                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 THE EFFECTS OF MARRIAGE-RELATED TAXES AND SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS

                                     Margherita Borella
                                    Mariacristina De Nardi
                                         Fang Yang

                                     Working Paper 23972
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23972


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2017, Revised October 2018




Previously circulated as "Marriage-Related Policies in an Estimated Life-Cycle Model of
Households' Labor Supply and Savings for Two Cohorts." De Nardi gratefully acknowledges
support from the ERC, grant 614328 “Savings and Risks.” Yang gratefully acknowledges MRRC
grant number 08098401, pursuant to a grant from the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA)
funded as part of the Retirement Research Consortium through the University of Michigan
Retirement Research Center Award RRC08098401. We thank Joe Altonji, Richard Blundell,
Monica Costa Dias, Zvi Eckstein, Rasmus Lenz, Derek Neal, and Jon Skinner for useful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research, MRRC, the SSA, the
CEPR, any agency of the federal government, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, or the IFS.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Margherita Borella, Mariacristina De Nardi, and Fang Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Marriage-Related Taxes and Social Security Benefits
Margherita Borella, Mariacristina De Nardi, and Fang Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 23972
October 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. D15,E21,H3,H31

                                         ABSTRACT

In the U.S., both taxes and old age Social Security benefits depend on one's marital status and
tend to discourage the labor supply of the secondary earner. We study the effects of eliminating
these marriage-related provisions on the labor supply and savings of two different cohorts. To do
so, we estimate a rich life-cycle model of couples and singles using the Method of Simulated
Moments (MSM) on the 1945 and 1955 birth-year cohorts. Our model matches well the life cycle
profiles of labor market participation, hours, and savings for married and single people and
generates plausible elasticities of labor supply. We find that these marriage-related provisions
reduce the participation of married women over their life cycle, the participation of married men
after age 55, and the savings of couples. These effects are large for both the 1945 and 1955
cohorts, even though the latter had much higher labor market participation of married women to
start with.

Margherita Borella                                           Fang Yang
Università di Torino                                         Louisiana State University
Dipartimento di Scienze Economico-Sociali                    Department of Economics, 2322
e Matematico-Statistiche                                     Business Education Complex,
Torino, Italy                                                Nicholson Extension
margherita.borella@unito.it                                  Baton Rouge, LA 70803
                                                             fyang@lsu.edu
Mariacristina De Nardi
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
90 Hennepin Ave
Minneapolis, MN 55401
and University College London
and also NBER
denardim@nber.org
1     Introduction
     In the U.S., both taxes and old age Social Security benefits depend on one’s marital
status. As for taxes, couples file jointly, which implies that the secondary earner in
the married couple faces a higher marginal tax rate than if he or she were filing as a
single person. Thus, the tax system tends to reduce the labor supply of the secondary
earner by raising their marginal tax rate.
     As for Social Security benefits, married and widowed people can claim Social
Security spousal and survivorship benefits, respectively, under which the benefits of
the lower-earner spouse, or secondary earner, are based on the earnings of their main-
earner spouse. These provisions reinforces the disincentive effect of the tax system on
the secondary earner because their reduced labor supply does not necessarily imply
lower Social Security benefits.
     We study the effects of these marital provisions by evaluating what would happen
if we made taxes and Social Security benefits independent from marital status, that
is, if people were to individually file for taxes and receive Social Security benefits only
based on their own past contributions.
     To do so, we develop and estimate a rich life-cycle model with single and married
people in which single people meet partners and married people might get divorced.
Every working-age person experiences wage shocks and every retiree faces medical
expenses and life span risk. People in couples face the risks of both partners. House-
holds can self-insure by saving and by choosing whether to work and how many
hours (for both partners if in a couple). Consistent with the data, we allow for labor
market experience to affect wages (potential wages depend on accumulated human
capital on the job), and for human capital to affect marriage and divorce probabilities.
We explicitly model Social Security and pension payments with survival and spousal
benefits, the differential tax treatment of married and single people, the progressivity
of the tax system, and old-age means-tested transfer programs such as Medicaid and
Supplemental Social Insurance (SSI). We also model the changes of the tax and Social
Security system that out two cohorts faced over time.
     We estimate our dynamic structural model using the Method of Simulated mo-
ments (MSM) and data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) and from
the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) for the cohort born in 1941-1945 (the “1945”
cohort). That cohort has by now completed a large part of its life cycle and is covered


                                            2
by these two data sets, which provide excellent information over their working period
and retirement period, respectively. Then, taking the estimated preference parame-
ters from that cohort as given, we also estimate our model for the 1951-1955 cohort
(the “1955” cohort), which had much higher participation of married women and for
which policy implications might thus be very different.
    Our estimated model matches the life cycle profiles of labor market participa-
tion, hours worked by the workers, and savings for married and single people for
both cohorts very well. It also generates elasticities of labor supply by age, gender,
and marital status that are consistent with those previously estimated by others.
The latter provides an additional test of the reliability of our model and its policy
implications.
    For the 1945 cohort, we find that Social Security spousal and survivor benefits and
the current structure of joint income taxation provide strong disincentives to work to
married women, but also to single women who expect to get married, and to married
men after age 55. For instance, the elimination of all of these marriage-based rules
raises participation at age 25 by over 20 percentage points for married women and by
five percentage points for single women. At age 45, participation for these groups is,
respectively, still 15 and three percentage point higher without these marital benefits
provisions. In addition, these marriage-based rules reduce the participation of married
men starting at age 55, resulting in a participation that is three percentage points
lower by age 65. Finally, for these cohorts, these marital provisions decrease savings
of married couples by $40,000 at age 70, and wages for married women by about
10%, due to the experience effect on wages. While our model takes marriage and
divorce behavior from the observed data from each cohort, we show that our results
are robust to changes in marriage and divorce behavior in Section 10.1.
    Given that the labor supply of married women has been increasing fast over time,
a natural question that arises is whether the effects of these marital provisions are
also large for more modern cohorts in which married women are much more likely to
work. To shed light on this question, we study a cohort that is ten years younger than
our reference cohort and for which we still have a completed labor market history,
the 1955 cohort. By way of comparison, the labor market participation of married
women at age 25 is just over 50% for our 1945 cohort, while it is over 60% for our
1955 cohort.
    To estimate our model for the 1955 cohort, we assume that their preference pa-


                                          3
rameters are the same as the ones we estimate for the 1945 cohort, but we give the
1955 cohort their observed marriage and divorce probabilities, number of children,
initial conditions for wages and experience, and returns to working. We then esti-
mate the child care costs, available time, and participation costs that reconcile their
labor supply and saving behavior to the observed data. Finally, we run the policy
experiment of eliminating the marriage-related provisions of both taxes and Social
Security. We find that the effects for the 1955 cohort on participation, wages, earn-
ings, and savings are large and similar to those in the 1945 cohort, thus indicating
that the effects of marriage-related provisions are large also for cohorts in which the
labor participation of married women is higher.
    Our paper provides several contributions. First, it is the first estimated structural
model of couples and singles that allows for participation and hours decisions of
both men and women, including those in couples, in a framework with savings. Our
results show that, in addition to lowering the participation of women, these marriage-
related policies also significantly reduce the savings of couples and the participation
of married men starting in their middle age. Second, it is the first paper that studies
all marriage-related taxes and benefits in a unified framework. Third, its does so by
allowing for the large observed changes in the labor supply of married women over
time by studying two different cohorts. Fourth, our framework is very rich along
dimensions that are important to study our problem. For instance, allowing for labor
market experience to affect wages (of both men and women) is important in that it
captures the endogeneity of wages and their response to policy and marital status
changes. Carefully modeling survival, health, and medical expenses in old age, and
their heterogeneity by marital status and gender, is crucial to evaluate the effects
on labor supply and savings of Social Security payments during old age and their
interaction with taxation and old age means-tested benefits such as Medicaid and
SSI, which we also model. Finally, our model fits the data for participation, hours
worked, and savings, as well as labor supply elasticities over the life cycle for single
and married men and women, and thus provides a valid benchmark to evaluate the
effects of the current marriage-related policies.




                                           4
2    Related literature
    We build on the literature on the determinants of female labor supply over the life
cycle. Within this literature, Attanasio, Low, and Sánchez-Marcos (2008) and Eck-
stein and Lifshitz (2011) point to the importance of changing wages and child care
costs to explain increases in female labor supply over time, while Eckstein, Keane,
and Lifhitz (2016) examine the changes over time in the selection of married women
working and find that it accounts for 75% of the observed increase over time in the
marriage-wage premium (the differential in salary for married versus single women).
Bronson (2015) uses a dynamic structural model of marriage, education choices, and
labor supply to explain gender gaps in college attendance and choice of major. Her
paper does not model marriage-related policies, nor their effects. Altonji and Vidan-
gos (2017) empirically characterize the dynamics of marriage, divorce, children, on
labor-market outcomes of married households. The structural papers in this branch
of the literature typically assume that male labor supply is exogenously fixed and/or
that the choice of hours of both partners is limited to full-time, or full-time and part-
time, and/or abstract from savings. We also add to this literature by quantifying the
disincentive effects of the U.S. Social Security and tax code on the labor supply of
women.
    We also contribute to the literature on tax and benefit reforms. The vast majority
of the existing literature on social insurance program reform adopts the paradigm of
a one-person household, or a household in which only one person supplies labor, and
abstracts from many important risks that households face over the life cycle and for
which progressive taxation and social insurance provide valuable protection.
    There is a smaller literature studying policy reforms in environments that in-
cludes couples. Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2012a) study the switch to a pro-
portional income tax and a reform in which married individuals can file taxes sepa-
rately and find that these reforms substantially increase female labor participation.
Nishiyama (2015), Kaygusuz (2015), and Groneck and Wallenius (2017) find that
removing spousal and Social Security survivor benefits would increase female labor
participation, female hours worked, and aggregate output. Bick and Fuchs-Shundeln
(2018) focus on a simpler static model of married couples and find that income taxes
are an important factor driving differences in the labor supply of married women
across countries.


                                           5
    In the context of understanding portfolio choice, Love (2010) proposes the first
model to evaluate the effects of family and marital status risk on savings and portfolio
choice. Hubener, Maurer, and Mitchell (2016) study the effects of exogenous family
dynamics and endogenous labor supply on portfolio choice and retirement behavior.
    Compared with these papers, we propose a richer model, which allows for inten-
sive and extensive labor supply decisions for both men and women, savings, medical
expenses during retirement, marriage and divorce, and life expectancy heterogenity
as a function of marital status. In addition, we estimate our model by using detailed
data from the PSID and the HRS for the 1945 and 1955 cohorts. Finally, our paper
is the first one to examine the role of U.S. taxes and Social Security transfers, jointly
and for two cohorts, for which we observe large changes in taxes and Social Security
policies and economic behavior across cohorts and over time.


3    Background on marriage and U.S. taxes and old
     age Social Security benefits
    Many countries tax the income of married people by making them file as if they
were single (individual taxation). This implies that, when the secondary earners in
couples work, their marginal tax rate is based on their own income only rather than
on the sum of their partner’s income and their own, and is thus typically lower under
progressive taxation. The U.S., instead, taxes the income of married couples jointly
(joint taxation) and uses a different tax schedule for married and single individuals.
The combination of joint taxation and a progressive tax system typically implies that
a married secondary earner faces a higher marginal tax rate than a single earner.
This feature of the tax system tends to be larger the larger the husband’s earnings.
    To quantify this disincentive to work for the secondary earner, we use data from the
PSID for 25-year-old single and married women in our 1945 cohort and our estimated
effective tax functions. The left hand side panel of Figure 1 highlights the incentives
to work for 25 year old single and married women. It plots four marginal tax rates
as a function of women’s earnings: the marginal tax rate for a single woman and
the marginal tax rates of married women with husbands at the 25th, 50th, and 75th
earnings percentiles. A 25-year-old single woman born in the 1945 cohort pays a zero
percent marginal tax rate to start working, while a married woman faces a marginal


                                           6
                                       Women's marginal tax rates                                           Empirical cumulative distribution
                             0.3                                                                            1

                                                                                                           0.9
                            0.25
                                                                                                           0.8

                                                                                                           0.7




                                                                                  Cumulative probability
                             0.2
        Marginal tax rate

                                                                                                           0.6

                            0.15                                                                           0.5

                                                                                                           0.4
                             0.1
                                                                                                           0.3


                                                     Married to 75th earner                                0.2
                            0.05
                                                     Married to 50th earner
                                                     Married to 25th earner                                0.1
                                                     Single Women

                              0                                                                             0
                                   0    1   2    3   4   5   6   7   8   9   10                                  0     0.1       0.2        0.3
                                                Women's income                4                             Non-working wive's marginal tax rate
                                                                         10



Figure 1: Left panel: 25-year-old women’s marginal tax rate when single (red-starred
          line) or married to a men at the 25th (orange-dashed line), 50th (orange-dotted
          line), and 75th earnings percentile (orange-circled line) as a function of women’s
          earnings in 1998 dollars. Right panel: cumulative density function (cdf) of 25-
          year-old non-working wives’ marginal tax rates.



tax rate of 14%, 16%, and 17%, respectively, if she is married to a 25-year old men in
the 25th, 50th, and 75th earnings percentile. The corresponding earnings levels for
these men in 1998 dollars are, respectively, $21,552, $32,729, and $42,167.
    While this graph tells us that married women typically pay a larger marginal tax
rate than single women, it does not tell us what is the distribution of marginal tax
rates for married women to start working. This is what the right hand side panel
of Figure 1 is meant to illustrate. It displays the distribution of the marginal tax
rates for young men whose wives are not working. This marginal tax rate is also
that of their wives, should they start working. Comparing the marginal tax rate of
non-working wives with that of non-working single women reveals that single women
face a 0% marginal tax rate, while 90% of married women face a marginal tax rate
of 10% or higher, due to their husband’s earnings and joint taxation. These graphs
thus suggest that making married people file as single rather than jointly could have
large incentives on the labor market participation of married women.
    Social Security for a single individual is a function of one’s average lifetime earn-
ings. Social Security for a married person is the highest of one’s own benefit enti-
tlement and half of the spouse’s entitlement while the other spouse is alive (spousal
benefit) and the highest of own benefit entitlement and the deceased spouse’s after


                                                                                  7
the spouse’s death (survival benefit).
   We use data from the PSID for 66-year old couples in our 1945 cohort and Social
Security rules to generate Figure 2, which illustrates the magnitude of Social Security
Spousal benefits. The left hand panel of Figure 2 plots household Social Security

                                           Social Security Benefit                                                                  Survivor Benefit
                                   32000                                                                                18000
                                                       With marital benefit                                                                 With marital benefit
                                                       Without marital benefit                                                              Without marital benefit
                                   30000                                                                                16000


                                   28000                                                                                14000




                                                                                      Average Wife's Survivor Benefit
       Average Household Benefit




                                   26000                                                                                12000


                                   24000                                                                                10000


                                   22000                                                                                8000


                                   20000                                                                                6000


                                   18000                                                                                4000


                                   16000                                                                                2000


                                   14000                                                                                   0
                                           1   2   3     4   5   6   7   8   9   10                                             1   2   3     4   5   6   7   8   9   10
                                           Wife's own benefit decile                                                            Wife's own benefit decile



Figure 2: Left panel: Average household Social Security benefits at age 66 by wife’s own
          Social Security benefit decile, with (blue-dotted line) or without (red-starred
          line) marital benefit, in 1998 dollars. Right panel: Average survivor benefit
          by wife’s own Social Security benefit decile, with (blue-dotted line) or without
          (red-starred line) marital benefits, 1998 dollars.



benefits while the husband is alive. It takes married women at retirement age and,
based on the deciles of their own Social Security’s entitlement, plots their average
household yearly Social Security benefits with (circled line) and without (crossed
line) marital benefits. For instance, the number one on the x axis represents married
women aged 66 in our 1945 cohort that are in the lowest decile of their own Social
Security contributions. At that decile, household Social Security benefit for those
women and their husbands are $22,000 under marital benefits and about $15,000
without marital benefits. The comparison of the two lines in this picture reveals that
about 50% of married women benefit from Social Security marital benefits while their
husband is alive and that these benefits can be very large.
    The righthand panel of Figure 2 takes the same married women and plots what
their yearly Social Security benefits would be after their husband’s death with and
without survivor’s benefits. For instance, a 66-year old married women at the lowest
10% of Social Security contributions, once a widow, would receive less than $500


                                                                                          8
dollars a month based on her own contributions only, while she receives $15,000
thanks to her husbands’ contributions and survivorship benefits. The picture shows
that, because most women have lower potential wages than men’s, participate less,
and work fewer hours, survivorship benefits are large for over 80% of married women
in this cohort.
    While survival benefits are larger than marital benefits, they are typically received
only for a few years after one’s husband’s death. In contrast, marital benefits are
received over a longer period. This last set of graphs highlights that Social Security
marital benefits are large and can also reduce married women’s incentives to work.


4     Data
    We use the PSID and the HRS data. We pick the 1945 cohort because their entire
adult life is first covered by the PSID, which starts in 1968, and has rich information
for the working period and then by the HRS, which starts covering people at age
50 in 1994 and has rich information for the retirement period, including on medical
expenses and mortality. Thus, this is a cohort for which we have excellent data
over their entire life cycle. We pick our 1955 cohort to be as young as possible to
maximize changes in their participation, conditional on having an almost complete
working period for the same cohort.
    We use the PSID to estimate all of the data we need for the working period and
the HRS to compute inputs for the retirement period. In Appendix A we discuss
these data sets and provide details about our computations.


4.1     The fraction of married people and life-cycle patterns for
        single and married men and women in our cohorts
    Table 1 shows that the majority of men and women are married and that the
fraction of married people goes down only slightly across these cohorts.
    Figure 3 displays participation and average annual hours worked for workers.
The top panel refers to the 1945 cohort1 . In that cohort, the top left panel shows
that married men have the highest participation rate and only slowly decrease their
   1
     The smoothed profiles are obtained by fitting a fourth-order polynomial in age fully interacted
with marital status and cohort dummies



                                                 9
                       Born in 1941 − 1945   Born in 1951 − 1955
           Gender    Age 25 Age 40 Age 55 Age 25 Age 40 Age 55
           Men        0.87     0.90    0.88 0.82     0.86    0.84
           Women      0.86     0.84    0.79 0.83     0.81    0.76


      Table 1: Fraction of married men and women by age and cohort, PSID data


participation starting from age 45, while single men decrease their participation much
faster. The participation of single women starts about 10 percentage points lower than
that of men, but it gradually increases until age 50. Married women have the lowest
participation. It starts around 50% at age 25, increases to 78% between age 40 and
50, and gradually declines at a similar rate as that of the other three groups. The top
right panel highlights that married men on average work more hours than everyone
else. Women not only have a participation rate lower than men on average, but also
display lower average hours, even conditional on participation.
    The bottom panel displays the same data for the 1955 cohort. Comparing the top
and bottom panels shows a large increase in participation by married women across
these two cohorts and, to a much smaller extent, by single women. Conditional on
working, average annual hours have also increased for married women. Finally, annual
hours worked by married men conditional on working are lower, which underscores
the importance of modeling men’s labor supply, in addition to that of women’s.
    Due to the limited availability of asset data in the PSID (it is available only every
5 years until 1999 and every other year afterwards) and to the fact that our 1955
cohort has not yet retired, we use the same asset profiles for both cohorts. Figure 3
displays average assets increase until age 70 for all groups, with women accumulating
the lowest amount and showing no sign of a slowdown in accumulation before age 75.


5    The model
   Our model period is one year long. People start their economic life at age 25, stop
working at age 66 at the latest, and live up to the maximum age of 99.
   During the working stage, people choose how much to save and how much to
work, face wage shocks and, if they are married, divorce shocks. Single people meet
partners. Given that we explicitly model labor participation and hours of husbands


                                           10
                                       Labor Participation                                                                                  Average Working Hours (Workers)
                   1                                                                                                     2400

                  0.9
                                                                                                                         2200
                  0.8

                  0.7
                                                                                                                         2000

                  0.6

                                                                                                                         1800
                  0.5

                  0.4          Single men                                                                                                                            Single men
                               Single women                                                                              1600                                        Single women
                  0.3          Married men                                                                                                                           Married men
                               Married women                                                                                                                         Married women
                  0.2                                                                                                    1400
                     25   30      35     40     45                  50                55      60     65                      25        30     35    40    45    50      55     60    65
                                                Age                                                                                                      Age
                                       Labor Participation                                                                                  Average Working Hours (Workers)
                   1                                                                                                     2400

                  0.9
                                                                                                                         2200
                  0.8

                  0.7
                                                                                                                         2000

                  0.6

                                                                                                                         1800
                  0.5

                  0.4           Single men                                                                                                                           Single men
                                Single women                                                                             1600                                        Single women
                  0.3           Married men                                                                                                                          Married men
                                Married women                                                                                                                        Married women
                  0.2                                                                                                    1400
                     25   30      35     40     45                   50               55      60     65                      25        30     35    40    45    50      55     60    65
                                                Age                                                                                                      Age
                                                                                          5
                                                                                    #10
                                                                                6
                                                                                              Single men
                                                                                              Single women
                                                                                5             Couples
                                                      Average Household Asset




                                                                                4


                                                                                3


                                                                                2


                                                                                1


                                                                                0
                                                                                      30        40           50         60        70         80
                                                                                                                  Age



Figure 3: Life-cycle profiles by gender and marital status for the 1945 (top two graphs)
          and 1955 cohorts (second two graphs), and both cohorts (bottom graph), PSID
          data


and wives, savings and medical expenses in old age, the model is computationally very
intensive.2 For tractability, we assume exogenous marriage and divorce probabilities
and we estimate them from the data. Thus, our results should be interpreted as
holding marriage and divorce patterns fixed at those historically observed for this
cohort. We discuss the empirical literature on the responses of changes in marriage
and divorce rates to policy changes and evaluate the robustness of our findings to this
assumption in section 10. Also for tractability, we assume exogenous fertility and
that women have an age-varying number of children that depends on their age and
  2
    As we show later, we optimize over four value functions, compute other two, and have six
continuous state variables. Even parallelizing on C on high-end computers, the model requires 37
minutes to be solved. Estimating the model implies solving it thousands of times, that is 3 or 4
weeks at least.



                                                                                                              11
marital status. We take the number of children from the data.
    During the retirement stage, people face out-of-pocket medical expenses (which
are net of Medicare payments) and are partly covered by Medicaid and by Social
Security payments. Married retired couples also face the risk of one of the spouses
dying. Single retired people face the risk of their own death. We allow mortality risk
and medical expenses to depend on gender, age, health status, and marital status.
    We allow for both time costs and monetary costs of raising children and running
households. They enter our problem in the following way. We allow for available time
to be split between work and leisure to depend on gender and marital status. We
interpret this available time to be net of home production and child care that one has
to perform whether working or not. We estimate available time using our model. We
will then compare our model’s implications on time use to those from the PSID data
and the literature.
    All workers have to pay a fixed cost of working which, for women, depends on their
age (which also maps in her number of children). Finally, when women work, they
also have to pay a child care cost that depends on her number and age of children,
and her earnings. That is, child care costs are a normal good: women with higher
earnings pay for higher-quality (and more expensive) child care. We estimate their
size using our model.3


5.1     Preferences
    Let t be age ∈ {t0 , t1 , ..., tr , ..., td }, with t0 = 25, tr = 66 being retirement time
and td = 99 being the maximum possible lifespan. For simplicity of notation think of
the model as being written for one cohort, so age t also indexes the passing of time
for that cohort. We solve the model for the two cohorts separately and make sure
that each cohort has the appropriate time and age inputs.
    Households have time-separable preferences and discount the future at rate β. The
superscript i denotes gender; with i = 1, 2 being a man or a woman, respectively. The
superscript j denotes marital status; with with j = 1, 2 being single or in a couple,
respectively.
    Each single person has preferences over consumption and leisure, and the period
  3
    Introducing home production and child care choices is infeasible given the complexity of our
framework. The main caveat with our assumptions is that we do not allow these choices to vary
when policy changes.


                                              12
flow of utility is given by the standard CRRA utility function

                                                        ((ct /ηti,j )ω lt1−ω )1−γ − 1
                                        v(ct , lt ) =
                                                                     1−γ

where ct is consumption and ηti,j is the equivalent scale in consumption, which is a
function of family size, including children.
   The term lti,j is leisure, which is given by

                                              lti,j = Li,j − nt − Φi,j
                                                                   t Int ,


where Li,j is available time endowment, which can be different for single and married
men and women and should be interpreted as available time net of home production.
This is a convenient way to represent activities that require time and cannot easily
be outsourced.
     Leisure equals available time endowment less nt , hours worked on the labor market,
less the fixed time cost of working. That is, the term Int is an indicator function
which equals 1 when hours worked are positive and zero otherwise, while the term
Φi,j
  t represents the fixed time cost of working.
     The fixed cost of working should be interpreted as including commuting time, time
spent getting ready for work, and so on. We allow it to depend on gender, marital
status and age because working at different ages might imply different time costs for
married and single men and women. We assume the following functional form, whose
three parameters we estimate using our structural model,

                                                 exp(φi,j    i,j     i,j 2
                                                      0 + φ1 t + φ2 t )
                                       Φi,j
                                        t =                             i,j 2 .
                                               1 + exp(φi,j      i,j
                                                          0 + φ1 t + φ2 t )


       We assume that couples maximize their joint utility function4

                                   ((ct /ηti,j )ω (lt1 )1−ω )1−γ − 1 ((ct /ηti,j )ω (lt2 )1−ω )1−γ − 1
            w(ct , lt1 , lt2 )   =                                  +                                  .
                                                 1−γ                               1−γ

Note that for couples, ηti,j does not depend on gender and that j = 2.
   4
     This a generalization of the functional form in Casanova (2012). An alternative is to use the
collective model and solve for intra-household allocation as in Chiappori (1988, 1992), and Browning
and Chiappori (1998)). We abstract from that for tractability.



                                                              13
5.2     The environment
    People can hold assets at at a rate of return r. The timing is as follows.
    At the beginning of each working period, each single individual observes his/her
current idiosyncratic wage shock, age, assets, and accumulated earnings. Each mar-
ried person also observes their partner’s labor wage shock and accumulated earnings.
    At the beginning of each retirement period, each single individual observes his/her
current age, assets, health, and accumulated earnings. Each married person also
observes their partner’s health and accumulated earnings.
    Decisions are made after everything has been observed and new shocks hit at the
end of the period after decisions have been made.

5.2.1    Human capital and wages

    There are two components to wages. The first component is human capital, which
is a function of one’s initial conditions, individual’s labor market experience, past
earnings, age, gender, and marital status and that we denote eit (·)5 .
    The second component is a persistent earnings shock it that evolves as follows

                          ln it+1 = ρiε ln it + υti , υti ∼ N (0, (συi )2 ).

   The product of eit (·) and it determines an agent’s units of effective wage per hour
worked during a period.

5.2.2    Marriage and divorce

    During the working period, a single person gets married with an exogenous prob-
ability which depends on his/her age, gender, and wage shock. To simplify our
computations, we assume that people who are married to each other have the same
age.
    The probability of getting married at the beginning of next period is

                                       νt+1 (·) = νt+1 (it , i).
   5
    We make this relationship explicit when describing our value functions for the working age and
we define all of our state variables.




                                                  14
Conditional on meeting a partner, the probability of meeting with a partner p with
wage shock pt+1 is
                            ξt+1 (·) = ξt+1 (pt+1 |it+1 , i).

Allowing this probability to depend on the wage shock of both partners generates
assortative mating. We assume random matching over assets at+1 and average accu-
                                   p
mulated earnings of the partner ȳt+1 , conditional on partner’s wage shock. Thus, we
have
                                                      p
                           θt+1 (·) = θt+1 (apt+1 , ȳt+1 |pt+1 ).

   A working-age couple can be hit by a divorce shock at the end of the period that
depends on age and the wage shock of both partners

                                     ζt+1 (·) = ζt+1 (1t , 2t ).

If the couple divorces, they split the assets equally and each of the ex-spouses moves
on with those assets and their own wage shock and Social Security contributions.
    After retirement, single individuals don’t get married anymore while people in
couples no longer divorce and only lose their spouse because of death. In the data,
these events happen very infrequently in our cohort.6

5.2.3    The costs of raising children and running a household

    We keep track of the total number of children and children’s age as a function of
mothers’ age and marital status. The total number of children by one’s age affects
the economies of scale of single women and couples.
    The number of children between ages 0 to 5 and 6 to 11 determine the child care
costs of working mothers (i = 2). The term τc0,5 is the child care cost for each child
age 0 to 5, where that number of children is f 0,5 (i, j, t), while τc6,11 is the child care
cost for each child age 6 to 11, which are f 6,11 (i, j, t). We use our structural model to
estimate these costs.
   6
     In the HRS data, we observe our 1941-1945 birth cohort between the age of 66 and 72. Over that
six-year period, only 1% of couples get divorced and 4% of singles get married. Thus, the implied
yearly probability of marriage and divorce is tiny.




                                                 15
5.2.4   Medical expenses and death

    After retirement, surviving people face medical expenses and health and death
shocks. At age 66, we endow people with a distribution of health that depends on
their marital status and gender. Health status ψti can be either good or bad and
evolves according to a Markov process πti,j (ψti ) that depends on age, gender, and
marital status. Medical expenses mi,j     i
                                      t (ψt ) are a function of age, gender, marital
status, and health status.

5.2.5   Initial conditions

   We take the fraction of single and married people at age 25 and their distribution
over the relevant state variables from the PSID data for each of our two cohorts.


5.3     The Government
   We model taxes on total income Y as Gouveia and Strauss (1994) and we allow
them to depend on marital status as follows

                                                                 1
                                                            −
                           τ (Y, j) = (bj − bj (sj Y + 1)       pj   )Y.

    The government also uses a proportional payroll tax on labor income τtSS , up to a
Social Security cap yet , to help finance old-age Social Security benefits. We use ȳt to
denote an individual’s average earnings at age t, which we use to determine old age
Social Security and defined benefit pensions.
    Social Security for a single individual is a function of one’s average lifetime earn-
ings. Social Security for a married person is the highest of one’s own benefit enti-
tlement and half of the spouse’s entitlement while the other spouse is alive (spousal
benefit) and the highest of own benefit entitlement and the deceased spouse’s after
the spouse’s death (survival benefit).
    We allow both the payroll tax and the Social Security cap to change over time for
each cohort, as in the data. We do not require the government to balance its budget,
as it is not done cohort by cohort or for a couple of cohorts.
    The insurance provided by Medicaid and SSI in old age is represented by a means-
tested consumption floor, c(j). Borella, De Nardi and French (2017) discuss Medicaid
rules and observed outcomes after retirement.


                                            16
5.4       Recursive formulation
    We define and compute six sets of value functions: the value function of working
age singles, the value function of retired singles, the value function of working age
couples, the value function of retired couples, the value function of an individual who
is of working age and in a couple, the value function of an individual who is retired
and in a couple.

5.4.1      The singles: working age and retirement

   The state variables for a single individual during one’s working period are age t,
gender i, assets ait , the persistent earnings shock it , and average realized earnings ȳti .
The corresponding value function is


W s (t, i, ait , it , ȳti ) = max       v(ct , lti,j ) + β(1 − νt+1 (·))Et W s (t + 1, i, ait+1 , it+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                                  )+
                          ct ,at+1 ,nit
                                                                                                                                   !
                      βνt+1 (·)Et ξt+1 (pt+1 |it+1 , i)θt+1 (·)Ŵ c (t + 1, i, ait+1 + apt+1 , it+1 , pt+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                                                   i       p
                                                                                                                       , ȳt+1 )

                                                                                                                  (1)

                                            lti,j = Li,j − nit − Φi,j
                                                                  t Init ,                                        (2)

                                                  Yt = eit (ȳti )it nit ,                                       (3)

                            τc (i, j, t) = τc0,5 f 0,5 (i, j, t) + τc6,11 f 6,11 (i, j, t),                       (4)

                                              T (·) = τ (rat + Yt , j),                                           (5)

              ct + at+1 = (1 + r)ait + Yt (1 − τc (i, j, t)) − τtSS min(Yt , yet ) − T (·),                       (6)
                                        i
                                      ȳt+1 = ȳti + min(Yt , yet )/(tr − t0 ),                                   (7)

                                             at ≥ 0,        nt ≥ 0,           ∀t.                                 (8)

Equation 3 shows that the deterministic component of wages is a function of age,
gender, and labor market experience through ȳti , which, being the individual’s average
labor income so far, includes the effects of both previous labor supply and wages, and
thus human capital. This formulation allows us to capture the important aspects of
labor market experience and previous wages on current wages but does not force us


                                                            17
to keep track of additional state variables.
    The expectation operator is taken with respect of the distribution of it+1 condi-
tional on it and with respect to the probability distribution of the partner’s charac-
teristics for people getting married ξt+1 (·) and θt+1 (·). The value function Ŵ c is the
discounted present value of the utility for the same individual, once he or she is in a
married relationship with someone with given state variables, not the value function
of the married couple, which counts the utility of both individuals in the relationship.
    The state variables for a retired single individual are age t, gender i, assets ait ,
health ψti , and average realized lifetime earnings ȳri . Because we assume that the
retired individual can no longer get married, his or her recursive problem can be
written as
                                                                                 !
   Rs (t, i, at , ψti , ȳri ) = max v(ct , Li,j ) + βsi,j i      s                   i       i
                                                       t (ψt )Et R (t + 1, i, at+1 , ψt+1 , ȳr )    (9)
                           ct ,at+1



                                                Yt = SS(ȳri )                                      (10)
                                                                
                                          T (·) = τ Yt + rat , j                                    (11)
                                      (                                         )
                                            n                                  o
                                                               i,j
     B(at , Yt , ψti , c(j)) = max 0, c(j) − (1 + r)at + Yt − mt (ψti ) − T (·)                     (12)

             ct + at+1 = (1 + r)at + Yt + B(at , Yt , ψti , c(j)) − mi,j i
                                                                     t (ψt ) − T (·)                (13)

                                              at+1 ≥ 0,    ∀t                                       (14)

                                      at+1 = 0,      if B(·) > 0                                    (15)

The term SS(y¯r i ) includes Social Security and defined benefit plans, which for the
single individual is a function of the income earned during their work life, ȳri , while
si,1  i
 t (ψt ) is the survival probability as a function of age, gender, marital and health
status. The function B(at , Yti , ψti , c(j)) represents old age means-tested government
transfers such as Medicaid and SSI, which ensure a minimum consumption floor c(j).

5.4.2    The couples: working age and retirement

  The state variables for a married couple in the working stage are (t, at , 1t , 2t , ȳt1 , ȳt2 )
where 1 and 2 refer to gender, and the recursive problem for the married couple (j = 2)


                                                    18
before tr can be written as:


   W c (t, at , 1t , 2t , ȳt1 , ȳt2 ) =       max1            w(ct , lt1,j , lt2,j )
                                              ct ,at+1 ,nt ,n2t

                                       + (1 − ζt+1 (·))βEt W c (t + 1, at+1 , 1t+1 , 2t+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                                1       2
                                                                                                    , ȳt+1 )   (16)
                                                    2 
                                                                                                      !
                                                   X                                               
                                       + ζt+1 (·)β      Et W s (t + 1, i, at+1 /2, it+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                              i
                                                                                                  )
                                                            i=1


                                                   lti,j = Li,j − nit − Φi,j
                                                                         t Init ,                               (17)

                                                           Yti = eit (ȳti )it nit ,                           (18)

                                τc (i, j, t) = τc0,5 f 0,5 (i, j, t) + τc6,11 f 6,11 (i, j, t),                 (19)

                                                 T (·) = τ (rat + Yt1 + Yt2 , j)                                (20)

 ct +at+1 = (1+r)at +Yt1 +Yt2 (1−τc (2, 2, t))−τtSS (min(Yt1 , yet )+min(Yt2 , yet ))−T (·) (21)
                                          i
                                        ȳt+1 = ȳti + (min(Yti , yet ))/(tr − t0 ),                            (22)

                                                  at ≥ 0,          n1t , n2t ≥ 0,          ∀t                   (23)

The expected value of the couple’s value function is taken with respect to the con-
ditional probabilities of the two t+1 s given the current values of the t s for each of
the spouses (we assume independent draws). The term ζt+1 (·) = ζt+1 (1t , 2t ) repre-
sents the probability of divorce for a couple at age t + 1 with wage shocks 1t and 2t .
The expected values for the newly divorced people are taken using the appropriate
conditional distribution for their own labor wage shocks.
    During retirement, that is from age tr on, each of the spouses is hit with a health
shock ψti and a realization of the survival shock si,2  i
                                                    t (ψt ). Symmetrically with the other
shocks, s1,2  1                                                                    2,2 2
          t (ψt ) is the after retirement survival probability of husband, while st (ψt )
is the survival probability of the wife. We assume that the deaths of the each spouse
are independent of each other.




                                                                      19
    In each period, the married couple’s (j = 2) recursive problem can be written as


     Rc (t, at , ψt1 , ψt2 , ȳr1 , ȳr2 ) = max w(ct , L1,j , L2,j )+
                                      ct ,at+1


                                   βs1,j 1 2,j   2      c                1      2       1 2
                                     t (ψt )st (ψt )Et R (t + 1, at+1 , ψt+1 , ψt+1 , ȳr , ȳr )+
                                                                                                             (24)
                                   βs1,j 1        2,j 2       s                   1     ¯1
                                     t (ψt )(1 − st (ψt ))Et R (t + 1, 1, at+1 , ψt+1 , ȳr )+
                                                                                             !
                                   βs2,j 2        1,j 1       s                   2     ¯2
                                     t (ψt )(1 − st (ψt ))Et R (t + 1, 2, at+1 , ψt+1 , ȳr )


                                  (                                           )
                                                    3
                    Yt = max (SS(ȳr1 ) + SS(ȳr2 ), max(SS(ȳr1 ), SS(ȳr2 ))                               (25)
                                                    2

                                              ȳ¯ri = max(ȳr1 , ȳr2 ),                                     (26)
                                                                        
                                           T (·) = τ Yt + rat , j                                            (27)
                                      (                                                                      )
B(at , Yt , ψt1 , ψt2 , c(j))   = max 0, c(j)−         (1 + r)at + Yt − m1,j 1      2,j 2
                                                                         t (ψt ) − mt (ψt ) − T (·)

                                                                                                              (28)
 ct + at+1 = (1 + r)at + Yt +           B(at , Yt , ψt1 , ψt2 , c(j))   −   m1,j 1
                                                                             t (ψt )   −   m2,j 2
                                                                                            t (ψt )   − T (·) (29)

                                                 at+1 ≥ 0,       ∀t                                          (30)

                                          at+1 = 0,      if B(·) > 0.                                        (31)

    In equation (25), the evolution of variable Yt mimics the spousal benefit from Social
Security and pension which gives a married person the right to collect the higher of
own benefit entitlement and half of the spouse’s entitlement. In equation (26), the
evolution of variables ȳ¯ri , i = 1, 2 represents survivorship benefits from Social Security
and pension in case of death of one of the spouses. The survivor has the right to
collect the higher of own benefit entitlement and the deceased spouse’s entitlement.

5.4.3      The individuals in couples: working age and retirement

   We have to compute the joint value function of the couple to appropriately com-
pute joint labor supply and savings under the married couples’ available resources.
However, while when computing the value of getting married for a single person, the


                                                         20
relevant object for that person is his or her the discounted present value of utility
in the marriage. We thus compute this object for person of gender i who is married
with a specific partner

    Ŵ c (t, i, at , 1t , 2t , ȳt1 , ȳt2 ) = v(ĉt (·)/ηt , ˆlti,j )+
                                         β(1 − ζ(·))Et Ŵ c (t + 1, i, ât+1 (·), 1t+1 , 2t+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                                    1       2
                                                                                                        , ȳt+1 )+ (32)
                                         βζ(·)Et W s (t + 1, i, ât+1 (·)/2, it+1 , ȳt+1
                                                                                       i
                                                                                           )

where ĉt (·), ˆlti,j (·), and ât+1 (·) are, respectively, optimal consumption, leisure, and
saving for an individual of gender i in a couple with the given state variables.
   During the retirement period, we have

R̂c (t, i, at , ψt1 , ψt2 , ȳr1 , ȳr2 ) = v(ĉt (·), ηt , Li,j ) + βsi,j i p,j   p       c                       1      2       1 2
                                                                       t (ψt )st (ψt )Et R̂ (t + 1, i, ât+1 (·), ψt+1 , ψt+1 , ȳr , ȳr )+

                                       βsi,j i        p,j p       s                       i     ¯i
                                         t (ψt )(1 − st (ψt ))Et R (t + 1, i, ât+1 (·), ψt+1 , ȳr ).

                                                                                                                 (33)

                                                         ȳ¯ri = max(ȳr1 , ȳr2 )

where sp,j     p
       t (ψt ) is the survival probability of the partner of the person of gender i and
the term ȳ¯ri represents the Social Security survivor benefits.


6         Estimation
    We estimate our model on our two birth cohorts separately. For each cohort, we
adopt a two-step estimation strategy, as done by Gourinchas and Parker (2002) and
De Nardi, French, and Jones (2010 and 2016). We extend their approach to match
the life cycle profiles of labor market participation and hours (in addition to savings).
    In the first step, for each cohort, we use data on the initial distributions at age 25
for our model’s state variables and estimate or calibrate those parameters that can
be cleanly identified outside our model. For example, we estimate the probabilities
of marriage, divorce, and death, as well as wage processes while working and medical
expenses during retirement, directly from the data for that cohort, and we calibrate
the interest rate and a few other model parameters.
    In the second step, we use the method of simulated moments. For the 1945



                                                                     21
cohort, we estimate 19 model parameters (β, ω, (φi,j           i,j  i,j    0,5  6,11
                                                          0 , φ1 , φ2 ), (τc , τc    ), Li,j ).7
For the 1955 cohort, we assume that the households of the 1955 cohort have the same
discount factor β and weight on consumption ω as the 1945 cohort and we estimate
the remaining 17 parameters.
    To perform the estimation, for each cohort, we use the model to simulate a repre-
sentative population of people as they age and die, and we find the parameter values
that allow simulated life-cycle decision profiles to best match (as measured by a GMM
criterion function) the data profiles for that cohort. The data that inform the esti-
mation of the parameters of our model are composed of the following 448 moments
for each cohort.

   1. To better evaluate the determinants of labor market participation and their
      responses to changes in taxes and transfers, we match the labor market par-
      ticipation of four demographic groups (married and single men and women)
      starting at age 25 and until age 65 (41 time periods for each group).

   2. To better evaluate the determinants of hours worked and their responses to
      changes in taxes and transfers, we match hours worked conditional on par-
      ticipation for four demographic groups (married and single men and women)
      starting at age 25 and until age 65 (41 time periods for each group).

   3. Because net worth, together with labor supply, is an essential to smooth re-
      sources during the working period and to finance retirement we match net
      worth for three groups (couples and single men and women) starting at age
      26 and until age 65 (40 time periods for each group).8 Because people save to
      self-insure against shocks and for retirement, matching assets by age is essential
      to evaluate the effects of policy instruments and other forces not only on saving
      but also on participation and hours.

    The mechanics of our MSM approach draw heavily from De Nardi, French, and
Jones (2010 and 2016) and are as follows. We discretize the asset grid and, using value
function iteration, we solve the model numerically (see Appendix D for details). This
yields a set of decision rules which allows us to simulate life-cycle histories for asset,
participation, and hours. We simulate a large number of artificial individuals, that are
  7
      We normalize the time endowment of single men.
  8
      Net worth at age 25 is an initial condition.


                                               22
initially endowed with a value of the state vector drawn from the data distribution for
each cohort at age 25 (that is, assets, accumulated Social Security, and wage shocks
for singles and the same variables for each of the partners for a couple), generate their
histories and use them to construct moment conditions and evaluate the match using
our GMM criterion. We search over the parameter space for the values that minimize
the criterion. We repeat the estimation procedure for each cohort.
    Appendix E contains a detailed description of our moment conditions, the weight-
ing matrix in our GMM criterion function, and the asymptotic distribution of our
parameter estimates.


6.1     First-step estimation for our two cohorts
   Table 2 summarizes our first-step estimated or calibrated model inputs. The
procedures for estimating wages as a function of age and previous experience and
earnings are new and so are the estimates of the probability of marriage and divorce
by age, gender, and wage shocks. Appendix B details all of these inputs, while
Appendix C reports additional first-steps inputs for both of each cohorts.

6.1.1   Marriage, divorce, spousal assets and Social Security benefits, and
        wages

    We use the PSID to estimate the probabilities of marriage and divorce. Figure 4
displays our estimated probabilities of marriage for both cohorts. Men with higher
wage shocks are more likely to get married but this gap shrinks with age. In contrast,
the probability of marriage for women displays less dependence on their wage shocks.
The comparison with the 1955 cohort shows that the probability of getting married
is smaller for the 1955 cohort, for both men and women.
    Figure 5 shows that married men with lower wage shocks are more likely to get
divorced. The probability of divorce decreases with age, and so does the gap in the
probabilities of divorce as a function of wage shocks. The probability of divorce for
women displays less dependance on the wage shock. The comparison with the 1955
cohort shows that divorce rates are a bit smaller in our more recent cohort once we
condition on age and wage shocks.
    Appendix C reports spousal assets and Spousal Social Security earnings by spousal
wage shocks in case of marriage next period for both of our cohorts.


                                           23
 Estimated processes                                         Source

 Wages
    eit (·)            Endogenous age-efficiency profiles    PSID
    it                Wage shocks                           PSID
 Demographics
    si,j    i
      t (ψt )          Survival probability                  HRS
    ζt (·)             Divorce probability                   PSID
    νt (·)             Probability of getting married        PSID
    ξt (·)             Matching probability                  PSID
    θt (·)             Partner’s assets and earnings         PSID
    f 0,5 (i, j, t)    Number of children age 0-5            PSID
    f 6,11 (i, j, t)   Number of children age 6-11           PSID
 Health shock
    mi,j      i
        t (ψt )        Medical expenses                      HRS
    πti,j (ψti )       Transition matrix for health status   HRS


 Calibrated parameters                                       Source

 Preferences and returns
    r            Interest rate                               4% De Nardi, French, and Jones (2016)
    ηt           Equivalence scales                          PSID
    γ            Utility curvature parameter                 2.5 see text
 Government policy
    bj , sj , pj Income tax                                  Guner et al. (2012b)
    SS(ȳri )    Social Security benefit                     See text
    τtSS         Social Security tax rate                    See text
    yet          Social Security cap                         See text
    c(1)         Minimum consumption, singles                $6,950, De Nardi et al. (2016)
    c(2)         Minimum consumption, couples                $6,950*1.5 Social Security rules



                               Table 2: First-step inputs summary


   We also estimate the joint distribution of (the logarithm of) the wage shocks of
new husbands and new wives9 by age and we assume it is lognormal. We find that
the correlation of the logarithm of initial wage shocks between spouses is 0.27 in the
25-34 age group, 0.39 in the 35-44 group, and 0.45 after age 45. Due to these initial
   9
    We assume it to be the same for both cohorts because the number of new marriages after age
25 is small during this time period.


                                                 24
                                       Men                                                  Women                                                          Men                                                  Women
                      0.25                                                      0.25                                                      0.25                                                      0.25
                                                  Lowest                                          Lowest                                                    Lowest                                                    Lowest
                                                  2nd                                             2nd                                                       2nd                                                       2nd
                                                  3rd                                             3rd                                                       3rd                                                       3rd
                       0.2                        4th                            0.2              4th                                      0.2              4th                                      0.2              4th
                                                  Highest                                         Highest                                                   Highest                                                   Highest
  Prob. of marriage




                                                            Prob. of marriage




                                                                                                                      Prob. of marriage




                                                                                                                                                                                Prob. of marriage
                      0.15                                                      0.15                                                      0.15                                                      0.15




                       0.1                                                       0.1                                                       0.1                                                       0.1




                      0.05                                                      0.05                                                      0.05                                                      0.05




                             30   40         50     60                                 30   40         50   60                                   30   40         50     60                                 30   40         50   60
                                       Age                                                       Age                                                       Age                                                       Age




Figure 4: Marriage probabilities by gender, age and one’s wage shock for the 1945 cohort
          (left panel) and 1955 cohort (right panel), PSID data


                                       Men                                                  Women                                                          Men                                                  Women
                      0.06                                                      0.06                                                      0.06                                                      0.06
                                                  Lowest                                          Lowest                                                              Lowest                                          Lowest
                                                  2nd                                             2nd                                                                 2nd                                             2nd
                      0.05                        3rd                           0.05              3rd                                     0.05                        3rd                           0.05              3rd
                                                  4th                                             4th                                                                 4th                                             4th
                                                  Highest                                         Highest                                                             Highest                                         Highest

                      0.04                                                      0.04                                                      0.04                                                      0.04
  Prob. of divorce




                                                            Prob. of divorce




                                                                                                                      Prob. of divorce




                                                                                                                                                                                Prob. of divorce
                      0.03                                                      0.03                                                      0.03                                                      0.03



                      0.02                                                      0.02                                                      0.02                                                      0.02



                      0.01                                                      0.01                                                      0.01                                                      0.01



                        0                                                         0                                                         0                                                         0
                             30   40         50     60                                 30   40         50   60                                   30   40         50     60                                 30   40         50   60
                                       Age                                                       Age                                                       Age                                                       Age




Figure 5: Divorce probabilities by gender, age and one’s wage shock for the 1945 cohort
          (left panel) and 1955 cohort (right panel), PSID data



correlations and the high persistence of shocks for an individual that we estimate,
partners tend to have positively correlated shocks even after getting married.

6.1.2                         Children

    Figure 6 displays the average total number of children and average number of
children in the 0-5 and 6-11 age groups by parental age. It shows that the number of
children has decreased for married women and, to a smaller extent, for single women
in the 1955 cohort compared to the 1945 cohort.
    We use the average total number of children for single and married women by age
to compute equivalence scales (as η(ft ) = (j + 0.7 ∗ ft )0.7 , as estimated by Citro and
Michael (1995), with j being equal to 1 or 2 depending on marital status). We also
use the number of children in those two different age groups to compute child care
costs.



                                                                                                                 25
                            Children                           Children                                              Children                            Children
                2.5                                 2.5                                                  2.5                                 2.5
                            Children under age 5               Children under age 5                                  Children under age 5                Children under age 5
                            Children ages 6-12                 Children ages 6-12                                    Children ages 6-12                  Children ages 6-12


                 2                                   2                                                    2                                   2



                1.5                                 1.5                                                  1.5                                 1.5



                 1                                   1                                                    1                                   1



                0.5                                 0.5                                                  0.5                                 0.5



                 0                                   0                                                    0                                   0
                      30     40      50      60           30    40      50      60                             30     40      50      60           30     40      50      60
                      Age of married woman                 Age of single woman                                 Age of married woman                 Age of single woman




Figure 6: Number of Children for married and single women for the 1945 cohort (left
          panel) and 1955 cohort (right panel), PSID data



6.1.3                      Wages

   We assume that wages are composed of a persistent stochastic shock and a com-
ponent that is a function of age, gender, and human capital. We measure human
capital at a given point in time as one’s average realized earnings up to that time.
Thus, we allow past wages and labor market experience to affect one’s wage today.
We estimate this relationship from the PSID data.10

                30                                                                                       30
                                Single Men                                                                                                              Single Men
                                Single Women                                                                                                            Single Women
                                Married Men                                                                                                             Married Men
                25              Married Women                                                            25                                             Married Women
  Hourly wage




                                                                                           Hourly wage




                20                                                                                       20



                15                                                                                       15



                10                                                                                       10
                           30                40           50              60                                        30                40           50               60
                                                   Age                                                                                      Age


Figure 7: Wage profile for single and married men and women at the average level of
          human capital by age and subgroup. Left panel: 1945 cohort. Right panel,
          1955 cohort. PSID data



    Figure 7 displays the average age-efficiency profiles computed from the estimated
wage process that we estimate for men and women, evaluated at the average values
of human capital, or average accumulated earnings at each age, (ȳt ). It shows that,
consistent with the evidence on the marriage premium, the wages of married men
  10
     Since we already keep track of average realized earnings to compute Social Security benefits,
this formulation does not require us to add state variables to our already computationally intensive
model.


                                                                                      26
are higher than those of single men. In contrast, the wages of married women are
lower than those of single women in our 1945 cohort, but this gap shrinks for our
1955 cohort. The marriage premium has decreased from the 1945 to the 1955 cohort
because the average wage of married women has increased, while the average wage for
men has stagnated. This is due to a combination of both different returns to human
capital and accumulated human capital levels. The stagnation of men’s wages that
we observe for our two cohorts is consistent with findings on wages over time reported
by Acemoglu and Autor (2011) and Roys and Taber (2017).
    To show the effect of human capital on wages, Figure 8 displays the implied profiles
of wages for men and women that we estimate, evaluated at different percentiles of
human capital (ȳt ) for each cohort in our PSID data. The bottom line refers to the
the lowest level of human capital (which is zero), while the top one corresponds to
the top 1% of each cohort. The left and right panels respectively refer to the 1945
and 1955 cohorts.
    The left panel of Figure 8 shows that a man of the 1945 cohort entering the labor
market at age 25 with no accumulated human capital earns an hourly wage of about
$10, while a woman of the same cohort, human capital, and age would earn less than
$9. The wage at entry, when human capital is equal to zero, is slightly increasing
for both men and women up to age 50, and then slightly decreasing after age 55. At
                           Men                                Women                                      Men                                Women

                     30                                  30                                        30                                  30
  Hourly wage rate




                                      Hourly wage rate




                                                                                Hourly wage rate




                                                                                                                    Hourly wage rate




                     25                                  25                                        25                                  25


                     20                                  20                                        20                                  20


                     15                                  15                                        15                                  15


                     10                                  10                                        10                                  10

                          40     60                           40      60                                40     60                           40      60
                           Age                                 Age                                       Age                                 Age


Figure 8: The effect of human capital on men’s and women’s wage, 1945 cohort. Average
          wage profiles for constant values of human capital at 0$, and at the 25th , 50th ,
          75th and 99th percentiles. Left panel: 1945 cohort. Right panel, 1955 cohort.
          PSID data



every age, the hourly wage rate increases with human capital, peaking at $28 for men
in the top 1%. The profile for women peaks later, at age 54, and women in the top
1% of human capital earn $24 an hour.

                                                                           27
    The right panel of the figure refers to the 1955 cohort, for which average wage
at a given human capital level is slightly lower than that for the 1945 cohort. Thus,
consistent with in Figure 7, wages for men have fallen from the 1945 cohort to the
1955 one. Those for women, for given level of human capital, have dropped by less
and women’s human capital has increased, which explains why the wages of married
women have increased on average, as shown in Figure 7.
    The shock in log wages is modeled as the sum of a persistent component and a
white noise, which we assume captures measurement error, and thus we do not include
in our structural model. We assume that this shock processes are cohort-independent.
Table 3 reports our estimates for the AR component of earnings. They imply that
men and women face similar persistence and earnings shock variance and that the
initial variance upon labor market entry for men is a bit larger than that for women.


                       Parameter            Men Women
                       Persistence          0.941 0.946
                       Variance prod. shock 0.026 0.015
                       Initial variance     0.114 0.095


   Table 3: Estimated processes for the wage shocks for men and women, PSID data



6.1.4   Health, mortality, and medical expenses

    Health, survival, and medical expenses in old age interact in an important way
to determine old age longevity and medical expense risks. These risks, in turn, are
affected by the structure of taxation and Social security rules. For these reasons, it
is important to capture the key aspects of health, mortality, and medical expenses to
evaluate the effects of these programs.
    We take this data from the HRS and, because we have no data after age 65 for the
1955 cohort, we assume that the 1955 cohort faces the same risks as the 1945 cohort
in terms of health, mortality, and medical expenses.
    Based on self-reported health status, we assume that health takes on two values,
good and bad. The left panel of Figure 9 displays the survival probabilities by gender
and marital and health status. Women, married people, and healthy people have
longer life expectancies. In Borella, De Nardi, and Yang (2017), we have shown that

                                         28
our estimated mortality rates line up very well with the life tables.
                                       Singles                       Couples                                                                  Singles                                                              Couples
                          1                               1
                                                                                                                                 18000        Men bad health                                          18000        Men bad health
                        0.95                            0.95                                                                                  Men good health                                                      Men good health
                                                                                                                                 16000        Women bad health                                        16000        Women bad health




                                                                                             Determinstic health cost in 1998$




                                                                                                                                                                  Determinstic health cost in 1998$
                         0.9                             0.9                                                                                  Women good health                                                    Women good health
                                                                                                                                 14000                                                                14000
                        0.85                            0.85
 survival probability




                                                                                                                                 12000                                                                12000
                         0.8                             0.8
                                                                                                                                 10000                                                                10000
                        0.75                            0.75
                                                                                                                                  8000                                                                 8000
                         0.7                             0.7

                        0.65                            0.65                                                                      6000                                                                 6000

                         0.6        Men bad health       0.6        Men bad health                                                4000                                                                 4000
                                    Men good health                 Men good health
                        0.55        Women bad health    0.55        Women bad health                                              2000                                                                 2000
                                    Women good health               Women good health
                         0.5                             0.5                                                                         0                                                                    0
                               70       80       90            70     80       90                                                        70    80       90                                                    70    80       90
                                         age                           age                                                                      Age                                                                  Age




Figure 9: Left panel: Survival probability by age, gender, and marital and health status,
          both cohorts. Right panel: Medical expenditure by age, gender, and marital
          and health status, both cohorts. HRS data


    The left panel of Figure 9 displays the importance of medical expenditures after
retirement. Average medical expenses climb fast past age 85 and are highest for
single and unhealthy people. Figure 24 in Appendix B reports our estimated health
transition matrices by gender, age, and marital and health status.

6.1.5                               Calibrated parameters

    We set the interest rate r to 4% and the utility curvature parameter, γ, to 2.5.
We use the tax function for married and single people estimated by Guner et al.
(2012b). We set the minimum consumption for the elderly singles at $6,950 in 1998
dollars, as in De Nardi, et al. (2016) and the one for couples to be 1.5 the amount
for singles, which is the is the statutory ratio between benefits of couples to singles.
The retirement benefit at age 66 is calculated to mimic the Old Age and Survivor
Insurance component of the Social Security system. Appendix B reports the Social
Security benefit function and the parameters in the tax function.


6.2                            Second step estimates
    Table 4 presents our estimated preference parameters for both cohorts.11
    For the 1945 cohort, our estimated discount factor is .994, the same value
estimated by De Nardi et al. (2016) on a sample of elderly retirees and our estimated
    11
                        Appendix F reports all of our estimated parameters for both cohorts and their standard errors.



                                                                                        29
 Estimated parameters                                      1945 cohort   1955 cohort

    β: Discount factor                                     0.994         0.994
    ω: Consumption weight                                  0.403         0.403
    L2,1 : Time endowment (weekly hours), single women     107           105
    L1,2 : Time endowment (weekly hours), married men      102           98
    L2,2 : Time endowment (weekly hours), married women    85            84
    τc0,5 : Prop. child care cost for children age 0-5     34%           56%
    τc6,11 : Prop. child care cost for children age 6-11   18%           14%
    Φi,j
      t : Partic. cost                                     Fig. 10       Fig. 10


                  Table 4: Second step estimated model parameters


weight on consumption is 0.4. We assume that the 1955 cohort shares these preference
parameters.
    While we normalize total weekly time endowment of single men to 5840 hours a
year, and thus 112 hours a week, for our 1945 cohort, we estimate that single women
have a total weekly time endowment of 107 hours a week. We interpret this as single
women having to spend five more hours a week managing their household and rearing
children (they have fewer children than married women but still more than single men)
or taking care of elderly parents. The corresponding time endowments for married
men and women are, respectively, 102 and 85 hours. This implies that people in the
latter two groups spend 10 and 27 hours a week, respectively, running households,
raising children, and taking care of aging parents.
    Our estimates of non-market work time are remarkably similar to those reported
by Aguiar and Hurst (2007). They find that, in the 1985 American Time Use Survey
(ATUS) dataset (when our 1945 cohort was age 42), men and women spent 14 and
27 hours a week, respectively, engaging in non-market work. Using more recent
data, Dotsey, Li, and Yang (2014) find that, similarly to Aguiar and Hurst (2007),
people spend 17 hours per week on activities related to home production on average.
It should be noted that, even for a working woman, 28 hours can amount to, for
example, spending nine hours each day on Saturday and Sunday and two hours a
day the other five days by parenting, cooking, doing laundry, cleaning, organizing
one’s house, and taking care of one’s parents. Thus, the data and model estimates
are very consistent with the way households spend time running their households and


                                         30
providing care.
    Our estimates for the 1945 cohort imply that the per-child child care cost of having
a child age 0-5 and 6-11 are, respectively, 34% and 18% of a woman’s wage. The PSID
only reports child care costs for all children in the age range 0-11 and implies that the
per-child child care costs of a married woman vary with age and they are for example
29% and 19% of her wages at ages 25 and 30 respectively. To compare our results
with the PSID data, we aggregate the costs obtained in estimation and find that the
per child care costs (for all children in the age range 0-11) of a married woman are
30% and 25% of her wages, respectively, at ages 25 and 30. Thus, our model infers
child care cost for women that are very similar to those in the PSID data.
    For the 1955 cohort, we notice two main changes compared to the 1945 cohort.
First, to help reconcile the lower hours worked by married men in this cohort, the
model estimates that their available time to work and enjoy leisure decreases by six
hours a week. Second, to help reconcile the slopes of hours and participation over the
life cycle by married women in the presence of fewer children, the model estimates
that the per-child child care costs of having younger children goes up, while that of
having older children goes down.
    While decomposing the effects of changing labor supply between the two cohorts
is very interesting (see for instance Attanasio, Low, and Sánchez-Marcos (2008) and
Eckstein and Lifshitz (2011)), we abstract from analyzing it here due to space con-
straints.

                         0.35                                                                       0.35
                                                           SM                                                                                   SM
                          0.3                              SW                                        0.3                                        SW
                                                           MM                                                                                   MM
                                                           MW                                                                                   MW
                         0.25                                                                       0.25
                                                                               Participation cost
    Participation cost




                          0.2                                                                        0.2


                         0.15                                                                       0.15


                          0.1                                                                        0.1


                         0.05                                                                       0.05


                           0                                                                          0
                            25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65                                25   30   35   40   45    50   55   60        65
                                                Age                                                                        Age



Figure 10: Estimated lifecycle labor participation costs expressed as fraction of the time
           endowment of a single men. SM: single men; SW: single women; MM: married
           men; MW: married women. Left panel: 1945 cohort. Right panel: 1955 cohort.
           Model estimates



   Figure 10 reports the age-varying time costs of working by age expressed as frac-

                                                                          31
tion of the time endowment of a single men that are necessary to reconcile the labor
market participation of our four groups of people in each cohort. Our estimated par-
ticipation cost are relatively high when people are younger and, with the exception
of single men, increase again after 45. The time costs of going to work might include
other factors than commuting time. For instance, they might be higher when children
are youngest because, for instance, during that period parents might need additional
time to get their children back and forth from daycare. They also show that, con-
ditional on all aspects of our environment, the participation costs of married women
are the lowest ones. This is because married women face lower wages, have a smaller
time endowment (due to the time spent engaging in home production and childcare),
and tend to have higher-wage husbands who work.
    To reconcile the higher participation of married women at younger ages
in the 1955 cohort, our model estimates a lower time cost of working for married
women when younger. Coupled with our previous finding that that married men have
less available time to work and enjoy leisure, and that per-child child care costs are
higher for this cohort, this might indicate that married women in the 1955 cohort are
both better able to get their husbands to help with childcare and to purchase more
childcare on the market, compared to the married women in the 1945 cohort.


6.3    Model fit
    Figures 11 and 12 report our model-implied moments, as well as the moments and
95% confidence intervals from the PSID data for our 1945 cohort. They show that our
parsimoniously parameterized model (19 parameters and 448 targets) fits the data
very well. It reproduces the important patterns of participation, hours conditional on
participation, and asset accumulation for all of our demographic groups. Our model
fits the data well for the 1955 cohort too (to save on space, we show the graphs for
the 1955 cohort in Appendix G).


6.4    Identification
    The fixed cost of participation by age and subgroup (Φi,j    t ) especially impacts
participation by subgroup and over the lifecycle. The available time endowment
(Li,j ) has first order effects on hours worked by workers. Child care costs have a
larger effect on hours than participation and especially affect hours worked by women

                                          32
                                                        Married men                                               Married women
                                              1                                                             1
                                                                                                                       Model
                                            0.9                                                           0.9          Data
                                                                                                                       Data, upper bound
                                                                                                                       Data, lower bound
                                            0.8                                                           0.8




                      Labor Participation




                                                                                    Labor Participation
                                            0.7                                                           0.7


                                            0.6                                                           0.6


                                            0.5                                                           0.5
                                                         Model
                                                         Data
                                            0.4          Data, upper bound                                0.4
                                                         Data, lower bound
                                            0.3                                                           0.3
                                                   30      40      50      60                                    30      40      50      60
                                                               Age                                                           Age




                                                                 (a) Participation, couples
                                                         Single men                                                   Single women
                                             1                                                             1


                                            0.9                                                           0.9


                                            0.8                                                           0.8
                  Labor Participation




                                                                                Labor Participation
                                            0.7                                                           0.7


                                            0.6                                                           0.6


                                            0.5                                                           0.5
                                                        Model                                                         Model
                                                        Data                                                          Data
                                            0.4         Data, upper bound                                 0.4         Data, upper bound
                                                        Data, lower bound                                             Data, lower bound
                                            0.3                                                           0.3
                                                   30     40      50       60                                    30     40      50       60
                                                             Age                                                           Age




                                                                 (b) Participation, singles
                                                         Married men                                                  Married women

                                            2400                                                          2400          Model
                                                                                                                        Data
                                                                                                                        Data, upper bound
                                            2200                                                          2200          Data, lower bound
                      Hours among workers




                                            2000
                                                                                    Hours among workers   2000


                                            1800                                                          1800


                                            1600                                                          1600
                                                          Model
                                                          Data
                                            1400          Data, upper bound                               1400
                                                          Data, lower bound


                                                    30      40        50   60                                     30      40        50   60
                                                                Age                                                            Age




                                                            (c) Hours for workers, couples
                                                         Single men                                                   Single women

                                            2400                                                          2400          Model
                                                                                                                        Data
                                                                                                                        Data, upper bound
                                            2200                                                          2200          Data, lower bound
                  Hours among workers




                                                                                Hours among workers




                                            2000                                                          2000


                                            1800                                                          1800


                                            1600                                                          1600
                                                         Model
                                                         Data
                                            1400         Data, upper bound                                1400
                                                         Data, lower bound


                                                    30     40      50      60                                     30      40     50      60
                                                                Age                                                           Age




                                                            (d) Hours for workers, singles

Figure 11: Model fit for participation (top graphs) and hours (bottom graphs) and average
           and 95% confidence intervals from the PSID data


when they have young children. This effect is especially large for married women, as
they have more children than single women.
    The discount factor (β) has large effects on savings. The weight on consumption
(ω) affects the intratemporal substitution between consumption and leisure thus af-
fects hours worked at all ages. Because the wage is increasing with human capital
(and past hours worked), a high ω increases the value of consumption at all ages, but
has a larger impact on the hours of older workers than for younger workers.




                                                                                33
                                                              #10 5                          Couples
                                                          6
                                                                           Model
                                                                           Data
                                                          5
                                                                           Data, upper bound




                                Average Household Asset
                                                                           Data, lower bound
                                                          4


                                                          3


                                                          2


                                                          1


                                                          0
                                                           25         30       35       40                 45                   50      55        60        65
                                                                                                 Age


                                                                                    (a) Assets, couples
                                                              #10 5 Single men                                                 #10 5
                                                                                                                                   Single women
                                             3.5                                                                         3.5
                                                                      Model                                                          Model
                                                          3           Data                                                3          Data
                                                                      Data, upper bound                                              Data, upper bound
                 Average Household Asset




                                                                                               Average Household Asset
                                                                      Data, lower bound                                              Data, lower bound
                                             2.5                                                                         2.5


                                                          2                                                               2


                                             1.5                                                                         1.5


                                                          1                                                               1


                                             0.5                                                                         0.5


                                                          0                                                               0
                                                                30      40      50      60                                      30    40     50        60
                                                                            Age                                                         Age


                                                                                     (b) Assets, singles

Figure 12: Model fit for assets and average and 95% confidence intervals from the PSID
           data


7    Model validation and implications
    The previous section shows that our model fits the data targets by age for assets,
participation, and hours worked. In this section, we show that our model also matches
labor income over the life cycle, Social Security benefits for single and married men
and women (which are endogenous to experience formation and labor supply in our
framework) at age 70, and labor supply elasticities at the extensive and intensive
margin for the 1945 cohort. To save space, we do not evaluate all of these implications
for the 1955 cohort.
    Figure 13 shows that our model reproduces the main features of labor income
observed in the data for married and single men and women. This is not an obvious
implication because, while we match participation and hours conditional on partici-
pation, our wages are endogenous to labor supply decisions and could thus generate
earning profiles that do not resemble those in the data.
    Table 5 reports the Social Security benefits at age 70 implied by our model and in
the HRS data and shows that these numbers closely match. The fact that the model’s
implications for both labor income and Social Security benefits over the life cycle are


                                                                                               34
                                             #10 4     Data                                       #10 4    Model
                                         8                                                    8
                                                     Single Men                                           Single Men
                                         7           Single Women                             7           Single Women
                                                     Married Men                                          Married Men




                  Average Labor Income




                                                                       Average Labor Income
                                         6           Married Women                            6           Married Women


                                         5                                                    5

                                         4                                                    4

                                         3                                                    3

                                         2                                                    2

                                         1                                                    1

                                              30     40    50    60                                30     40    50    60
                                                       Age                                                  Age



   Figure 13: Labor income, data (left graph) and model implications (right graph).



consistent with the data is important because these implications have to do with the
available resources that the households have to consume, save, and pay taxes, first
during their working period, and then during their retirement.

                Married men                               Married women                                 Single men        Single women
        Model     14,690                                      10,560                                      14,460             11,100
        Data      14,290                                       9,160                                      13,450             12,800


       Table 5: Average Social Security benefits at age 70, model and HRS data


    To compare the model’s implications for labor supply elasticity with those esti-
mated by many others, we compute a version of compensated labor supply elasticity.
To do so, we temporarily increase the wage for only one age and one group (either
married men, or married women, or single men, or single women) at a time by 5%.
This change is anticipated. Table 6 shows the (compensated) elasticities of partic-
ipation and hours among workers with respect to a change to their own wage. It
shows several interesting features. First, the elasticity of participation of women is
larger than that of men, both for married and singles. Second, married men display
small participation elasticities to temporary and small wage changes, and have the
lowest elasticity of participation among the four groups that we consider. Third, the
elasticity of participation for all groups is largest around retirement age, a finding
that confirms that of French (2005) for men. Our elasticities are in line with those
estimated by the existing literature.
    Our model was not required to match any of these additional important aspects
of the data. The fact that it does provides further support for the validity of the
model’s prediction in response to policy changes.

                                                                      35
                           Participation       Hours among workers
                        Married     Single     Married    Single
                        W M W M                W M W          M
                   30   0.7 0.0 0.5 0.1        0.1 0.2 0.1    0.3
                   40   0.5 0.1 0.4 0.2        0.3 0.4 0.4    0.2
                   50   0.6 0.2 0.4 0.6        0.5 0.4 0.5    0.3
                   60   1.0 0.8 1.7 1.1        0.3 0.3 0.4    0.5


                  Table 6: Model-implied elasticities of labor supply


    While important to compare with the empirical estimates, the compensated wage
elasticities are not necessarily indicative of how participation and hours would change
as a result of a permanent wages change such as those implied by a permanent tax
change. To help shed light on what we should expect from our policy experiments, we
report here the effects of a permanent increase of 5% in the wage schedule of married
women when the wage structure of the other three demographic groups remains the
same.
    Panel (a) of Figure 14 shows that a permanent wage increase for married women
implies a much larger, and U-shaped, elasticity of participation for married women,
which peaks at 2.5 at age 25. It also reports the cross-elasticities of the other groups
to changes in the wages of married women. Panel (b) highlights that permanent wage
changes can lead to high increases in married women’s participation, with participa-
tion being 4-7 percentage points higher over all of their life cycle. It also shows that
the participation of single women rises because they expect to get married and obtain
higher wages (and higher returns to their accumulated human capital) upon marriage.
There is little response in the participation of single men. In contrast, married men’s
participation after age 40 decreases when women’s wage schedule increases. This
shows that modeling men’s labor supply is important to assess the effects of reforms
affecting the wages of married women in a long-lasting way.
    Turning to the elasticity of married women’s behavior to changes in their hus-
band’s wages, Figure 15 highlights a negative cross-elasticity of participation for
married women which is as high as -1.8 at age 25, decreases to -0.7 between ages
43 and 50, and then increases again to about -1.5 after age 60. This change also
increases the labor supply of married men after age 40.
    We do not report the effects of permanently changes the wages of singles, as their


                                          36
                                                Raise wages of married women by:5%                                                                                                               Raise wages of married women by:5%
                                    3                                                                                                                                       0.08
                                                                                                                Single Men                                                                                          Single Men
                                                                                                                Single Women                                                                                        Single Women
                                  2.5
                                                                                                                Married Men                                                                                         Married Men
                                                                                                                                                                            0.06
                                                                                                                Married Women                                                                                       Married Women
                                    2
    Elasticity in participation




                                                                                                                                                  Change in participation
                                                                                                                                                                            0.04
                                  1.5


                                    1                                                                                                                                       0.02


                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                               0

                                    0

                                                                                                                                                                            -0.02
                                  -0.5


                                   -1                                                                                                                                       -0.04
                                     25    30    35     40     45                      50                  55         60        65                                               25        30        35        40     45       50   55   60   65
                                                               Age                                                                                                                                                    Age




Figure 14: Elasticity of participation (left graph) and change in participation (right graph)
           for a 5% permanent increase in the wage schedule for married women. Effect
           on all four demographic groups. Model implications


                                                                                                                           Raise wages of married men by:5%
                                                                                                   1.5
                                                                                                                                          Single Men
                                                                                                                                          Single Women
                                                                                                     1                                    Married Men
                                                                                                                                          Married Women
                                                                     Elasticity in participation




                                                                                                   0.5


                                                                                                     0


                                                                                                   -0.5


                                                                                                    -1


                                                                                                   -1.5


                                                                                                    -2
                                                                                                      25         30        35        40     45                               50       55        60        65
                                                                                                                                            Age




Figure 15: Change in participation for a 5% permanent increase in the wage schedule of
           married men. Effect on all four demographic groups. Model implications



effects are very small, nor the effect of wages on hours, which are also small.


8                                        Eliminating Marital Social Security benefits and
                                         joint taxation for the 1945 cohort
    We now turn to using our model to evaluate the effect of various policy reforms.
For each of them, we leave everything else unchanged, including taxes. This has the
benefit of focusing on the policy change at hand and does not require the government
to balance the budget for one cohort.




                                                                                                                                          37
8.1    Eliminating all spousal Social Security benefits, 1945 co-
       hort
    According to the current Social Security rules, one’s spouse can receive half of his
or her partner’s contribution while the partner is alive and all of the benefits of the
deceased spouse. This provision potentially has three effects. First, it discourages
the labor supply of the secondary earner, given that he or she can benefit from
spousal benefits. Second, it encourages the labor supply of the main earner, who
is also working to provide Social Security benefits to the secondary earner spouse.
Third, it reduces retirement savings because it raises the annuitized income flow of
the secondary earner or non-participant.
    When eliminating all spousal Social Security benefits, both while the spouse is
alive and after his or her death, the government budget surplus increases by 24%
and the top left panel of Figure 16 shows that the participation of married women
is, respectively, eight, twelve, and six percentage points higher at ages 25, 55-60,
and 65. In contrast, men decrease their participation starting at age 55 and their
participation is three percentage points lower by age 65. A model in which married
men cannot change their participation or can do it only after a certain age, would
miss this effect. Even the participation of single women increases (by four percentage
points) because, should they get married, they now expect no Social Security benefits
coming from theirs spouse’s labor supply. As they age, the probability that they get
married becomes negligible and the effect on spousal benefits elimination on their
participation fades.
    Groneck and Wallenius (2017) focus on the redistribution of Social Security related
to marital benefits in a simpler model than ours, for instance with three-year periods,
much less flexibility in adjusting hours and calibrating all of their model parameters,
but also report that, over all of the working period, their model implies an increase in
the participation by married women of 6.4 percentage points. Kaygusuz (2015) finds
an increase in the participation by married women of 6.1 percentage points overall.
Their findings are a bit smaller but in the ballpark of ours.
    The top right panel of Figure 16 reports changes in labor income for our four
demographics groups. As a result of their increased labor supply and labor market
experience, married women’s labor income is about, respectively, $1,200, $2,500 and
$1,500 higher ages 25, 55-60 and 65. The labor income of married men drops by


                                          38
                                                        No spousal or survival benefit in SS                                                                                                              No spousal or survival benefit in SS
                                         0.14                                                                                                                                             3000

                                         0.12




                                                                                                                                                         Change in average Labor Income
                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
                                           0.1




               Change in participation
                                         0.08
                                                                                                                           Single Men                                                     1000
                                         0.06
                                                                                                                           Single Women
                                                                                                                           Married Men
                                         0.04                                                                              Married Women
                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                         0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Single Men
                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                                          -1000            Single Women
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Married Men
                                         -0.02                                                                                                                                                             Married Women

                                         -0.04                                                                                                                                            -2000
                                              25   30     35     40     45                                         50         55       60     65                                               25    30      35       40   45     50     55      60   65
                                                                        Age                                                                                                                                                Age
                                                                                                                              4        No spousal or survival benefit in SS
                                                                                                                        #10
                                                                                                                    4
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Couples
                                                                                                                  3.5




                                                                              Change in Average Household Asset
                                                                                                                    3

                                                                                                                  2.5

                                                                                                                    2

                                                                                                                  1.5

                                                                                                                    1

                                                                                                                  0.5

                                                                                                                    0

                                                                                                                  -0.5
                                                                                                                      20          30     40     50     60                                   70      80     90       100
                                                                                                                                                       Age



Figure 16: Changes in participation (top left panel), labor income (top right panel) and
           savings (bottom panel) after the elimination of all the spousal Social Security
           benefits



about $1,500 by age 65.
    The bottom panel of Figure 16 displays changes in savings over the life cycle
for married people. The effect of this reform is large and peaks at an accumulation
of additional $35,000 between the ages of 75 and 80 compared to our benchmark
economy with Social Security marital benefits.


8.2    Eliminating all spousal Social Security benefits and joint
       income taxation, 1945 cohort
    Government surplus increases by 25% as a result of this reform. The left sub-panel
of Figure 17 displays the participation profiles in our benchmark economy and the
economy in which every one files as an individual and there are no Social Security
spousal benefits. The sub-panel on the left plots the difference in the participation
profile in each group. These graphs highlight several important findings. First, elimi-
nating all marriage-related taxes and transfers have a large effect of the participation
of married and single women. The participation of married women is 15-22 percent-
age points higher until age 60 in the no-marital provisions economy. The one for
single women is about five percentage points higher until age 40. The participation

                                                                                                                                                     39
of married men is higher in their middle age, reaching a peak of three percentage
points higher than in the benchmark, but is three percentage points lower than in the
benchmark after age 60. Thus, the timing of their participation changes over their life
cycle. This highlights the importance of also modeling their labor supply behavior
over their life cycle, in addition to that of their wives’ when we change provisions
that affect both members in the household.
                                                        All policies change                                                              Benchmark                                     All policies change
                                     0.3                                                                                       1                                                  1
                                                                              Single Men
                                                                              Single Women
                                    0.25                                      Married Men                                     0.9                                                0.9
                                                                              Married Women
          Change in participation




                                     0.2                                                                                      0.8                                                0.8




                                                                                                        Labor Participation




                                                                                                                                                           Labor Participation
                                    0.15                                                                                      0.7                                                0.7


                                     0.1                                                                                      0.6                                                0.6


                                    0.05                                                                                      0.5                                                0.5
                                                                                                                                          Single Men                                        Single Men
                                                                                                                                          Single Women                                      Single Women
                                       0                                                                                      0.4         Married Men                            0.4        Married Men
                                                                                                                                          Married Women                                     Married Women

                                    -0.05                                                                                     0.3                                                0.3
                                         25   30   35    40     45     50       55      60    65                                    30    40    50    60                               30   40    50    60
                                                               Age                                                                          Age                                               Age


Figure 17: 1945 cohort: Differences in participation (left panel) and participation in the
           benchmark and reformed economy (right panel) after the elimination of all the
           spousal Social Security benefits and of joint income taxation



    Guner, Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2012a) study the switch from current U.S. tax-
ation to single filer taxation in a calibrated model of a steady state and find that
the labor supply of married women goes up by 10-20 percentage points. They do
not study the effect of marital Social Security benefits. When we perform the exper-
iment of switching to single filer taxation in isolation, we find that our effect on the
labor supply of married women is closer to the lower bound of those found by Guner,
Kaygusuz, and Ventura (2012a).
    As a result of increased labor market experience, the average wages of both married
and single women increase; this increase peaks at $0.8-0.9 between age 50 and 60 (left
panel in Figure 18). Increased wages and participation (hours increase little for the
workers) imply higher average earnings of $3,000 per year over for married women and
$2,000 for single women for most of their life cycle. In contrast, average earnings of
married men start dropping at age 62 and are $1,500 a year lower by age 65. Looking
at savings, couples accumulate less assets before age 40 because both partners work
more and consume less leisure and more consumption goods. However, they then save
much more rapidly and end up accumulating over $40,000 more by age 75.

                                                                                                   40
                                                                   All policies change                                                                                                                                 All policies change
                                                  1                                                                                                                                       5000


                                                                                                                                                                                          4000




                                                                                                                                                         Change in average Labor Income
                                                0.8




                Change in average hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                          3000
                                                0.6
                                                                                                                          Single Men                                                      2000
                                                                                                                          Single Women
                                                0.4
                                                                                                                          Married Men
                                                                                                                          Married Women                                                   1000

                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Single Men
                                                  0                                                                                                                                                           Single Women
                                                                                                                                                                                          -1000
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Married Men
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Married Women
                                                -0.2                                                                                                                                      -2000
                                                    25   30   35    40     45                                   50             55        60   65                                               25        30     35      40     45     50     55   60   65
                                                                          Age                                                                                                                                                 Age
                                                                                                                               4              All policies change
                                                                                                                         #10
                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                    Couples




                                                                                Change in Average Household Asset
                                                                                                                    4


                                                                                                                    3


                                                                                                                    2


                                                                                                                    1


                                                                                                                    0


                                                                                                                    -1
                                                                                                                           30           40    50    60                                     70       80        90
                                                                                                                                                     Age




Figure 18: 1945 cohort: Changes in wages (left panel), labor income (right panel), and
           assets for couples (bottom panel) after the elimination of all the spousal Social
           Security benefits and with joint income taxation



    An important reason why these reforms have such large effects on the labor supply
of married women resides in the initial distribution of potential wages of men and
women when they enter the labor market at age 25. Table 7 shows that, in the 1945
cohort, 57% of women and only 23% of men belong to the bottom two quintiles of
wages at age 25. Thus, most women have low wages and tend to be secondary earners
in this cohort. For this reason, they react strongly to the elimination of marital tax
benefits.

                                                                         Wage quintile
                                                                           1      2    3     4     5
                                                      Men                7.3% 16.3% 18.8% 24.9% 32.7%
                                                      Women              39.3% 17.8% 21.4% 15.0% 6.6%


Table 7: Distribution of men and women across potential wage quintiles at age 25, 1945
         cohort, PSID data




                                                                                                                                                   41
9     Eliminating Marital Social Security benefits and
      joint taxation for the 1955 cohort
    We now turn to studying the effects of marriage-related taxes and Social benefits
for the 1955 cohort. In the interest of space, we only report results for the case in
which we eliminate all three marriage-related provisions at the same time.
    The right sub-panel of Figure 19 displays the participation profiles in our bench-
mark economy and the economy in which every one files as an individual and there
are no Social Security spousal benefits. The sub-panel on the right plots the differ-
ence in the participation profile in each group. These graphs show that eliminating
all marital-related provisions also has large effects for the 1955 cohort, in which labor
supply participation is much higher to start with. Thus, the effects of these policies on
a relative younger cohort with much higher participation of married women continues
to be very large.
                                            Benchmark                                     All policies change                                                      All policies change
                                  1                                                  1                                                         0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                         Single Men
                                 0.9                                                0.9                                                                                                  Single Women
                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                         Married Men
                                                                                                                                                                                         Married Women
                                                                                                                     Change in participation




                                 0.8                                                0.8
           Labor Participation




                                                              Labor Participation




                                                                                                                                               0.15

                                 0.7                                                0.7
                                                                                                                                                 0.1
                                 0.6                                                0.6

                                                                                                                                               0.05
                                 0.5                                                0.5
                                             Single Men                                        Single Men
                                             Single Women                                      Single Women
                                 0.4         Married Men                            0.4        Married Men                                        0
                                             Married Women                                     Married Women

                                 0.3                                                0.3                                                        -0.05
                                       30    40    50    60                               30   40    50    60                                       25   30   35    40     45     50       55     60     65
                                               Age                                               Age                                                                      Age



Figure 19: 1955 cohort: Participation in the benchmark and reformed economy (left
           panel), differences in participation (right panel) after the elimination of all
           the spousal Social Security benefits and with joint income taxation



    The effects on increased labor market experience on wages are similar to those
in the 1945 cohort, (left panel in Figure 20) and, as for the 1945 cohort, increased
wages and participation (hours increase little for the workers) imply higher average
earnings of $3-4,000 per year over for married women and $2,000 for single women
for most of their life cycle. Average earnings of married men start dropping earlier
for this cohort, that is at age 55, compared to age 62 for the 1945 cohort, but their
drop is smaller by age 65. Changes in savings for married people are very close to
those for the older cohort and also peak at over $40,000 more by age 75.

                                                                                                                42
                                                                 All policies change                                                                                                                             All policies change
                                                0.8                                                                                                                                   5000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Single Men
                                                0.7                                                                                                                                                                                    Single Women




                                                                                                                                                     Change in average Labor Income
                                                                                                                                                                                      4000




                Change in average hourly wage
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Married Men
                                                0.6                                                                                                                                                                                    Married Women

                                                                                                                                                                                      3000
                                                0.5
                                                                                                                         Single Men
                                                                                                                         Single Women
                                                0.4                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                                                                                         Married Men
                                                                                                                         Married Women
                                                0.3
                                                                                                                                                                                      1000
                                                0.2
                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                0.1

                                                 0                                                                                                                                    -1000
                                                  25   30   35    40     45                                   50            55       60    65                                              25    30      35       40     45     50       55     60     65
                                                                        Age                                                                                                                                             Age
                                                                                                                            4              All policies change
                                                                                                                      #10
                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Couples




                                                                              Change in Average Household Asset
                                                                                                                  4


                                                                                                                  3


                                                                                                                  2


                                                                                                                  1


                                                                                                                  0


                                                                                                                  -1
                                                                                                                    20          30    40    50     60                                   70      80     90       100
                                                                                                                                                  Age



Figure 20: 1955 cohort: Changes in wages (left panel), labor income (right panel), and
           assets for couples (bottom panel) after the elimination of all the spousal Social
           Security benefits and with joint income taxation


                                                                       Wage quintile
                                                                         1      2    3     4     5
                                                      Men              8.6% 16.9% 19.5% 28.1% 27.4%
                                                      Women            32.9% 26.9% 16.6% 12.3% 11.3%


Table 8: Distribution of men and women across potential wage quintiles at age 25, 1955
         cohort, PSID data


    Comparing Tables 7 and 8 highlights that the fraction of women in the lowest
wage quintile has decreased and the fraction of women in the highest one has increased
from the 1945 to the 1955 cohort but that it is still the case that, even in the 1955
cohort, most women tend to have lower wages and thus to be secondary earners in
this cohort, and thus to respond strongly to the elimination of marital provisions.




                                                                                                                                                 43
10       Changes in marriage and divorce patterns in
         response to policy
   Because we study labor supply and savings responses to the elimination of two
important marriage-based policies, the question of the robustness of our findings to
changes in marriage and divorce patterns naturally arises. To address this question,
we first turn to summarizing previous empirical findings on the effects of changes in
Social Security rules and income taxes on marriage and divorce patterns. Then, we
perform policy experiments in which marriage and divorce exogenously change at the
same time as we eliminate marriage-based taxes and Social Security benefits by more
than what has been fond in the empirical literature, to evaluate the robustness of our
results.


10.1      The effects of Social Security and income taxes on mar-
          riage and divorce in the empirical literature
    Before 1977, Social Security spousal benefits were available to the secondary earner
in case of divorce after twenty years of marriage. After 1977, the threshold for eligi-
bility became ten years of marriage before divorce.12
    Dickert-Conlin and Meghea (2004) examine the 1977 U.S. policy switch (using
data from the National Vital Statistics, the 1980 Census, and The Current Population
Survey) and conclude that it had no effects on divorces and remarriages. Goda et al.
(2007) also find no impact of the 10-year eligibility discontinuity (using data from the
PSID Marital History File) on divorces. Dillender (2016) confirms that these rules
have no effects overall and small ones on a very small number of people, those who
married late. This group of people accounts for a very small fraction of marriages and
divorces in the aggregate. Thus, previous literature indicates that while the effects of
Social Security benefits kinks are negligible in the United States.
    Turning to the effect of income taxes on marriages and divorces, Alm and Whit-
tington (1995) use time series data from 1947 to 1988 and argue that “the magnitude
of this impact is quite mall. This result suggests that some individuals respond to
tax incentives in their marriage choices, but that for many individuals taxes do not
  12
    We do not model this part of the benefits because the fraction of people divorcing after 10 years
of marriage is small and this addition would add great computational complexity to our framework.



                                                 44
affect these decisions.” Alm and Whittington (1997) use data from the Panel Study
on Income Dynamics and estimate a discrete-time hazard model of the probability
of divorce from the first marriage. They conclude that “couples respond to tax in-
centives in their decision to divorce, although these responses are typically small.”
Alm and Whittington (1999) utilize the same data to estimate a discrete-time hazard
model of the time to first marriage from 1968 to 1992, and uncover that the income
tax has no effect on the marriage decisions of men and only a small effect on the mar-
riage decisions of women. They thus conclude that, in the context of the U.S., “In
general, the impacts of the income tax variables, even when statistically significant,
are small.”
     Thus, for the U.S., previous empirical studies on the impact of income taxation
and Social Security benefits on marriage and divorce find either no significant effects
or very small effects. The small effects apply to tiny groups of people which have very
little weight on the aggregates.
     Looking into welfare programs, Low, Meghir, Pistaferri, and Voena (2018) study
the U.S. subpopulation of mothers on welfare and the 1996 welfare reform, which was
meant to encourage labor supply by welfare recipients and reduce marital disincen-
tives. They use the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) data and
document that the reform immediately reduced the welfare recipience and increased
the labor participation of mothers, but had no effects on marriage and fertility. They
do highlight an effect on divorces, which declined from 0.9% before the reform to 0.7%
after the reform. This is a non-trivial drop as a fraction of divorces, but in absolute
terms, the reform reduced a very small number to a tiny one.
     More broadly on the effects of welfare programs, a previous survey by Moffitt
(1998) concludes that“Most find that the majority of studies show either no significant
effects of AFDC and other welfare programs, effects that are statistically significant
but small in magnitude, a set of mixed effects indicating some that are favorable
and some unfavorable, or effects that occur only for some specific types of programs.
Although the research reviewed in these chapters does not support a finding of no
effect whatsoever of welfare programs on demographic behavior, it would be difficult
to argue that the research often indicates very sizable or stable effects.”
     Persson (2017) studies the elimination of marital survivorship benefits that took
place in 1989 in Sweden and infers larger effects than those found for the U.S. In
terms of comparison with our work, her main finding is that divorce rate increased


                                          45
by 10% as a result of the elimination of marital survivorship benefits. Although this
is a sizeable effect in percentage terms, it is a small change from the standpoint of
the overall population because the divorce rate is small.
    In comparing findings for the United States and Sweden, it is also important to
keep in mind that cultural and religious factors are important reasons why people
marry and stay married, and that marriage is much more widespread in the United
States than in Sweden. For instance, The United Nations (Department of Economic
and Social Affairs) reports that in 1985, a time period proceeding the 1989 Swedish
marital benefits reform, only 35.8% of the 25-29 year old Swedish women were married,
compared to 64.3% in the U.S.. In addition, in the 1980s 18% of live births were born
to unmarried women in the United States, compared to 40% in Sweden (Sorrentino,
1990).


10.2     Robustness of policy results to large changes in mar-
         riage and divorces
    In this subsection, we compare the effects of a policy experiment in which we
eliminate joint income taxation of couples and Social Security marital benefits (for
the 1945 cohort) for given marriage and divorce patterns to the effects of the same
policy when there are also two alternative possible changes in marriage and divorce
patterns. In the first robustness exercise, the policy also decreases marriage rates
by 20% and increases divorce rates by 20%. Alternatively, in the second robustness
exercise, the policy also increases marriage rates by 20% and decreases divorces rates
by 20%.
    Figure 21 highlights several important findings. First, all changes in participation
of the four groups are very similar whether marriage and divorce patterns change or
not. Second, comparing the left panel (no marriage and divorce changes) and the
middle panel (decreased marriage and increased divorce) shows that a reform that
lowers the probability of marriage and raises that of divorce makes women more self-
reliant on their own labor supply and human capital. Married women work more (and
accumulate more human capital) to edge against divorce risk. Single women are less
likely to get married and also work more (and also accumulate more human capital).
Comparing the left panel (no marriage and divorce changes) and the right panel
(increased marriage and decreased divorce) highlights that increasing marriage rates


                                          46
                                                                                               All policies change                                                                                       All policies change, lower marriage and higher divorce rates                                                                  All policies change, higher marriage and lower divorce rates
                                                          0.3                                                                                                                                  0.3                                                                                                                           0.3
                                                                                                                     Single Men                                                                                                                   Single Men                                                                                                                    Single Men
                                                                                                                     Single Women                                                                                                                 Single Women                                                                                                                  Single Women
                                        0.25                                                                         Married Men                                             0.25                                                                 Married Men                                              0.25                                                                 Married Men
                                                                                                                     Married Women                                                                                                                Married Women                                                                                                                 Married Women
     Change in participation




                                                                                                                                          Change in participation




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Change in participation
                                                          0.2                                                                                                                                  0.2                                                                                                                           0.2


                                        0.15                                                                                                                                 0.15                                                                                                                          0.15


                                                          0.1                                                                                                                                  0.1                                                                                                                           0.1


                                        0.05                                                                                                                                 0.05                                                                                                                          0.05


                                                                   0                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                             0


                               -0.05                                                                                                                                -0.05                                                                                                                         -0.05
                                    25                                          30        35    40     45     50       55      60    65                                  25                                       30        35    40    45   50     55      60    65                                   25                                       30        35    40    45   50     55      60    65
                                                                                                      Age                                                                                                                              Age                                                                                                                           Age




Figure 21: Differences in participation after the elimination of all the spousal Social Se-
           curity benefits and joint income taxation for the 1945 cohort. Left panel:
           benchmark economy with unchanging marriage and divorce after the policy
           change. Middle panel: 20% lower marriage probability and 20% higher divorce
           rate after the policy change. Right panel: 20% higher marriage probability
           and 20% lower divorce rate after the policy change.



and lowering divorce rates has the opposite effects, but that these effects are small
and do not change the conclusions that we reach in our original policy experiment.
   Changes in hours worked are also very similar to each other across these three
experiments and we do not report them due to space constraints.
                                                                        #10 4                  All policies change                                                                                       All
                                                                                                                                                                                                          #10  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                             policies change, lower marriage and higher divorce rates                                                                  All
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        #10  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           policies change, higher marriage and lower divorce rates
                                                                   5                                                                                                                                    5                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                Couples                                                                                                                           Couples                                                                                                                       Couples
                               Change in Average Household Asset




                                                                                                                                                                    Change in Average Household Asset




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Change in Average Household Asset




                                                                   4                                                                                                                                    4                                                                                                                             4


                                                                   3                                                                                                                                    3                                                                                                                             3


                                                                   2                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                                                             2


                                                                   1                                                                                                                                    1                                                                                                                             1


                                                                   0                                                                                                                                    0                                                                                                                             0


                                                                   -1                                                                                                                                   -1                                                                                                                            -1
                                                                           30        40        50    60      70        80      90                                                                            30        40        50    60    70     80      90                                                                             30        40        50    60    70     80      90
                                                                                                      Age                                                                                                                              Age                                                                                                                           Age




Figure 22: Changes in assets for couples after the elimination of all the spousal Social Se-
           curity benefits and with joint income taxation for the 1945 cohort. Left panel:
           benchmark economy with unchanging marriage and divorce after the policy
           change. Middle panel: 20% lower marriage probability and 20% higher divorce
           rate after the policy change. Right panel: 20% higher marriage probability
           and 20% lower divorce rate after the policy change.



   Figure 22 compares savings for the three experiments. The middle and right panel
show that the effects on savings of couples are also very robust to changes in expected
marital patterns.
   Our results are thus robust to large changes in marriage and divorce rates.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       47
11      Conclusions
     We estimate a model of labor supply and savings of single and married people,
which allows for a rich representation of the risks that people face over their entire
life cycle and that allows for the important provisions of taxes and Social Security for
singles and couples.
     We estimate our model to both the 1945 and the 1955 birth-cohorts and we show
that our model fits the data very well, including along important dimensions that it
was not meant to match by construction, such as the elasticities of labor supply.
     We find that the fact that young women entering the labor market have much
lower wages than those of men and the time and monetary costs that children imply
are important determinants of the labor supply of single and married men and women.
     We use our model to evaluate the effect of marriage-based Social Security benefits
and the marriage tax bonus and penalty. We find that these marriage-based provisions
have a strong disincentive effect on the labor supply of married women, but also on
that of single young women who expect to get married. This lower participation
reduces their labor market experience which, in turn, reduces their wages over their
life cycle. These provisions also induce married men to work longer careers and
depress the savings of couples. Our findings are robust to changes in marriage and
divorce patterns.
     These effects are very similar for the 1945 and the 1955 birth cohorts, despite the
fact that the labor market participation of young married women in the 1955 cohort
is over ten percentage points higher than that of the 1945 cohort.
     Our paper provides several contributions. First, it is the first estimated structural
model of couples and singles that allows for participation and hours decisions of both
men and women, including those in couples, in a framework with savings. Second,
it is the first paper that studies all marriage-related taxes and benefits in a unified
framework. Third, its does so by allowing for the large observed changes in the labor
supply of married women over time by studying two different cohorts. Fourth, our
framework is very rich along dimensions that are important to study our problem,
including labor market experience affecting wages and carefully modeling survival,
health, and medical expenses in old age, and their heterogeneity by marital status
and gender.




                                           48
References
 [1] Acemoglu, Daron and David Autor. 2011. “Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Im-
     plications for Employment and Earnings. ” in D. Card and O. Ashenfelter, ed.,
     Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4, (North Holland), 1043-1171.

 [2] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. 2007. “Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allo-
     cation of Time Over Five Decades.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(3),
     969-1006.

 [3] Alm, James and Leslie A. Whittington. 1995. “Income Taxes and the Marriage
     Decision. ” Aoolied Economics 13(3), 193-204.

 [4] Alm, James and Leslie A. Whittington. 1997. “’Til Death or Taxes Do Us Part:
     The effects of Income Taxation on Divorce. ” The Journal of Human Resources
     32(2), 388-412.

 [5] Alm, James and Leslie A. Whittington. 1999. “For Love or Money? The Impact
     of Income Taxes on Marriage. ” Economica 66, 297-316.

 [6] Altonji, Joseph G. and Ivan Vidangos. 2017.“Marriage Dynamics, Earnings Dy-
     namics, and Lifetime Family Income. ” Mimeo.

 [7] Altonji, Joseph G. and Lewis M. Segal. 1996. “Small Sample Bias in GMM Esti-
     mation of Covariance Structures. ” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
     14(3), 353366.

 [8] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sánchez-Marcos. 2008. “Explain-
     ing Changes in Female Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle Model.” The American
     Economic Review, 98(4), 1517-1552.

 [9] Bick, Alexander, and Nicola Fuchs-Schundeln. 2018. “Taxation and Labor Supply
     of Married Couples across Countries: A Macroeconomic Analysis. ” The Review
     of Economic Studies, 85(3), 1543-1576.

[10] Blau, David M. and Donna Gilleskie. 2006. “Health Insurance and Retirement
     of Married Couples.” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 21(7), 935-953.




                                        49
[11] Blundell, Richard and Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten. 2016. “Con-
     sumption Inequality and Family Labor Supply.” American Economic Review,
     106(2), 387435.

[12] Blundell, Richard and Costa Dias, Monica and Meghir, Costas and Shaw,
     Jonathan. 2016. “Female labor supply, human capital, and welfare reform.”
     Econometrica, 84(5), 1705-1753.

[13] Blundell, Richard and Jack Brtitton and Monica Costa Dias and Eric French.
     2017. “The impact of health on labour supply near retirement.” Mimeo.

[14] Bronson, Mary Ann. 2015. “Degrees Are Forever: Marriage, Educational Invest-
     ment, and Lifecycle Labor Decisions of Men and Women.” Mimeo.

[15] Borella, Margherita and Mariacristina De Nardi and Eric French. 2017. “Who
     received Medicaid in old age? Rules and reality.” Fiscal Studies, forthcoming.

[16] Borella, Margherita and Mariacristina De Nardi and Fang Yang. 2017. “The
     Aggregate Implications of Gender and Marriage.” The Economics of Ageing,
     May 2018, 6-26.

[17] Browning, Martin, and Pierre-André Chiappori. 1998. “Efficient intrahousehold
     allocation: a characterisation and tests. ” Econometrica, 66(6), 1241-78.

[18] Casanova, Maria. 2012. “Happy Together: A Structural Model of Couples’ Joint
     Retirement Choices.” Mimeo.

[19] Chiappori, Pierre-André. 1988. “Rational Household Labor Supply. ” Economet-
     rica, 56, 63-89.

[20] Chiappori, Pierre-André. 1992. “Collective labor supply and welfare. ” Journal
     of Political Economy, 100(3), 437-67.

[21] Citro, Constance Forbes, and Robert T. Michael, 1995, Measuring poverty: a
     new approach, National Academy Press.

[22] De Nardi, Mariacristina and Eric French, and John Jones. 2010. “Why do the
     Elderly Save? The Role of Medical Expenses,” Journal of Political Economy,
     118, 39-75.


                                        50
[23] De Nardi, Mariacristina and Eric French, and John Jones. 2016. “Medicaid In-
     surance in Old Age,” The American Economic Review, 106(11), 3480-3520.

[24] Dickert-Conlin, Stacey and Meghea, Christian. 2004. “The Effect of Social Se-
     curity on Divorce and Remarriage Behavior,” Working paper no. 9, Center for
     Retirement Research.

[25] Dillender, Marcus. 2016. “Social Security and Divorce. ” The B.E. Journal of
     Economic Analysis and Policy,” 16(2), 931-971.

[26] Dotsey, Michael, Wenli Li, and Fang Yang, 2014, “Consumption and Time Use
     over the Life Cycle.” International Economic Review, 55 (3), 665-692.

[27] Duffie, Darrell, and Kenneth J. Singleton. 1993. “Simulated Moments Estimation
     of Markov Models of Asset Prices. ” Econometrica, 61(4), 929952.

[28] Eckstein, Zvi and Osnat Liftshitz. 2011. “Dynamic Female Labor Supply.”
     Econometrica 79(6), 1675-1726.

[29] Eckstein, Zvi, and Michael Keane, and Osnat Liftshitz. 2016. “Sources of Change
     in the Life-Cycle Decisions of American Men and Woman: 1962-2014. ” Working
     paper.

[30] French, Eric. 2005. “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply
     and Retirement Behavior.” Review of Economic Studies, 72(2), 395-427.

[31] Gouveia, Miguel and Robert P. Strauss. 1994. “Effective Federal Individual In-
     come Tax Functions: An Exploratory Empirical Analysis.” National Tax Jour-
     nal, 47(2), 317–39.

[32] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker. 2002. “Consumption over
     the Life Cycle.” Econometrica 70(1), 47–89.

[33] Goda, Gopi Shah, John Shoven and Sita Nataraj Slavov. 2007. “Social Security
     and the Timing of Divorce,” NBER Working Papers 13382.

[34] Groneck, Max, and Johanna Wallenius. 2017. It Sucks to Be Single! Marital
     Status and Redistribution of Social Security. Working Paper.



                                        51
[35] Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz and Gustavo Ventura. 2012a. “Taxation and
     Household Labour Supply.” Review of Economic Studies, 79, 1113-1149.

[36] Guner, Nezih, Remzi Kaygusuz and Gustavo Ventura. 2012b. “Income Taxation
     of U.S. Households: Basic Facts,” CEPR Discussion Paper 9078.

[37] Hubener, Andreas, Raimond Maurre, and Olivia Mitchell. 2016. “How Family
     Status and Social Security Caliming Options Shape Optimal Life Cycle Portfo-
     lios. ”The Review of Financial Studies, 29(4), 937-978.

[38] Kaygusuz, Remzi. 2015. “Social Security and Two-Earner Households.” Mimeo.

[39] Love, David. 2010. “The Effects of Marital Status and Children on Savings and
     Portfolio Choice. ” Review of Financial Studies, 23, 328-355.

[40] Low, Hamish, Costas Meghir, Luigi Pistaferri, and Alessandra Voena. 2018.
     “Marriage, Labor Supply and the Social Safety Net.” Mimeo.

[41] Robert Moffit. 1998. “Welfare, The Family, And Reproductive Behavior, Re-
     search Perspectives. ” Robert A. Moffitt, Editor. National Academy Press. Wash-
     ington D.C.

[42] Persson, Petra. 2017. “Social Insurance and the Marriage Market.” Mimeo.

[43] Nishiyama, Shinichi. 2015. “The Joint Labor Supply Decision of Married Couples
     and the Social Security Pension System.” Mimeo.

[44] Pakes, Ariel, and David Pollard. 1989. “Simulation and the Aysmptotics of Op-
     timization Estimators. ” Econometrica, 57(5), 10271057.

[45] Roys, Nicolas and Christopher Taber. 2017. “Skills Prices, Occupations and
     Changes in the Wage Structure for Low Skilled Men. ” Mimeo.

[46] Sorrentino, Constance. 1990. “The Changing Family in International Perspec-
     tive.” Monthly Labor Review, 113(3), 41-58.

[47] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Di-
     vision, Fertility and Family Planning Section. 2012. “World Marriage Data”,
     http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/WMD2012/MainFrame.html
     ” Web page.


                                        52
Appendix A. Data: The PSID and the HRS
    We use the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) to estimate the wage process,
the marriage and divorce probabilities, the initial distribution of couples and singles
over state variables, and to compute the sample moments that we match using our
structural model.
    The PSID is a longitudinal study of a representative sample of the U.S. population.
The original 1968 PSID sample was drawn from a nationally representative sample of
2,930 families designed by the Survey Research Center at the University of Michigan
(the SRC sample), and from an over-sample of 1,872 low-income families from the
Survey of Economic Opportunity (the SEO sample). Individuals have been followed
over time to maintain a representative sample of families.
    We study the two cohorts born in 1941-45 and in 1951-55. More specifically, we
select all individuals in the SRC sample who are interviewed at least twice in the sam-
ple years 1968-2013, select only heads and their wives, if present, and keep individuals
born between 1931 and 1955. The resulting sample includes 5,129 individuals aged
20 to 70, for a total of 103,420 observations. In general, to gather the information we
need, we control for cohort effects in our estimates, and use the results relative to the
cohorts of interest. Table 9 details our PSID sample selection.

        Selection                                   Individuals   Observations
        Initial sample (observed at least twice)      30,587        893,420
        Heads and wives (if present)                  18,304        247,203
        Born between 1931 and 1955                     5,137        105,381
        Age between 20 and 70                          5,129        103,420


                        Table 9: Sample Selection in the PSID

    We use the Health and Retirement Study (HRS) to compute inputs for the re-
tirement period, because this data set contains a large number of observations and
high-quality data for this stage of the life cycle. In fact, the HRS is a longitudinal
data set collecting information on people aged 50 or older, including a wide range
of demographic, economic, and social characteristics, as well as physical and mental
health, and cognitive functioning.
    The HRS started collecting information in 1992 on individuals born between 1931
and 1941, the so-called initial HRS cohort, which was then re-interviewed every two
years. Other cohorts were introduced over the years, the AHEAD (Assets and Health

                                           53
Dynamics Among the Oldest Old) cohort, born before 1924, was first interviewed
in 1993, while the CODA (Children of the Depression) cohort, born 1924 to 1930,
and the WB (War-Baby) cohort, which includes individuals born 1942 to 1947, were
introduced in 1998 and subsequently interviewed every two years. Younger cohorts,
the EBB (Early Baby Boomer), born 1948 to 1953, and the MBB (Mid Baby Boomer),
born 1954 to 1959, were first interviewed in 2004 and 2010 respectively.
    Our data set is based on the RAND HRS files and the EXIT files to include in-
formation on the wave right after death. Our sample selection is as follows. Of the
37,317 individuals initially present, we drop individuals for whom marital status is
not observed (2,275 individuals) because marital status is crucial information in our
analysis. This sample consists of 35,042 individuals and 176,698 observations. We
then select individuals in the age range 66-100 born in 1900 to 1945, obtaining a sam-
ple of 15,072 individuals and 67,744 observations. As we cannot observe individuals
born after 1945 and aged at least 66 in the HRS, for the 1955 cohort we use the same
estimates obtained for the 1945 one.



Appendix B. First step estimation, methodology

Wages
    In this section we describe how we estimate the deterministic wage function and
the distribution of the wage shocks. We proceed in two steps, because in the PSID
data the wage is observed only for those who work. In the first step, we obtain an
estimate of latent wages for those who are not working by imputation. In the second
step, we estimate the average latent wage profile by age and experience, and the
persistence and variance of its unobserved component.
    Imputation. The observed wage rate is defined as annual earnings divided by
annual hours worked. Gross annual earnings are defined as previous year’s income
from labor, while annual hours are previous year’s annual hours spent working for
pay.
    Wages may be missing both because an individual has not been active in the labor
market, and because (s)he may have been active, but earnings or hours (or both) are
missing. In addition, because estimated variances are very sensitive to outliers, we
set to missing observations with an hourly wage rate below half the minimum wage

                                         54
and above $250 (in 1998 values). We use the same imputation procedure for all these
cases.
   More specifically, we impute wage values using coefficients from fixed effects re-
gressions run separately for men and women. To avoid endpoint problems with the
polynomials in age, we include individuals aged 22 to 70 in the sample. Define:
                                                           i
                               ln wageikt = Iikt
                                             n ^
                                                 ln wagekt .

                                                                  n
where i denotes gender, k denotes an individual, and t is age. Iikt  is an indicator of
participation (equal to 1 if the individual participates in the labor market and has
no missing hours or wage) and ln^  wage is latent or potential wage, that we wish to
estimate. We estimate:
                                           0
                             ln wageikt = Zkit βzi + fki + ςkt
                                                            i
                                                               ,

where the index i emphasizes the fact the we run separate regressions for each gender.
The dependent variable is the logarithm of the observed hourly wage rate, fki is an
                                        i
individual-specific fixed effect and ςkt   is an error term. We include a rich set of
explanatory variables: a fifth-order polynomial in age, a third-order polynomial in
experience (measured in years), marital status (a dummy for being single), family
size (dummies for each value), number of children (dummies for each value), age
of youngest child, and an indicator of partner working if married. We also add
interactions between these variables. As an indicator of health, we use a variable
recording whether bad health limits the capacity of working, as this is the only health
indicator available for all years (self-reported health starts in 1984 and is not asked
before). However, as this health indicator is not collected for wives, we do not include
it in the regression for married women. All regressions also include interaction terms
between the explanatory variables. Using the estimated coefficients, the predicted
value of the (logarithm of the) wage is taken as a measure of the potential wage for
observations with a missing wage. When the wage is observed, we use the actual
wage. Our estimated latent wage is then:

                               i
                         ln\         0
                           wagekt = Zkit β̂zi + fˆki        n
                                                        if Iikt =0
                                  i
                           wagekt = ln wageikt
                         ln\                               n
                                                       if Iikt = 1.

   Wage function. Having estimated the (logarithm of) latent wage for all obser-


                                             55
vations in the sample, we can estimate the deterministic wage function eit .
   To take into account the effect of human capital on the current wage in a way that
does not add state variables to the structural model, we condition the age-efficiency
profile on age and average realized earnings accrued up to the beginning of age t (ȳti ),
which are a measure of accumulated human capital.
   We describe the computation of average realized earnings later in this Appendix.
As it turns out, conditional on an individual’s previous average earnings, differences
due to marital status are not statistically significant, and we do not include them.
   To estimate the wage profile, we run a fixed-effect regression of the logarithm of
the latent wage rate on a fourth-order age polynomial, fully interacted with gender,
and include average realized earnings as a regressor. We then regress the residuals
from this regression on cohort dummies to compute the average effect for our two
cohorts of interest.
   More specifically, we estimate:
                          i
                              0
                  ln\
                    wagekt = Xkit βx + ln uikt , with ln uikt = dik + wkt
                                                                       i



where the dependent variable is imputed wage as computed in the previous step, and
the explanatory variables include age, gender, average earnings ln(ȳkt ) and interaction
terms. To fix the constant of the wage profile for our cohorts of interest, we then
regress the residuals on cohort dummies to compute the average effects for the cohorts
born in 1941-45 and in 1951-55 respectively.
    The estimated potential wage profiles, computed at average values of ln(ȳt ), are
shown in the main text. We also use these residuals to estimate an AR(1) plus white
noise process. In this case, we limit the age range between 25 and 65. As we rely on
residuals also taken from imputed wages, we drop the highest 0.5% residuals both for
men and women, in order to avoid large outliers to inflate the estimated variances
(however, the effect of this drop is negligible on our estimates).
    The shock in log wage is modeled as the sum of a persistent component plus white
noise, which we assume captures measurement error:

                                                          i
                               ln uik,t+1 = ln ik,t+1 + ξk,t+1                      (34)

                                                           i
                              ln ik,t+1 = ρi ln ik,t + vk,t+1 ,                   (35)



                                              56
                                i           i
where i indicates gender, and ξk,t+1 and vk,t+1   are independent white-noise processes
                                           2         2
with zero mean and variances equal to σiξ and σiv      , respectively. This last variance
together with the persistent parameter ρi characterize the AR process in the model.
Estimation is carried out on residuals ln ûikt .
    Because initial conditions and marriage and divorce are functions of one’s wage
shocks, we need the value of those wage shocks for each person of working age over
time. To obtain them, we notice that the system formed by (34) and (35) can be
estimated by Maximum Likelihood, which can be constructed assuming the initial
state of the system and the shocks are Gaussian, and using the standard Kalman
Filter recursions. We then also use this estimates of the productivity shocks as an
explanatory variable when computing marriage/divorce probabilities, as well as the
initial distribution.


Wealth
    We define wealth as total assets defined as the sum of all assets types available in
the PSID, net of debt and plus the value of home equity. We apply an imputation
procedure to gather information on assets in missing years, as described below. All
monetary values are expressed in 1998 prices.
    Wealth in the PSID is only recorded in 1984, 1989, 1994, and then in each (bi-
ennial) wave from 1999 onwards. We rely on an imputation procedure to compute
wealth in the missing years, from 1968; this procedure is based on the estimation
of a fixed-effect regression which allows to estimate each individuals’ fixed effect. In
order to get a reliable estimate of the age profile at young ages, however, we include
also younger cohorts. The cohorts used in all previous steps were born between 1931
and 1955: this implies that in 1984 the youngest individuals were aged 29, and if we
restrict the sample as usual to those cohorts we cannot estimate the age profile at the
beginning of the life cycle. We therefore include, in the imputation regression only,
individuals born between 1956 and 1965, in order to have enough observations ob-
served at young ages to rely on when estimating the age profile to be used to impute
wealth. The equation we estimate is:

                                             0
                          ln(aikt + δai ) = Zkit βzi + daik + waikt ,               (36)

where, as before, k denotes the individual, i gender, and t is age. δai is a shift

                                              57
parameter for assets to have only positive values and to be able to take logs, and the
variables Z include polynomials in age, average earnings (uncapped), hours of work,
family size, age of the youngest child, dummies for marital and health status, and
interactions among the variables. daik is the individual fixed effect, invariant regardless
the individual is single, married or divorced, and waikt is a white-noise error term.
Equation (36) is estimated separately for men and women, on an enlarged sample of
individuals born between 1931 and 1965.
    We then use the estimated coefficients and individual fixed effects to impute miss-
ing observations (that is, wealth in missing years) using:

                                   i
                               ln(a\     i      0 ˆi      ˆi
                                   kt + δa ) = Zkit βz + dak


    For single men and women, we parameterize the joint distribution of initial as-
sets, average realized earnings, and wage shocks at each age as a joint log normal
distribution.                             i           
                          ln(ait + δai )     µat + δai
                                                       i 
                        ln(ȳti )  ∼ N  µiȳt , Σst  ,                     (37)
                                         
                                  i              i
                             ln t             µt
where Σs is a 3x3 covariance matrix. We completely characterize the distribution by
estimating its mean and its variance, both depending on age t. To get an estimate of
the mean, we regress the logarithm of assets plus shift parameter, average earnings,
and productivity shock ln ˆit on a third-order polynomial in age and cohort dummies.
The predicted age profile, relative in turn to the cohort born in 1945 and in 1955, is
the age-specific estimate of the mean of the log-normal distribution. Taking residuals
from the above estimates, we can obtain an estimate of the elements of the variance-
covariance matrix, by taking the relevant squares or cross-products. We regress the
squares or the cross-products of the residuals on a third-order polynomial in age to
obtain, element by element, a smooth estimate of the variance-covariance matrix at
each age.
    For couples, we compute the initial joint distribution at age 25 of the following
variables




                                            58
                                                   
                          ln(a + δa )       µ a + δa
                         ln(ȳ 1 )       µȳ1
                                                   
                                                      
                                                   
                         ln(ȳ 2 )  ∼ N  µȳ2 , Σc  ,                           (38)
                                                   
                                1
                         ln( )          µ1
                                                   
                                                      
                                2
                            ln( )             µ2
    where Σc is a 5x5 covariance matrix computed on the data for married or cohab-
iting couples.
    We use wealth with imputed missing observations when computing the initial joint
distribution (equations (37) and (38)) and the descriptive wealth age profiles.


Average realized earnings and accumulated Social Security
contributions
    In the model we keep track of average accumulated earnings for a person (ȳkt )
subject to Social Security cap that is applied to yearly earnings and is time varying. To
do so, we assume that individuals start working at age 22 and we compute individual-
level capped average earnings. This computation requires taking a stand on people
who appear in our data after age 22. Some individuals (4.86 per cent, that is 5,153 out
of 105,985) enter the sample after turning 22 either because in 1968, the first year the
PSID was collected, they were older or because they entered as spouses or descendants,
and might thus be older than 22. Among people in this group, 1,969 enter the sample
before turning 27: for those individuals we assume average accumulated earnings at
entry is equal to zero. For the remaining 3,184 we use an imputation procedure to
recover average realized earnings at entry and then we update the value following
each individual over time. We run a regression of capped earnings on: a fourth-order
polynomial in age fully interacted with gender, education dummies, interactions of
education and gender, marital status and race dummies also interacted with gender.
Cohort dummies are also included. We use the predicted values of this regression as
entry value for individuals entering the sample after turning 27. Average earnings is
then updated for each individual following his/her observed earnings history.
    For the purposes of imputing missing values of wealth we also compute uncapped
average realized earnings using the same methodology for missing values of accumu-
lated earnings at entry as above.


                                           59
Social Security benefits
   The Social Security benefit at age 66 is calculated to mimic the Old Age and
Survivor Insurance component of the Social Security system:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                      0.9ȳr ,
                                                                                                                   ȳr < 0.1115;                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                              SS(ȳr )                                             =   0.1004 + 0.32(ȳr − 0.1115), 0.1115 ≤ ȳr < 0.6725;
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                       0.2799 + 0.15(ȳr − 0.6725), 0.6725 ≤ ȳr < ytcap
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  


The marginal rates and bend points, expressed as fractions of average household
income, come from the Social Security Administration.13
   The Social Security tax and Social Security cap shown in Figure 23 have been
changing over time. We also allow them to change over time for the households in
our cohorts.
       Social Security tax rate




                                                                                                                                              Social Security tax rate



                                   0.07                                                                                                                                   0.065

                                   0.06
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.06
                                   0.05
                                                                                                                                                                          0.055
                                   0.04

                                   0.03                                                                                                                                              0.05
                                      1965                                1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010                                                  1975                      1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                                                  Age                                                                                                                                     Age
                                                                      4                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                #10                                                                                                                                     #10
                                  Social Security tax cap




                                                                                                                                                                         Social Security tax cap




                                                            8                                                                                                                                      10


                                                            6                                                                                                                                      8


                                                            4                                                                                                                                      6


                                                            2                                                                                                                                      4
                                                            1965          1970   1975   1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010                                                             1975           1980   1985   1990   1995   2000   2005   2010   2015   2020
                                                                                                  Age                                                                                                                                     Age




Figure 23: Social Security tax and Social Security cap over time (expressed in 1998$) for
           the 1945 cohort (graphs on the left) and 1955 cohort (graphs on the right)




Taxes
    Guner et al. (2012b) estimate the tax function by marital status. The resulting
values for a married couple are: b2 = 0.2338, s2 = 0.0032, p2 = 1.493; Those for singles
are: b1 = 0.2462, s1 = 0.0311, p1 = 0.8969.
  13
    https://www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/bendpoints.html. We use value in 2009 year and convert them
into 1998 dollar.




                                                                                                                                         60
Marriage and divorce probabilities
   We also use the PSID to estimate the probabilities of marriage and divorce. More
specifically, we model the probability of getting married, νt+1 (·), as a function of
gender, age and the wage shock. We perform the estimation separately for men and
women. Our estimated equation is

                                                  i           i  i
               Pr(M arriedt+1 = 1|M arriedt = 0, Zt+1 ) = F (βm Zt+1 ),

where the variables Z include age, the logarithm of the wage shock, squares of all
variables, interactions of levels and squares, and cohort dummies. Using the estimated
coefficients on the cohort dummies, we then adjust the probability for the 1945 and
the 1955 cohort respectively. F is the standard logistic distribution.
   Similarly, we estimate the probability of divorce, ξt+1 (·), as

                                                  i
               Pr(Divorcedt+1 = 1|M arriedt = 1, Xt+1 ) = F (βdi Xt+1
                                                                  i
                                                                      )

where the explanatory variables are: age of the husband, age squared, husband’s
wage shock, wife’s wage shock, and interactions between age and wage shocks. Also
in this case, we add cohort dummies and use the estimated coefficients to adjust
the probability of divorce for the 1945 and 1955 cohort. F is the standard logistic
distribution.
    Conditional on meeting a partner, the probability of meeting with a partner p
with wage shock pt+1 is
                              ξt+1 (·) = ξt+1 (pt+1 |it+1 , i).

We compute the above probability using our estimates of the wage shocks, by parti-
tioning households in age groups (25-35; 35-45; 45-65) and computing the variance-
covariance matrix of newly matched partners’ wage shocks in each age group. We
then assume that the joint distribution is lognormal. As in the whole sample we
observe 750 new marriages in the age range 25-65, we do not allow this probability
to depend on cohort.
    We assume random matching over asset and lifetime income of the partner con-
ditional on partner’s wage shock. Thus, we compute

                            θt+1 (·) = θt+1 (apt+1 , ȳt+1
                                                       p
                                                           |pt+1 ).


                                              61
using sample values of assets, average capped earnings, and wage shocks. More specif-
ically, we assume θt+1 is log-normally distributed at each age with mean and variance
computed from sample values. Assets include a shifter as described for the computa-
tion of joint the distribution at age 25 (see Wealth subsection in this Appendix).


Number of children
    To compute the average number of children by age group we use the PSID, where
information on the total number of children and on the age of the youngest child
is available, while information on the age of each child is missing. Using the panel
structure of the data to update the age of existing children and to infer the arrival
of new children in the family, we are able to construct the age structure of children
in each family. More specifically, of the 2,543 women in our dataset, 71% enter the
sample with no children or one child. As information about the age of the youngest
child is available, following those families through time enables us to update the age
of the initial child. In addition, we can assign a year of birth and follow through time
any child born during the sample period. Having done that, we add up the number
of children in each age category (0 to 5, 6 to 11) and run a regression on a fifth-order
polynomial in age, interacted with marital status, and cohort dummies to construct
the average age profile of children in each age group for single and married women.
We use the profiles relative to the cohorts of mothers born in 1941-45 and in 1951-55.
    Similarly, we compute the average age profile of the total number of children,
which is available in the PSID, running a regression on a polynomial in age, interacted
with marital status, and cohort dummies to construct the average age profile of total
number of children for single and married women.

Health status at retirement

    We use the HRS data and define health status on the basis of self-reported health,
a variable that can take five possible values (excellent, very good, good, fair, poor).
As standard, bad health status is defined as a dichotomous variable equal to 1 if
self-reported health is fair or poor and 0 otherwise.14
  14
    Looking at labor supply behavior about retirement time, Blundell, Britton, Costa Diaz and
French (2017) show that this measure of self-reported health captures health well and about as well
as more involved measures such as using large numbers of objective measures to predict health.



                                                62
    We estimate the probability of being in bad health at the start of retirement,
that is at age 66, using the observed frequencies for the 1941-1945 cohort, which is
the youngest cohort that we can observe aged 66+ in the HRS data. All the inputs
estimated from the HRS correspond to the 1941-45 cohort. For lack of better data,
we also use them for our 1951-1955 cohort.
    For singles, we compute the sample fraction of single men and single women in
bad health in the age range 65-67, which ensures that the sample size is big enough.
For couples, we define the first member in the couple as the husband and the second
as the wife, and compute the sample frequencies for the four possible health states in
the couple as (good, good), (good, bad), (bad, good), and (bad, bad).


Health dynamics after retirement
   As before, in the HRS, we define the health status variable ψ equal to 1 if self-
reported health at time t is equal to fair or bad and 0 otherwise. We model the
probability of being in bad health during retirement as a logit function:

                                                           exp(Xtψ )
                      πψt = P rob(ψt = 1 |   Xtψ )   =                   .
                                                         1 + exp(Xtψ )

The set of explanatory variables Xtψ includes a third-order polynomial in age, previous
health status, gender, marital status, and interactions between these variables. The
logit is estimated on all individuals born in 1900 to 1945, and includes cohort dummies
among the regressors; we then use coefficients relative to the 1941-1945 cohort as
inputs in our model for both of our cohorts. As the HRS data are collected every two
years, we obtain two-year probabilities, and convert them into one-year probabilities.
Figure 24 displays the health transition matrix by gender, age, marital status, and
health status that we estimated.

Survival probabilities

  We assume that people are alive until retirement age for sure. After that, we
model the probability of being alive at time t as a logit function

                                                         exp(Xts )
                      πst = P rob(St = 1 |   Xts )   =               .
                                                       1 + exp(Xts )


                                          63
                                                                          Singles                                                             Couples
                                                              1                                                                    1




                       Prob. of staying in the same health




                                                                                            Prob. of staying in the same health
                                                             0.9                                                                  0.9



                                                             0.8                                                                  0.8



                                                             0.7                                                                  0.7


                                                                        Men bad health                                                       Men bad health
                                                             0.6        Men good health                                           0.6        Men good health
                                                                        Women bad health                                                     Women bad health
                                                                        Women good health                                                    Women good health
                                                             0.5                                                                  0.5
                                                                   70      80       90                                                  70      80     90
                                                                            Age                                                                  Age




  Figure 24: Health transition probabilities for singles and couples by age. HRS data


that we estimate using the HRS data. Among the explanatory variables, we include a
fourth-order polynomial in age, gender, marital status (single or married) and health
status in the previous period, as well as interactions between these variables. We
also include cohort dummies and use coefficients relative to the 1941-1945 cohort for
both cohorts. As the HRS is collected every two years, we transform the biennial
probability of surviving into an annual probability by taking the square root of the
biennial probability.

Out-of-pocket medical expenditures

    Out-of-pocket (oop) medical expenditures are defined as the sum the individual
spends out of pocket in hospital costs, nursing home costs, doctor visits costs, dentist
costs, outpatient surgery costs, average monthly prescription drug costs, home health
care and special facilities cost. They include medical expenditures in the last year
of life, as recorded in the exit interviews. On the other hand, expenses covered by
public or private insurance are not included in our measure. The estimated equation
is:
                                          m m
                             ln (mkt ) = Xkt β + αkm + um
                                                        kt

where explanatory variables include a third-order polynomial in age, current health
status, gender, marital status, and interactions between these variables. We estimate
the equation on the HRS data using a fixed effects estimator, which takes into account
all unmeasured fixed-over-time characteristics that may bias the age profile, such as
differential mortality, as discussed in De Nardi, French and Jones (2010).


Appendix C. First step estimation, additional results

                                                                                            64
Spousal assets and Social Security benefits

                                                              #10 5        Men                                                                                 #10 5      Women                                                                                                           #10 5        Men                                                                                                   #10 5   Women
  Mean assets at marriage conditional on productivity




                                                                                                   Mean assets at marriage conditional on productivity




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Mean assets at marriage conditional on productivity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Mean assets at marriage conditional on productivity
                                                         4                                                                                                4                                                                                                                           4                                                                                                                  4
                                                                      Lowest                                                                                           Lowest                                                                                                                     Lowest                                                                                                                   Lowest
                                                        3.5           2nd                                                                                3.5           2nd                                                                                          3.5                           2nd                                                                                  3.5                                 2nd
                                                                      3rd                                                                                              3rd                                                                                                                        3rd                                                                                                                      3rd
                                                                      4th                                                                                              4th                                                                                                                        4th                                                                                                                      4th
                                                         3            Highest                                                                             3            Highest                                                                                                        3           Highest                                                                                                3                 Highest

                                                        2.5                                                                                              2.5                                                                                                        2.5                                                                                                                2.5

                                                         2                                                                                                2                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                  2

                                                        1.5                                                                                              1.5                                                                                                        1.5                                                                                                                1.5

                                                         1                                                                                                1                                                                                                                           1                                                                                                                  1

                                                        0.5                                                                                              0.5                                                                                                        0.5                                                                                                                0.5

                                                         0                                                                                                0                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                                  0
                                                                30       40         50      60                                                                   30       40         50      60                                                                                             30    40         50      60                                                                                        30    40         50   60
                                                                              Age                                                                                              Age                                                                                                                     Age                                                                                                                Age



Figure 25: Spousal assets by spousal wages shocks in case of marriage next period for the
           1945 cohort (left panel) and 1955 cohort (right panel) panel, PSID data



    Figure 25 reports spousal assets by spousal wage shocks in case of marriage next
period. Both panels show that both women and men getting married early on in
life expect their partner to have relatively low assets on average, even conditional
on the various wage shocks. In contrast, those who get married later experience
much larger variation in partner’s assets conditional on partner’s wage shocks. The
gradient in average assets by wage shocks increases especially fast for male partners,
and thus exposes women to much more variability in their partner’s resources as they
get married later and later. The patterns are very close for the two cohorts.
                                                              #10 4        Men                                                                                 #10 4      Women                                                                                                           #10 4      Men                                                                                                     #10 4   Women
                                                         5                                                                                                5                                                                                                                           5                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                          Lowest                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Lowest
  Average ybar conditional on productivity




                                                                                                   Average ybar conditional on productivity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Average ybar conditional on productivity




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Average ybar conditional on productivity




                                                        4.5                                                                                              4.5                              2nd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2nd
                                                                                                                                                                                          3rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                              3rd
                                                         4                                                                                                4                               4th                                                                                         4                                                                                                                  4                 4th
                                                                                                                                                                                          Highest                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Highest
                                                        3.5                                                                                              3.5

                                                         3                                                                                                3                                                                                                                           3                                                                                                                  3

                                                        2.5                                                                                              2.5

                                                         2                                                                                                2                                                                                                                           2                                                                                                                  2

                                                        1.5                                                                                              1.5
                                                                                         Lowest                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lowest
                                                                                         2nd                                                                                                                                                                                          1                           2nd                                                                                    1
                                                         1                                                                                                1
                                                                                         3rd                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3rd
                                                        0.5                              4th                                                             0.5                                                                                                                                                      4th
                                                                                         Highest                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Highest
                                                         0                                                                                                0                                                                                                                           0                                                                                                                  0
                                                                30       40         50      60                                                                   30       40         50      60                                                                                             30    40         50      60                                                                                        30    40         50   60
                                                                              Age                                                                                              Age                                                                                                                     Age                                                                                                                Age



Figure 26: Spousal Social Security earnings by spousal wage shocks in case of marriage
           next period for the 1945 cohort (left panel) and 1955 cohort (right panel) panel,
           PSID data



   Figure 26 reports Spousal Social Security earnings by spousal wage shocks in case
of marriage next period. Given that male wage shocks are higher on average, Social
Security earnings for men are higher than those for women at all levels of the wage

                                                                                                                                                                                                    65
shocks. Their shape by age reflects the different participation and hours decisions
made by women and men over their life cycle. Here, too, the graphs for the two
cohorts are similar, but reveal a bit more Social Security benefits by spousal wage
shocks in the 1955 cohort, and especially so when marrying middle-age men.



Appendix D. The solution algorithm
    We compute three sets of value functions: the value function of being single, the
joint value function of the two people in the married couple, and the value function
of each individual in a couple. During the retirement period, single people do not get
married anymore, hence their value function can be computed independently of the
other value functions. The value function of the couples depends on their own future
continuation value and the one of the singles, in case of death of a spouse. Then there
is the value function of the single person being married in a couple, which depends
on the optimal policy function of the couple, taking the appropriate expected values.
This is thus how the value functions are computed during retirement:

  1. Compute the value function of the retired single person for all time periods after
     retirement by backward iteration starting from the last period.

  2. Compute the value function of the retired couple for all time periods after
     retirement, which uses the value function for the retired single individual in
     case of death of one of the spouses, doing the usual backward iteration starting
     from the last period.

  3. Compute the value function of the single individual in a marriage for all time
     periods after retirement.

   During the working age, the value functions are interconnected, hence we solve
each of them at a given time t. Working backwards over the life cycle

  1. For any given time period, take as given the value of being a single person in
     a married couple for next period and the value function of being single next
     period, which have been previously computed and we then the value function
     of being single this period.

  2. Given the value function of being single, compute the value function of the
     couple for the same age.

                                          66
   3. Given the optimal policy function of the couple, use the implied policy functions
      to compute the value function for an individual of being in a couple.

   4. Keep going back in time until the first period.

   After we solve the value functions and policy functions, we simulate our model
economy using the inputs and the procedures that we describe in the next section.



Appendix E. Moment Conditions and Asymptotic Distribu-
tion of Parameter Estimates
    In this Appendix we review the two step estimation strategy, the moment condi-
tions and the asymptotic distribution of our estimation. To keep notation light, we
do not include a separate indicator for each of the two cohorts that we estimate the
model for.
    In the first step, we estimate the vector χ, the set of parameters than can be
estimated without explicitly using our model. In the second step, we use the method
of simulated moments (MSM) to estimate the remaining parameters , which are con-
tained in the M ×1 vector ∆. For the 1945 cohort, the elements of ∆ are the 19 model
parameters (β, ω, (φi,j    i,j  i,j    0,5  6,11
                      0 , φ1 , φ2 ), (τc , τc    ), Li,j ).15 For the 1955 cohort, we assume
that the households have the same β and ω as the 1945 cohort and we estimate the
remaining 17 parameters. Our estimate, ∆,        ˆ of the “true” parameter vector ∆0 is
the value of ∆ that minimizes the (weighted) distance between the life-cycle profiles
found in the data and the simulated profiles generated by the model.
    For each working age from 25 to 65, we match average assets for single men,
single women and couples, as well as working hours and participation for single men,
single women, married men and married women. For the generic variable z equal to
                                                                    i,j
hours (H), participation (In), and assets (a), we denote zk,t           the sample observation
relative to individual k, of gender i, marital status j, and age t. Denoting zti,j (∆, χ)
the model predicted expected value of the generic variable z at age i, gender i, and
marital status j, where χ is the vector of parameters estimated in the first step, we
write the moment conditions:

                           E[ai,j    i,j
                              k,t − at (∆0 , χ0 )] = 0,   ∀t = 2, ..., 41                (39)
  15
       We normalize the time endowment of single men.


                                                67
                        i,j
                     E[Hk,t − Hti,j (∆0 , χ0 )] = 0,   ∀t = 1, ..., 41            (40)

                    E[Ini,j     i,j
                        k,t − Int (∆0 , χ0 )] = 0,     ∀t = 1, ..., 41.           (41)

    Note that assets for couples, ai,j
                                    k,t , do not depend on gender when marital status
is j = 2. Also, as assets at age 25 (t = 1) is an initial condition, it is matched by
construction. In the end, we have a total of J = 448 moment conditions.
    In practice, we compute the sample expectations in equations (39), (40) and (41)
conditional on a flexible polynomial in age. More in detail, we regress each variable z
on a fourth-order polynomial in age and on a set cohort of dummies, fully interacted
with marital status and separately for each gender. We then compute the conditional
expectations for each cohort in turn using the estimated marital- and gender-specific
polynomial in age as well as coefficients relative to that cohort. These average age
profiles, conditional on gender, marital status, and cohort, are those shown in the
figures in the main text.
    Suppose we have a dataset of K individuals that are each observed at up to
T separate calendar years. Let ϕ(∆; χ0 ) denote the J-element vector of moment
conditions described immediately above, and let ϕ̂K (.) denote its sample analog.
    Letting Wc K denote a J ×J positive definite weighting matrix, the MSM estimator
∆ˆ is given by
                           argmin ϕ̂K (∆; χ0 )0 W
                                                c K ϕ̂K (∆; χ0 ).                  (42)
                             ∆

It should be noted that we also estimate χ0 . For tractability reasons, and following
much of the literature, we treat it as known.
    Under regularity conditions stated in Pakes and Pollard (1989) and Duffie and Sin-
gleton (1993), the MSM estimator ∆   ˆ is both consistent and asymptotically normally
distributed:
                             √             
                               K ∆  ˆ − ∆0       N (0, V),                        (43)

with the variance-covariance matrix V given by

                       V = (D0 WD)−1 D0 WSWD(D0 WD)−1 ,                           (44)

where S is the variance-covariance matrix of the data;

                                       ∂ϕ(∆; χ0 )
                                 D=                                               (45)
                                         ∂∆0        ∆=∆0



                                            68
is the J×M gradient matrix of the population moment vector; and W = plimK→∞ {W    c K }.
When W = S−1 , V simplifies to (D0 S−1 D)−1 .
                                                              c K converges to S−1 ,
    The asymptotically efficient weighting matrix arises when W
the inverse of the variance-covariance matrix of the data. However, as Altonji and
Segal (1996) pointed out, the optimal weighting matrix is likely to suffer from small
sample bias. We thus use a diagonal weighting matrix that is the same as S along the
diagonal and has zeros off the diagonal of the matrix. We estimate D and W with
their sample analogs.



Appendix F. Parameter Estimates




                                         69
                                     Cohort 1945           Cohort 1955
                                  Coeff. Std. Err.       Coeff. Std. Err.
           β                      0.9942 (0.00032)
           ω                      0.4032 (0.00176)
           Participation costs:
           φ1,1
             2                    0.0002     (0.00002)   0.0003    (0.00003)
           φ1,1
             1                    -0.0126    (0.00086)   -0.0260   (0.00110)
           φ1,1
             0                    -1.0997    (0.02180)   -0.7464   (0.01712)
           φ2,1
             2                    0.0005     (0.00002)   0.0006    (0.00002)
           φ2,1
             1                    -0.0198    (0.00094)   -0.0266   (0.00103)
           φ2,1
             0                    -1.1557    (0.02927)   -1.0316   (0.02444)
           φ1,2
             2                    0.0011     (0.00003)   0.0012    (0.00004)
           φ1,2
             1                    -0.0479    (0.00135)   -0.0604   (0.00137)
           φ1,2
             0                    -1.3315    (0.02468)   -1.3661   (0.02541)
           φ2,2
             2                    0.0043     (0.00010)   0.0041    (0.00014)
           φ2,2
             1                    -0.1700    (0.00488)   -0.1507   (0.00836)
           φ2,2
             0                    -2.3437    (0.05299)   -3.5088   (0.10222)
           Time endowments:
           F L2,1                 -2.9758    (0.10054) -2.6273     (0.06388)
           F L1,2                 -2.3407    (0.03637) -1.9071     (0.02466)
           F L2,2                 -1.1139    (0.01369) -1.0902     (0.00644)
           Childcare costs:
           τc0,5                  0.3422     (0.01232)   0.5576    (0.00756)
           τc6,11                 0.1820     (0.00728)   0.1442    (0.00596)


Table 10: Estimates of parameters. Standard Errors in parenthesis. We estimate F Li,j
                                                                    L
          and time endowment in the model is given by Li,j = 1+exp(F  Li,j )
                                                                             , where we
          normalize L to 112 hours a week.




                                            70
Appendix G. Model fit for the 1955 cohort
                                                    Married men                                             Married women
                                          1                                                           1


                                        0.9                                                         0.9


                                        0.8                                                         0.8




                  Labor Participation




                                                                              Labor Participation
                                        0.7                                                         0.7


                                        0.6                                                         0.6


                                        0.5                                                         0.5
                                                      Model                                                       Model
                                                      Data                                                        Data
                                        0.4           Data, upper bound                             0.4           Data, upper bound
                                                      Data, lower bound                                           Data, lower bound

                                        0.3                                                         0.3
                                               30     40      50      60                                   30     40      50      60
                                                           Age                                                         Age



                                                             (a) Participation, couples
                                                    Single men                                              Single women
                                         1                                                           1


                                        0.9                                                         0.9


                                        0.8                                                         0.8
               Labor Participation




                                                                           Labor Participation
                                        0.7                                                         0.7


                                        0.6                                                         0.6


                                        0.5                                                         0.5
                                                     Model                                                        Model
                                                     Data                                                         Data
                                        0.4          Data, upper bound                              0.4           Data, upper bound
                                                     Data, lower bound                                            Data, lower bound

                                        0.3                                                         0.3
                                               30     40     50       60                                   30     40     50       60
                                                        Age                                                         Age



                                                             (b) Participation, singles
                                                     Married men                                                Married women

                                        2400                                                        2400           Model
                                                                                                                   Data
                                                                                                                   Data, upper bound
                                        2200                                                        2200           Data, lower bound
                  Hours among workers




                                                                              Hours among workers




                                        2000                                                        2000


                                        1800                                                        1800


                                        1600           Model
                                                                                                    1600
                                                       Data
                                                       Data, upper bound
                                        1400                                                        1400
                                                       Data, lower bound


                                                30     40        50   60                                    30      40       50   60
                                                           Age                                                         Age



                                                           (c) Hours for workers, couples
                                                     Single men                                                 Single women

                                        2400                                                        2400          Model
                                                                                                                  Data
                                                                                                                  Data, upper bound
                                        2200                                                        2200          Data, lower bound
               Hours among workers




                                                                           Hours among workers




                                        2000                                                        2000


                                        1800                                                        1800


                                        1600          Model
                                                                                                    1600
                                                      Data
                                                      Data, upper bound
                                        1400                                                        1400
                                                      Data, lower bound


                                                30     40     50      60                                    30     40     50      60
                                                           Age                                                         Age



                                                           (d) Hours for workers, singles

Figure 27: Model fit for participation (top graphs) and hours (bottom graphs) and average
           and 95% confidence intervals from the PSID data


   Figures 27 and 28 report our model implied moments as well as moments and 95%
confidence intervals from the PSID data for our 1955 cohort. They show that our
parsimoniously parameterized model also fits the data for the 1955 cohort well.




                                                                           71
                                                            # 10 5                         Couples
                                                        6
                                                                          Model
                                                                          Data
                                                        5
                                                                          Data, upper bound
                              Average Household Asset




                                                                          Data, lower bound
                                                        4


                                                        3


                                                        2


                                                        1


                                                        0
                                                         25          30      35       40                  45                   50    55      60         65
                                                                                               Age



                                                                                   (a) Assets, couples
                                                            # 10 5 Single men                                                     5
                                                                                                                              # 10Single women
                                           3.5                                                                          3.5
                                                                      Model                                                         Model
                                                        3             Data                                               3          Data
                                                                      Data, upper bound                                             Data, upper bound
               Average Household Asset




                                                                                              Average Household Asset




                                                                      Data, lower bound                                             Data, lower bound
                                           2.5                                                                          2.5


                                                        2                                                                2


                                           1.5                                                                          1.5


                                                        1                                                                1


                                           0.5                                                                          0.5


                                                        0                                                                0
                                                              30      40      50     60                                        30   40     50     60
                                                                          Age                                                         Age



                                                                                   (b) Assets, singles

Figure 28: Model fit for assets and average and 95% confidence intervals from the PSID
           data




                                                                                              72
