                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  RELATIVE PRICES AND SECTORAL PRODUCTIVITY

                                       Margarida Duarte
                                       Diego Restuccia

                                      Working Paper 23979
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23979


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          October 2017, Revised January 2018




We thank the editor, four anonymous referees, Giuseppe Berlingieri, Paco Buera, Rui Castro,
Pedro Cavalcanti Ferreira, Doug Gollin, Berthold Herrendorf, David Lagakos, Alessio Moro,
Delfim Neto, Rachel Ngai, Markus Poschke, Todd Schoellman, Yoyee Wang, Xiaodong Zhu, and
seminar participants at several institutions for useful comments and suggestions. All errors are
our own. Both authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council of Canada. Restuccia thanks the support from the Canada Research
Chairs program. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Margarida Duarte and Diego Restuccia. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Relative Prices and Sectoral Productivity
Margarida Duarte and Diego Restuccia
NBER Working Paper No. 23979
October 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. O1,O4

                                            ABSTRACT

The relative price of services rises with development. A standard interpretation of this fact is that
productivity differences across countries are larger in manufacturing than in services. The service
sector comprises heterogeneous categories. We document that many disaggregated service
categories–such as transportation, communication, and finance–feature a negative income
elasticity of relative prices, whereas the relative price of aggregate services is mostly driven by
large expenditure categories in housing, collective government, and health that feature a positive
income elasticity of relative prices. We also document a substantial reallocation of expenditures
in services from categories with positive income elasticities (traditional services) to categories
with negative elasticities (non-traditional services) as income rises. Using an otherwise standard
multi-sector development accounting framework extended to include an input-output structure,
we find that the cross-country income elasticity of sectoral productivity is large in non-traditional
services (1.15), smaller in manufacturing (1.05) and much smaller in traditional services (0.67).
Eliminating cross-country productivity differences in non-traditional services reduces aggregate
income disparity by 58 percent, a 7.9-fold reduction in aggregate productivity differences. We
also find that the heterogeneity between traditional and non-traditional services has a substantial
impact on aggregate productivity and that the input-output structure is important in this
assessment.


Margarida Duarte
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
Canada
margarida.duarte@utoronto.ca

Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1       Introduction

A well-known fact in the development literature is that the expenditure price of services
relative to the price of GDP rises systematically with income per capita.1 The standard
interpretation of the rising relative price of services with development is that cross-country
differences in productivity are larger in manufacturing than in services (Kravis et al., 1983;
Hsieh and Klenow, 2007; Herrendorf and Valentinyi, 2012). This sectoral characterization
of productivity differences is important for at least two reasons. First, it identifies “problem
sectors” in accounting for the large aggregate income differences across countries. Second, it
indicates that the process of structural transformation—the reallocation of resources across
sectors in development—can be helpful in mitigating aggregate productivity differences since
the process involves a reallocation of factors towards the service sector as income grows.

The standard interpretation, however, has two important limitations that our paper ad-
dresses. First, it assumes that the service sector is homogeneous, while, in reality, this sector
includes very heterogenous service industries. The heterogeneity in the service sector has
been recognized in the literature. For instance, Kuznets (1957) emphasizes heterogeneity in
services in addressing cross-country differences in the income share of services. Similarly,
and in contrast to Baumol (1967)’s seminal work, Baumol et al. (1985) conclude that “The
service sector happens to contain some of the economy’s most progressive activities as well
as its most stagnant.”2 In particular, there is mounting evidence of a wide range of behavior
of productivity growth and relative prices across different service industries and countries.
For instance, Baumol et al. (1985) document growth rates of productivity for specific service
industries that are as large as those in manufacturing in U.S. post-war data and emphasize
the importance of these differences within services.3 We use a comprehensive cross-country
    1
     The data for individual countries also reveals that the relative price of services rises over time (Duarte
and Restuccia, 2010).
   2
     Jorgenson and Timmer (2011) emphasize the importance of heterogeneity in the service sector for a
modern analysis of structural change.
   3
     Baily and Solow (2001) also document cross-country differences in labor productivity for specific service



                                                      2
dataset of expenditure prices and show that many service industries have a falling relative
price with income, in sharp contrast with the behavior of the relative price of aggregate
services. We argue that this heterogeneity is important in understanding sectoral produc-
tivity differences across countries. Second, the standard interpretation measures sectoral
productivity using expenditures in final goods and services rather than sectoral value-added.
Therefore, these measures relate to a composite of sectoral productivities that depend on the
input-output structure of the economy. The potential pitfall of using expenditure data to
infer sectoral productivity differences across countries has been emphasized in the literature
(e.g. Heston and Summers, 1996, p. 22). We derive sectoral productivity implications by
extending an otherwise standard multi-sector development accounting framework to incor-
porate input-output linkages across sectors.

We use detailed price data from the International Comparisons Program (ICP). The ICP
dataset provides price and nominal expenditure data for 129 expenditure categories that
aggregate up to gross domestic product (GDP) for 130 countries in 2005. In our data, the
income elasticity of the relative price of aggregate services is 0.14, so the relative price of
services rises with development. However, across disaggregated categories of services, we find
substantial heterogeneity in the income elasticity of relative prices, with elasticities ranging
between very negative (−0.6) and very positive (0.4) numbers. In addition, many service
categories feature a negative income elasticity, such as transportation, communication, and
finance/insurance; whereas the relative price of aggregate services is mostly driven by large
expenditure categories that feature a positive income elasticity, such as housing, collective
government, and health. In contrast, the range of income elasticities of relative prices among
individual categories in the manufacturing sector lies mostly in the negative range between
−0.37 and 0.05. Indeed, we find a larger dispersion of elasticities across categories in services
industries that are as large as those in manufacturing. Jones et al. (1990) explore the role of a sub-set of
services (for which the relative price is declining) in the international fragmentation of production. Inklaar
and Timmer (2014) emphasize rising output prices of non-market services in accounting for the Penn effect—
the rising price of income relative to the exchange rate with development.



                                                      3
(a standard deviation of 0.20) compared to manufacturing (0.09), including when weighting
categories by world expenditure shares. We also show that there is substantial reallocation
of expenditures within services with development, with expenditures moving from service
categories featuring a rising relative price to service categories featuring a falling relative
price.

We assess the productivity implications of heterogeneity in the service sector by closely fol-
lowing the literature and using a development accounting framework which imposes minimal
structure. The accounting framework uses expenditure and price data from the ICP. While
this approach is still subject to the limitation discussed earlier on the use of expenditure
data, it highlights the importance of heterogeneity in services using the same methodology
and data as the existing literature. We derive a simple mapping between the income elastic-
ities of sectoral productivity and relative prices for any individual expenditure category. In
particular, the income elasticity of sectoral productivity is one minus the income elasticity of
the relative price. This implies that productivity variation across countries is low for those
services that feature a rising relative price with development, whereas the productivity varia-
tion is high for services whose relative price declines with development, and this productivity
variation is larger than that of the manufacturing sector for some service categories such as
transportation, communication, among others. The heterogeneity in productivity variation
within services is substantial. For instance, consider two categories of services with income
elasticities of relative prices of -0.2 and 0.2, well within the range of elasticities in the data.
The income elasticities of sectoral productivity are 1.2 and 0.8, and considering that the
ratio of GDP per capita between the top and bottom deciles of the income distribution is
a factor of 49-fold, these elasticities imply that the factor difference in sectoral productivity
between these countries are 107.5 and 22.6-fold in each case. These are striking differences
in sectoral productivity implied by the income elasticities of relative prices.

To address the issue of intermediate inputs, we extend the accounting framework follow-



                                                4
ing Ngai and Samaniego (2009) to include input-output linkages across sectors and derive
sectoral productivity implications from expenditure data. We show that our simple map-
ping of relative expenditure prices to sectoral productivity holds up to an adjustment factor
that depends on the input-output structure. To implement this extension quantitatively
and to provide a tractable characterization of heterogeneity in the service sector we ag-
gregate service categories into two broad categories: traditional services which includes all
individual service categories whose relative price increases systematically with income and
non-traditional services which includes all individual service categories with a relative price
that falls systematically with income. Our aggregation follows the spirit of Baumol (1967)
in characterizing some industries as stagnant with less scope for productivity growth (tradi-
tional) relative to other more dynamic sectors in the economy (non-traditional). We restrict
the input-output parameters using data from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD)
and find that accounting for input-output linkages reduces the disparity of productivity
in traditional services and, less so, in manufacturing; and increases the disparity in non-
traditional services. The income elasticities of sectoral productivity are 1.05, 0.67, and 1.15
for manufacturing, traditional, and non-traditional services compared to 1.07, 0.79, and 1.13
abstracting from intermediate inputs. The ratios of sectoral productivities between the top
and bottom deciles of countries in the income distribution are 66-fold in manufacturing,
12.5-fold in traditional services, and 81.2-fold in non-traditional services (compared to 68.8,
21.1, and 75.5-fold without intermediate inputs).

Because the development accounting is silent about the forces that drive reallocation across
sectors and in order to assess the aggregate implications of heterogeneity in the service
sector, we develop a multi-sector model building on Duarte and Restuccia (2010) and Ngai
and Samaniego (2009). The model includes manufacturing, traditional services, and non-
traditional services; and it features an input-output structure. We calibrate the model
to U.S. data and the parameters of the model are chosen so that the model matches the
real consumptions and relative price data from the ICP data as well as intermediate input

                                              5
shares from the WIOD. We use the model to measure sectoral productivity differences across
countries and perform counterfactual analysis. The model delivers productivity implications
that are very close to the development accounting and, in addition, generates the broad
patterns of consumption expenditure shares in the cross-country data.

We assess the aggregate implications of sectoral productivity differences across countries
by conducting a series of counterfactuals where we set, for each sector at a time, the pro-
ductivity level in all countries to the level in the United States. Eliminating cross-country
productivity differences in non-traditional services reduces aggregate income disparity sub-
stantially by 58 percent (a 7.9-fold reduction), whereas eliminating productivity differences
in traditional services reduces income disparity by 43 percent (a 4.7-fold reduction) and in
manufacturing by 30 percent (a 2.9-fold reduction). We also assess the aggregate implica-
tions of heterogeneity in services by setting the productivity in non-traditional services to
that of traditional services in each country. Eliminating heterogeneity in services has sub-
stantial aggregate implications, for instance, the disparity in aggregate productivity between
the top and bottom deciles of countries in the income distribution would fall to 22.1-fold
from 35.8-fold in the data. This is a 14 percent reduction in income disparity, which repre-
sents about half of the reduction from eliminating the cross-country productivity differences
in manufacturing. We find that the input-output structure is essential in understanding the
role of this heterogeneity as non-traditional services are an important input in manufacturing
production.

Our paper relates to a growing quantitative literature on the role of services in the economy.
Buera and Kaboski (2012) study the interaction between growth in skill-intensive services
and the decision between home and market provision of services. Ngai and Pissarides (2008)
and Rogerson (2008) emphasize the importance of home-produced services for the trends in
hours and the allocation of employment across market sectors. Our paper also relates to
a literature emphasizing the role of input-output structure of the economy such as Jones



                                              6
(2011) and Herrendorf et al. (2013). Jones (2011) focuses on the role of intermediate inputs
for aggregate productivity implications whereas our study focuses on the sectoral produc-
tivity implications. Herrendorf et al. (2013) assess the relative importance of two standard
mechanisms in explaining the structural transformation. They find that the preference speci-
fication (and mechanism) that can account for the U.S. data depends on whether the analysis
uses value-added data or expenditure data. The input-output structure of the United States
reconciles the two views, which highlights the importance of the input-output structure. Our
analysis, instead, focuses on the role of intermediate inputs and the input-output structure
for cross-country implications across sectors.

The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we document a set of facts about
disaggregate prices and expenditure patterns from the ICP data. Section 3 derives the pro-
ductivity implications from relative price data using a multi-sector development accounting
framework extended to include input-output linkages across sectors. In Section 4, we develop
a model of structural transformation that features an input-output structure to assess the
aggregate implications of sectoral productivity differences across countries and heterogeneity
in services. We conclude in Section 5.




2    Facts

We document facts on the relative price and expenditure share of services and services sub-
categories. Our main focus is on the price and expenditure data from the International
Comparisons Program (ICP). These data, which we describe in more detail below, are a
cross-section for a large number of countries in 2005. We also report facts for the United
States from 1950 to 2015. Our analysis in Section 3 uses data from the World Input-Output
Database (WIOD) but we describe these data and the associated facts in that section.




                                                 7
2.1        Cross-Country Data

We use detailed price and expenditure data from the ICP for 2005. We also verify our main
empirical findings with the data for 2011. The ICP data are the basis for the construction
of the widely-used Penn World Table (PWT) where comparable measures of gross domestic
product are available for a large number of countries and years. The ICP data report
information on 129 expenditure categories that aggregate up to GDP. The dataset contains
information on price indices and nominal expenditures (in units of domestic prices) for
individual expenditure categories. From these data, nominal expenditures, real expenditures
(in units of an average international price which is common across countries), and prices can
be constructed for arbitrary aggregates such as consumption, investment, tradables, services,
among others. We note that in order to aggregate individual categories we use the Geary-
Khamis method which produces additive results, an essential feature for calculating shares
in our analysis. The data covers 146 countries. We restrict our sample of countries to those
with more than 1 million inhabitants, leaving 130 countries. See appendix A.1 for more
details.



Aggregate services We start by constructing an aggregate category of services from the
individual expenditure categories in the ICP data. We document the behavior of the relative
price of services and the expenditure share of services (nominal and real) across countries.
A summary of the data is reported in Table 1.

The price of aggregate services relative to that of GDP increases with income per capita.
That is, the relative price of services is higher in rich countries compared to poor countries.
We report the relative price of services (relative to that of the United States) against GDP
per capita across countries in Figure 1, top panel. On average, the richest 10 percent of
countries have a relative price of services which is about 70 percent higher than the price in
the poorest 10 percent of countries and the income elasticity of the relative price of services


                                              8
                         Table 1: Relative Prices and Expenditure Shares


                         Deciles                RGDPpc       Ps /P     sQs      sEs
                         1                       0.02        0.54      0.48     0.30
                         2                       0.03        0.60      0.52     0.37
                         3                       0.05        0.55      0.44     0.28
                         4                       0.09        0.59      0.49     0.32
                         5                       0.13        0.60      0.49     0.34
                         6                       0.19        0.66      0.50     0.40
                         7                       0.27        0.68      0.50     0.39
                         8                       0.41        0.74      0.47     0.40
                         9                       0.67        0.90      0.47     0.50
                         10                      0.89        0.94      0.43     0.48
                         Ratio D10 /D1             49.2       1.75     0.91     1.60
                         Income elasticity          –         0.14     -0.01    0.14
                                                              (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)


Notes: Countries are ranked according to real GDP per capita and divided among deciles. For each decile
we report: (1) Real GDP per capita relative to that of the United States (RGDPpc), (2) the price of services
relative to the price of GDP relative to that of the United States (Ps /P ), (3) the real expenditure share of
services to GDP (sQs ), (4) the nominal expenditure share of services to GDP (sEs ). Income elasticity is
the slope coefficient from an OLS regression of the log of each variable on log real GDP per capita across all
countries in our sample (standard error in parenthesis).



is 0.14. This is a well-known fact that has been emphasized in the related literature (Kravis
et al., 1983; Baumol et al., 1985; Summers and Heston, 1991; Heston and Summers, 1996).

We also note that the nominal expenditure share of services—the ratio of expenditures in
services to total expenditures both in domestic prices—increases with income per capita.
See Figure 1, bottom panel. While rich countries dedicate about 50 percent of their GDP in
domestic prices to services, poor countries spend only 30 percent. This fact is also relatively
well known (Duarte and Restuccia, 2010; Herrendorf et al., 2014). We also note that the
real expenditure share of services—the ratio of expenditures in services to total expenditures
both in common international prices—does not vary systematically with income per capita.
That is, rich and poor countries spend about the same fraction of their real expenditures in



                                                      9
services, at an average of around 50 percent for all countries.



Heterogeneity in services The set of categories that comprises services is very hetero-
geneous. For instance, it comprises categories such as hospital services, household services,
insurance, among many others. The substantial heterogeneity within the services sector has
long been recognized in the literature (Baumol et al., 1985; Eichengreen and Gupta, 2011;
Jorgenson and Timmer, 2011). The detailed ICP price data also reflects this heterogeneity.
The measure of heterogeneity that we focus on is the behavior of the price of individual cat-
egories (relative to that of GDP) against GDP per capita across countries. We focus on the
income gradient of relative prices because we are interested in the productivity implications
derived from them, following the emphasis in the seminal work of Baumol (1967).

We report the income elasticity of the relative price of individual categories—measured by
the slope coefficient of an OLS regression of the relative price on real GDP per capita
across countries—in Figure 2 and Tables 2 and 3 for all individual service categories as
well as for the aggregates of manufacturing and services. As we discuss below, there is a
simple mapping between the income elasticity of relative prices and the income elasticity of
sectoral productivity and, as a result, the observations on relative prices directly pin down
the productivity implications derived in the next section. We emphasize that the income
elasticity of the relative price of individual categories in services lies in a wide range, from
−0.59 to 0.40, as can be readily seen in Figure 2. That is, there are individual service
categories for which its relative price rises systematically with income—such as domestic
services, medical services, education, and housing—whereas others for which its relative
price falls systematically with income such as transportation, communication, and financial
services. The income elasticity of aggregate services is positive (0.14) because of the large
share of housing, collective government, and health in total real expenditures in services.
The wide range of elasticities in services—from very positive to very negative values—is an
important component of the heterogeneity we highlight in services. For comparison, the

                                              10
elasticity coefficients for manufacturing categories lie in a much narrower and almost all
negative range, between −0.37 and 0.05 and the income elasticity of the relative price of
manufacturing is −0.07. We also find a larger dispersion of income elasticities of relative
prices in services relative to manufacturing with a standard deviation of 0.2 across categories
in services and 0.09 across manufacturing categories. The difference in standard deviations
are quantitatively similar when we weight each sector category by either the U.S. expenditure
shares or the world expenditure shares.

The striking fact that emerges from Figure 2 and Tables 2 and 3 is that many individual
service categories in household consumption expenditures have a relative price that falls
systematically with income, in sharp contrast to the income gradient of the relative price of
aggregate services. The relative price behavior across countries for many individual categories
in services in household consumption expenditures resembles more the relative price behavior
of manufacturing goods than that of aggregate services.

Data from the 2011 ICP confirm these findings. The income elasticity of the relative price
of services is positive (0.08) and the income elasticity of the relative price of manufacturing
is negative (−0.05), whereas these elasticities are 0.14 and −0.07 in the ICP 2005. More
importantly, as with the 2005 ICP data, we find substantial heterogeneity in the behavior
of the relative price across individual service categories, with elasticities ranging between
−0.36 and 0.40. In turn, elasticities for manufacturing categories in the 2011 ICP range
between −0.31 and 0.15. The standard deviation of elasticities is 0.14 across manufacturing
categories and 0.18 across categories in services.



Reallocation across services In order to provide a tractable characterization of the ex-
tent and implications of heterogeneity in the service sector, we divide services into two broad
categories based on the income gradient of relative prices. The first broad category, which
we refer to as traditional services, comprises the government and all service categories in


                                              11
                 Table 2: Cross-Country Income Elasticity of Relative Prices


                                                                           Income      Standard
                                                                          Elasticity     Error

          Manufacturing                                                     -0.07        0.02
          Services                                                           0.14        0.02

          Disaggregated Services:

          Personal Consumption Expenditures

            Clothing and Footwear
              Cleaning and repair of clothing                               -0.02        0.03
              Repair and hire of footwear                                    0.08        0.03

            Housing and Water
             Actual and imputed rentals for housing                          0.21        0.05
             Maintenance and repair of the dwelling                         -0.16        0.04
             Water supply                                                   -0.21        0.06
             Miscellaneous services relating to the dwelling                -0.18        0.04

            Furnishings, Household Equipment, and
            Routine Maintenance of the House
              Repair of furniture, furnishings and floor coverings          -0.16        0.04
              Repair of household appliances                                -0.20        0.03
              Domestic services                                              0.40        0.04
              Household services                                            -0.14        0.02

            Health
              Medical services                                              0.28         0.04
              Dental services                                               0.24         0.04
              Paramedical services                                          0.15         0.05
              Hospital services                                             0.18         0.03

            Transport
              Maintenance and repair of personal transport equipment        -0.12        0.03
              Other services in respect of personal transport equipment     -0.17        0.03
              Passenger transport by railway                                -0.10        0.04
              Passenger transport by road                                   -0.08        0.03
              Passenger transport by air                                    -0.59        0.04
              Passenger transport by sea and inland waterway                -0.28        0.02
              Combined passenger transport                                  -0.20        0.03
              Other purchased transport services                            -0.15        0.03

Notes: The column Income Elasticity reports the slope coefficient of an OLS regression of the PPP price
of each category relative to the PPP price of GDP on a constant and real GDP per capita. The column
Standard Error reports the standard error of the slope coefficient.




                                                    12
             Table 3: Cross-Country Income Elasticity of Relative Prices (Cont.)


                                                                         Income      Standard
                                                                        Elasticity     Error

            Communication
              Postal services                                             -0.15        0.04
              Telephone and telefax services                              -0.36        0.03

            Recreation and Culture
              Repair of audio-visual and other equipment                  -0.08        0.04
              Veterinary and other services for pets                      -0.14        0.02
              Recreational and sporting services                          0.07         0.04
              Cultural services                                           -0.02        0.02
              Games of chance                                             -0.13        0.02
              Package holidays                                            -0.06        0.03

            Education                                                     0.22         0.04

            Restaurants and Hotels
              Catering services                                           -0.10        0.02
              Accommodation services                                      -0.24        0.03

            Miscellaneous Goods and Services
             Hairdressing salons and personal grooming establishments      0.24        0.03
             Prostitution                                                  0.26        0.04
             Social protection                                            -0.10        0.02
             Insurance                                                    -0.14        0.01
             Financial intermediation services indirectly measured        -0.14        0.02
             Other financial services n.e.c.                              -0.14        0.03
             Other services n.e.c.                                        -0.13        0.02

          Government                                                      0.21         0.03

            Production of Health Services                                 0.21         0.04

            Education                                                     0.28         0.04

            Collective Services                                           0.18         0.03

Notes: See notes in Table 2.




                                                  13
personal consumption expenditure for which its relative price increases with income across
countries. Our nomenclature “traditional” follows a large literature in growth and develop-
ment referring to sectors or activities featuring low growth or low productivity levels. The
main components of traditional services are the government and, from personal consump-
tion expenditures, actual and imputed rents for housing and health services. These three
components represent at least 50 percent of real expenditures in traditional services in all
countries. The cross-country average is 87 percent. The second broad category, which we call
non-traditional services, comprises all other service categories, that is all service categories
in personal consumption expenditures for which its relative price declines with income across
countries. The main components of non-traditional services are transport services, commu-
nication services, and financial and related services. These three components represent, on
average, 50 percent of real expenditures in non-traditional services. We emphasize that our
classification of services into traditional and non-traditional is objective in that it is deter-
mined solely by whether their relative price rises or falls with income. Table 4 summarizes
the price and expenditure facts for these two broad categories within services.

As per our construction of traditional and non-traditional service categories, the relative
price of traditional services increases with income while the relative price of non-traditional
services declines with income. The increase in the relative price of traditional services is
2.3-fold between the poorest decile to richest decile of countries, whereas the relative price
of non-traditional services declines by more than 30 percent. The relative price of non-
traditional to traditional services declines from 4.7 in the poorest decile of countries to 1.3 in
the richest decile of countries. Note from Tables 2 and 3 that our non-traditional/traditional
decomposition maps tightly to a decomposition of market/non-market services. Inklaar and
Timmer (2014) decompose service industries into market and non-market and estimate that
the relative output price of market services to non-market services declines with income
across a relatively small set of countries.



                                               14
                Table 4: Relative Prices and Expenditure Shares within Services


         Deciles                RGDPpc        PsT /P          PsN /P    sQST     sEST     sQSN     sESN
         1                       0.02          0.38            1.82     0.42     0.21      0.05     0.09
         2                       0.03          0.44            1.64     0.45     0.27      0.07     0.09
         3                       0.05          0.39            1.56     0.38     0.19      0.07     0.09
         4                       0.09          0.43            1.21     0.38     0.22      0.11     0.11
         5                       0.13          0.49            1.08     0.38     0.24      0.11     0.10
         6                       0.19          0.51            1.14     0.37     0.26      0.13     0.14
         7                       0.27          0.55            1.12     0.35     0.25      0.15     0.14
         8                       0.41          0.62            1.13     0.32     0.26      0.14     0.14
         9                       0.67          0.81            1.08     0.29     0.32      0.18     0.18
         10                      0.89          0.86            1.12     0.25     0.29      0.18     0.19
         Ratio D10 /D1              49.2        2.25           0.61      0.59    1.35     3.49     2.22
         Income elasticity           –          0.21          -0.13     -0.12    0.09     0.38     0.25
                                                (0.02)         (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.03)   (0.03)


Notes: Countries are ranked according to GDP per capita and divided among deciles. For each decile, we
report: (1) GDP per capita relative to that of the United States (RGDPpc), (2) the price of traditional
services relative to the price of GDP (PsT /P ), (3) the price of non-traditional services relative to the price
of GDP (PsN /P ), (4) the real expenditure share of traditional services to GDP (sQsT ), (5) the nominal
expenditure share of traditional services to GDP (sEsT ), (6) the real expenditure share of non-traditional
services to GDP (sQsN ), and (7) the nominal expenditure share of non-traditional services to GDP (sEsN ).
Income elasticity is the slope coefficient from an OLS regression of the log of each variable on log real GDP
per capita across all countries in our sample.



There is substantial variation in the shares of expenditures within services across countries.
The nominal share of traditional services (in total services) declines with income while the
nominal share of non-traditional services increases with income. This reallocation between
the two broad service categories is substantial and even stronger in real terms, with poor
countries allocating most of the real expenditure in services to traditional services whereas
rich countries allocate around 45 percent of the real service expenditure to non-traditional
services, as documented in Figure 3. We note that not all individual expenditure categories
conform with the reallocation pattern of the aggregated categories. For instance, recreational
services, rents, and some medical services that are traditional services according to the
income gradient of their relative prices, have a positive (albeit small) income elasticity of

                                                         15
real expenditure shares.

In sections 3 and 4, we assess the productivity implications of heterogeneity in the service
sector and its aggregate implications across countries.



2.2       U.S. Data

Our characterization of relative prices and sectoral structure has so far relied on a cross-
section of countries that differ in their level of development. We now provide evidence on
the evolution of the sectoral structure and relative prices for an individual country as it
develops. We document the time-series behavior of the nominal and real shares of non-
traditional services and its relative price using detailed expenditure data for the United
States from 1950 to 2015.4 We allocate the available expenditure categories for the United
States to match the traditional and non-traditional service categories defined for the ICP
data.

The top panel in Figure 4 shows the nominal and real shares of total services in GDP in the
United States between 1950 and 2016. The nominal share increased substantially in this time
period, from 41 to 63 percent, while the real share is roughly constant. These shares reflect,
as in the cross-country data, a rising price of services relative to that of GDP over this period
(from about 0.63 in 1950 to 1.04 in 2016). When we decompose services, we find that there
has been a reallocation of expenditures from traditional to non-traditional services in the
United States between 1950 and 2015, documented in the bottom panel of Figure 4. Over
this time period, the real share of non-traditional services (in total services) rose by about
10 percentage points, from about 26 to 37 percent, while the nominal share rose by less. The
income elasticities of the nominal and real shares of non-traditional services in total services
are 0.1 and 0.3, respectively. The corresponding income elasticities in the cross-country data
  4
      See appendix A.2 for details.




                                               16
are 0.12 and 0.39. Figure 5 plots the relative price deflator of non-traditional to traditional
services. This relative price fell in this time period from about 1.5 in 1950 to 0.95 in 2015 and
its income elasticity is −0.31. The income elasticity of this relative price in the cross-country
data is −0.34.

Overall, these facts for the sectoral structure and relative prices of traditional and non-
traditional services in the United States over time are consistent with our findings for the
cross-section of countries and reinforce our interpretation in their connection with the process
of development. As emphasized earlier for the cross-country evidence, we note that our
evidence for the United States does not imply that all individual service categories match
the behavior in the aggregated sector or that of the cross-country data. For example, the
real share of expenditures in education and health—two categories in traditional services—
rises in the United States over some periods, whereas in the cross-country data, the real
share in education and some health categories fall with the level of development. A more
disaggregated analysis of the behavior of real expenditure shares in the time series of the
United States and in the cross-country data may be useful in identifying relevant channels
and potential sources of variation.



2.3    Discussion

We have documented substantial heterogeneity in the income elasticity of the relative price of
individual service categories across countries. We now discuss the forces that may be behind
this differential relative price behavior of individual service expenditure categories as well
as measurement issues related to the role of government and cross-country price differences,
specially for non-market services.



Drivers of relative price differences The main empirical finding we have emphasized is
the heterogeneity among individual expenditure categories in services on the income elasticity

                                               17
of relative prices which contrasts with non-service categories. In particular, we have found
that for many individual service categories, the income elasticity of the relative price is
negative and for some categories even smaller than that of manufacturing. What drives this
heterogeneity? Our starting point is that, as we develop in the next section, these relative
price differences reflect differences in productivity, as emphasized by Baumol (1967). But
this theory encompasses many complementary explanations for the behavior of productivity,
which may be intrinsic to the industry/product, such as whether the good/service is tradable
or not, whether the good/service is provided by the government and hence not marketed, or
whether there are market imperfections or policy-induced distortions (such as restrictions to
international trade) that affect the level of competition and hence affect productivity growth
of the industry.

The facts we have documented are based on relative prices and it would be comforting
to have at least some direct evidence on productivity growth. This evidence is of course
not available across countries and hence the value of documenting the behavior of relative
prices. However, time series data for the United States suggest a tight association between
our characterization of services between traditional and non-traditional and productivity
growth. Duernecker et al. (2016) document average annual growth rates of labor productivity
between 1947 and 2010 for 13 (private) service industries in the United States. They find
a large range of growth rates and aggregate service industries into two broad sub-sectors:
services with fast and slow productivity growth. Their assignment of industries is nearly
identical to ours. That is, all service industries that they identify as “fast growth” are in
non-traditional services and all service industries but one that they identify as “slow growth”
are in traditional services.

Similarly, inspecting the individual categories that feature a positive or negative income
elasticity of relative price, we confirm that they roughly correspond to more subjective
characterizations of non-market and market services or non-tradable and tradable services.



                                              18
But again, in our view this connection occurs because of the effect that marketability and
tradability of services imply for competition and productivity growth.



The importance of government As is standard in the literature, services include the
government and, given the behaviour of its relative price, it was assigned to traditional ser-
vices in our analysis. We recognize the issues of measurement associated with government
services, but despite these limitations we include government in our analysis because the
scope of the government in services varies greatly across countries. However, we note that
our findings are robust to excluding government from the analysis. We observe a relative
price of services, excluding government, that rises systematically with income, in line with
the behavior of the relative price of aggregate services in Figure 1, top panel. The income
elasticity of the relative price of services excluding government is 0.09 (compared to 0.14 when
including government). The income elasticity of traditional services excluding government
is 0.21, the same as including government. In addition, we also observe a strong realloca-
tion from traditional services, excluding government, to non-traditional services along the
development path: in the bottom decile of the income income distribution, the real share of
non-traditional services in total services excluding government is 0.24 and in the top decile
this share is 0.58.



Other measurement issues It is not the intention of our analysis to provide an im-
proved measurement of services, instead, we are interested in the patterns of relative prices
underlying the actual data for GDP across countries. In this context, an important question
related to our analysis is: how reliable are the price observations across countries from the
ICP? We emphasize that the ICP is an enormous and ambitious statistical undertaking. It
is clear from the methodological underpinnings that the best statistical methods are used
as well as substantial data-collection efforts and consistency/accuracy checks are followed to
provide the most accurate picture of price comparisons across countries. Importantly for our


                                              19
purposes is that the ICP follows a basic principle guiding the price collection which is that
prices should be consistent with those underlying national accounts expenditure data in each
country. This does not mean that ICP is absent of errors, measurement, and methodolog-
ical issues and, in fact, ICP adjusts methods in each round based on experience, improved
availability of data, and new techniques and, as a result, the magnitude of differences in
GDP and price levels invariably vary. But we argue that the methods followed and data
efforts provide the best picture available for price comparisons across countries and that the
findings cannot be simply dismissed on measurement grounds.

The basic data requirements for ICP in each country are: (a) estimates of GDP and its
expenditure disaggregates (129 basic headings) in national currency using the System of
National Accounts 1993 and (b) national annual average prices for a set of well-defined
goods and services for each basic heading. We focus on describing the price collection efforts
and the specifics of more difficult items such as government and non-market services, as well
as housing and health. Price comparisons follow the principle of matching “like with like”
to maximize comparability. For this reason, price-determining characteristics are specified
for each product. The number of products specified varies across headings. For example,
“Postal Services” is covered with a small number of products whereas “Bread” needs a large
number of products to be specified in order for its price to be representative within and across
countries. Product coverage is determined in order to strike the most reasonable balance
between representativeness of prices in the basic heading in a country with comparability of
each category across countries.

There are a number of service expenditure components of GDP that are intrinsically more
difficult to estimate (such as housing, collective government consumption, health, and educa-
tion). We describe the details followed on these categories to illustrate the efforts made. For
Housing, the national accounts measure actual rents and inputed rents for owner-occupied
housing. But calculating PPPs for rents is challenging because in some countries the rental



                                              20
market is small, rendering noisy average prices. The ICP has developed a specific question-
naire to obtain detailed data underlying the estimates of dwelling stocks used in national
accounts for rented and owner-occupied housing (details such as number of dwellings, num-
ber of rooms, square footage by type of dwelling, by region, locality, facilities available such
as utilities, private toilet, etc.). Starting in 2005, the ICP has mainly used one or a combi-
nation of approaches to compute PPPs for housing rent: the quantity method based on the
questionnaire above and the direct rent approach when rental data is representative.

For government, the ICP follows the national accounting convention of measuring non-market
output by the input-cost approach. The key component of government expenditures is com-
pensation for employees. The ICP computes PPPs for compensation of employees by compar-
ing salaries across countries for several detailed and well-defined jobs that are representative
of government expenditures around the world. For health, the ICP includes basic heading
for medical products and health services under both household consumption and individual
consumption by government, in addition to other government categories for the production
of health services. The ICP prices for health reflect the total price regardless of who pays for
the service. Prices of products are collected (either paid in full by the consumer, partially
paid by private insurance, or fully paid by the government). For products partially paid by
consumers and government, the total amount is recorded. Hence, the PPP for consumption
expenditure on health services includes a combination of prices paid by consumers as well
as government contributions which includes input costs such as compensation of employees.
Overall, there is an extensive effort in PPP prices to address consistency with GDP mea-
surement, representativeness of basic headings across the world, and comparability across
countries.

We conclude from this brief description of the ICP data that mis measurement of non-market
prices is not the most likely explanation for the rising relative price of traditional services with
development. We also emphasize that by inspecting the basic heading categories, products



                                                21
within those categories can differ in the extent to which the product is traded internationally
or whether it reflects non-market services, but the pricing approach of the ICP attempts to
deal with these issues. Finally, we highlight that our documentation of relative prices for
disaggregate services challenges the consensus view of aggregate services precisely for the
service categories that we can more reliably measure their price. For the service categories
that we can better measure their price, and in sharp contrast to the behaviour of aggregate
services, we find that their relative price falls systematically with income. As a result,
we believe that the relative price implications of the ICP data are important in providing
guidance as to productivity implications for services.




3     Productivity Implications

We ask the following question: What are the productivity implications of disaggregating
the service sector? We assess the importance of heterogeneity within services for sectoral
productivity across countries by following a large literature in conducting a development
accounting exercise. Although using expenditure data is not our preferred approach for
the same reasons emphasized in Heston and Summers (1996), we highlight the importance
of heterogeneity in services by staying close to the existing literature and using the same
methodology and data. We then extend our accounting framework to consider the role of
input-output linkages across sectors.



3.1    Basic Framework

We follow Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2012) in considering a development accounting frame-
work that imposes minimal structure. There are N sectors indexed by i in the economy
which we map to the level of basic-heading data from the ICP or any aggregate from those



                                              22
categories. Production in each sector is governed by linear technologies requiring labor input:


                                       Yi = Ai Li ,    ∀i,


where Yi and Li are output and labor in sector i and Ai is labor productivity in sector i.
Notice that, given the functional form for production in each sector, data on output and labor
across sectors and countries can directly pin down the variables of interest, i.e., Ai for all
countries and sectors. However, such data does not exist, at least for a comprehensive set of
sectors and for a large number of countries. The main difficulty is that what is available is the
value of output across sectors and countries and these values can reflect differences in relative
prices across sectors within a country as well as differences in relative prices across countries,
potentially confounding true differences in real productivity. In addition, even if we could
make a mapping from the real expenditure data to output in a sector, generally we do not
have the corresponding labor input associated with that sector specification. Hence, more
structure is needed before we can identify Ai across sectors and countries using data. We
note that labor productivity in each sector is summarized in the model by the productivity
parameter Ai . There are many features that can explain differences across countries in
labor productivity, such as capital intensity and factor endowments, and accounting for
these sources can provide a better understanding of labor productivity facts. Our analysis
abstracts from the sources driving labor productivity observations.

We proceed by assuming, in addition to linear technologies in labor, competitive markets
for goods and labor, and perfect factor mobility across sectors. With these assumptions, the
value of labor productivity (the marginal product of labor in this case) is equalized across
sectors. The stand-in firm in each sector maximizes profits by choosing an appropriate
amount of labor, which requires,
                                        p i Ai = w    ∀i,                                     (1)

where w is the common wage rate and pi is the price of output in sector i. Then, it follows

                                                23
                                                            P                               P
that the (domestic price) value of aggregate output is          i   pi Yi = wL, where L =   i   Li is the
total amount of labor in the country. Hence, the wage rate is the nominal value of output
per capita. We also note that the share of labor allocated to each sector is given by the
                                                                    P
value of output in the sector relative to the total, Li /L = pi Yi / i pi Yi . More directly, we
can use equation (1) to solve for sectoral labor productivity Ai . Dividing the numerator and
denominator by the price of GDP, p, we obtain

                                                w/p
                                         Ai =         ,   ∀i.                                        (2)
                                                pi /p

To implement this development accounting empirically, we note that w/p is real GDP per
capita in each country and pi /p is the price of output of sector i relative to the price of GDP,
both of which are readily available in the cross-country data documented earlier.5 For each
sector and country, we calculate labor productivity (Ai ) and compute statistics from them
to illustrate how sectoral productivity varies with GDP per capita in the cross-country data.
Moreover, taking the log of equation (2) results in,


                                 log(Ai ) = log(w/p) − log(pi /p).


It is straightforward to note that the income elasticity of sectoral productivity Ai —the deriva-
tive of log Ai with respect to log real GDP per capita—is one minus the income elasticity
of the sectoral relative price, providing a simple mapping between the relative price facts
documented earlier and the income elasticity of sectoral productivity from which we can
derive productivity implications. We compute the income elasticity of sectoral productivity
by using the income elasticities of relative prices reported in Tables 2 and 3.

To illustrate the productivity implications of relative prices, consider income elasticities of
relative prices of -0.20 and 0.20, as is the case for many categories in Tables 2 and 3. The
  5
    We note that our analysis would be similar using GDP per worker instead of GDP per capita since the
employment to population ratio does not vary systematically with development.



                                                   24
implied income elasticities of sectoral productivity would be 1.2 and 0.80. We can then
use these elasticities to assess the sectoral productivity implications between the richest and
poorest 10% of countries whose real GDP per capita ratio is a factor of 49.2-fold. The
implied sectoral productivity ratios (the ratio of sectoral productivity between rich and poor
countries) would be a factor of 107.2-fold (exp(1.2 × log(49.2))) and 22.6-fold (exp(0.8 ×
log(49.2))) respectively. For the manufacturing sector, whose income elasticity of relative
price is -0.07, the income elasticity of manufacturing productivity is 1.07, and hence the ratio
of manufacturing productivity between the richest and poorest 10% of countries would be a
factor of 64.6-fold (exp(1.07×log(49.2))). These are stark differences in relative productivities
derived from relative price behavior within service categories and even compared to the
manufacturing sector.

The cross-country income elasticities of relative prices provide a convenient summary statistic
for the productivity implications. Table 5 also reports the accounting for each individual
country grouped by deciles of the income distribution and for the aggregate of manufacturing
and services and the sub aggregates of traditional and non-traditional services.

The cross-country variation in manufacturing productivity is larger than that in aggregate
services since the income elasticity in manufacturing is larger than aggregate services. A one
percent higher income per capita translates into about a 1.07 percent higher productivity
in manufacturing productivity whereas only a 0.86 percent higher productivity in aggregate
services. For the ratio of the 10 percent richest and poorest countries, differences in man-
ufacturing productivity are close to 70-fold while for services only 27-fold. These results
are consistent with the findings in the related literature such as Baumol (1967), Hsieh and
Klenow (2007), Herrendorf and Valentinyi (2012), and the literature emphasizing productiv-
ity differences between the tradable and non-tradable sectors (Kravis et al., 1983).

For disaggregated services, the accounting results are markedly different in that traditional
services feature lower differences in productivity than manufacturing, which are critical in


                                               25
                             Table 5: Development Accounting Results


                                              Relative                      Ai
                                              GDPpc          m         s          sT       sN
                      D1                        0.02        0.01     0.04        0.05     0.01
                      D2                        0.03        0.02     0.06        0.08     0.02
                      D5                        0.13        0.07     0.24        0.31     0.14
                      D9                        0.67        0.53     0.74        0.83     0.62
                      D10                       0.89        0.75     0.95        1.05     0.80

                      Ratio D10 /D1             49.2        68.8     27.2        21.1     75.5
                      Income elasticity          –          1.07     0.86        0.79     1.13
                                                            (0.02)   (0.02)      (0.02)   (0.02)


Notes: Ai refers to labor productivity in each sector. The income elasticity is the slope coefficient from
an OLS regression of log productivity on log GDP per capita across all countries in our sample. Standard
errors are in parenthesis. D10 /D1 is the ratio of average labor productivity in each sector in the richest and
poorest 10% of countries.



determining the implications for aggregate services since traditional services are almost all
the services in poor countries and around 55 percent in rich countries. The cross-country
differences in productivity in non-traditional services resemble more those of manufacturing.
Using the income elasticity as a summary indicator of differences in productivity across coun-
tries, non-traditional services feature a larger elasticity than manufacturing and much larger
than traditional services. These results are broadly in line with productivity measurement
for specific industries within services and manufacturing (Baily and Solow, 2001).



3.2     Input-Output Structure

We extend the basic framework, following Ngai and Samaniego (2009), to incorporate the
input-output structure of the economy. We use this extended framework to assess the quan-
titative relevance of sectoral linkages for productivity implications.



                                                       26
There are many production sectors in the economy indexed by i. The technology to produce
output in each sector is given by the the gross-output production function,


                                       qi = Bi li1−αi hαi i ,             ∀i,                 (3)


where Bi is the productivity level of gross output, li is the labor input, and hi is the composite
of intermediate inputs used in sector i. The share of produced inputs in each sector is αi
and the intermediate input composite hi is given by

                                Y  gji ϕji                  X
                         hi =                          ,          ϕji = 1,       ϕji > 0,     (4)
                                 j
                                        ϕji                   j


where gji is the quantity of intermediate input j used in sector i.

The representative firm in sector i solves the problem
                                               (                                 )
                                                              X
                                     max           pi q i −       pj gji − wli                (5)
                                 li ,{gji }j
                                                              j



subject to (3) and (4). Note that the first two terms in the profit function of problem (5),
the value of gross output minus the cost of intermediate inputs, is value added which we
denote as pyi yi ,
                                                                  X
                                        pyi yi ≡ pi qi −              pj gji .                (6)
                                                                  j



The first order condition of profit maximization in problem (5) with respect to intermediate
input use gji implies,
                                      αi ϕji pi qi = pj gji ,              ∀j,                (7)

from which we can derive the optimal demand for intermediate inputs. Using these optimal
demands in equations (3) and (4), we obtain gross output as a function of only labor and




                                                           27
prices,                                                                            αi
                                                          1
                                                                                1−α
                                                        1−αi            αi pi            i
                                         qi = Bi               li                            ,                                           (8)
                                                                        phi
                                                                                                                    Q        ϕ
where phi is the price index of intermediate composite hi given by phi =                                                j   pj ji . Using the
definition of value added in equation (6) and substituting for output and intermediate inputs
from equations (8) and (7), we obtain

                                                          αi
                                                                                      αi
                                                       1−α                                        1
                                                 pi            i
                             pyi yi
                                                                                     1−αi         1−αi
                                      = pi                          (1 − αi )αi                  Bi      li ,
                                                 phi

where the price of value added is given by

                                                                            αi
                                                                           1−α
                                                                    pi           i
                                                 pyi   = pi                          ,
                                                                    phi

and real value added is given by
                                                         yi = Ai li ,
                       αi         1
                      1−αi      1−αi
where Ai = (1 − αi )αi       Bi         is value added productivity.

The first order condition of profit maximization in problem (5) with respect to the labor
allocation across sectors is given by pyi Ai = w. Hence, as in the basic framework, sector
productivity is the ratio of wage to sector price, where now the sector price is the price of
value added which depends on the prices of all other sectors through intermediate input
linkages. That is,

                                                                                      αi
                                                                            "   # 1−α
                                w                                            Y pi ϕji    i

                     Ai =           ,        where pyi = pi                                                     .
                                pyi                                              j
                                                                                             pj


Hence, sector productivities can be expressed as a simple function of relative income per
capita and relative sector gross-output prices, and a term reflecting the input-output struc-




                                                                   28
ture as follows,
                                 w/p                 1
                          Ai =        ·                         αi .                        (9)
                                 pi /p   1−α
                                            αi       −ϕji  1−α
                                                       pj         i
                                        pi     i
                                                   Q
                                         p           j   p


As a result, sector productivities are identical to the framework without intermediate inputs
when αi = 0 for all i. Also, the difference between sector productivities with and without
the input-output structure depends on the magnitude of the second term on the right-hand
side of equation (9). Taking logs and rearranging we obtain,

                                                  αi X
           log(Ai ) = log(w/p) − log(pi /p) −            ϕji [log(pj /p) − log(pi /p)].    (10)
                                                1 − αi j


Assuming for now that αi ’s are constant across countries, the deviation of sector productiv-
ities with respect to the basic framework depends on the third term of the above expression
which in turn depends on the income elasticity of relative prices (between the price of input
j and sector price i) and the corresponding shares αi and ϕji . Note that when ϕii is high
(which occurs when the sector uses it own output as main input), this term is close to zero
as the j = i term in square brackets is zero. Hence, we expect that input-output linkages
have smaller productivity implications when the share of intermediate inputs in gross output
is smaller, when the share of intermediate inputs sourced from other sectors is smaller, and
when the share of intermediate inputs with different relative price is smaller, all else equal.

To derive quantitative implications, we need to characterize the values for αi and ϕji for
all i and j and across countries. We use data from WIOD. This database includes national
input-output tables for 40 countries from 1995 to 2011, in a 35 by 35 industry classification.
As a result, we are unable to quantify the input-output implications at the same level of
disaggregation as in the ICP data where we derived the relative price facts. Following
our previous analysis, we aggregate the input-output tables into 4 sectors: manufacturing,
traditional services, non-traditional services, and other. We then consistently compute input-
output parameters for 3 sectors: manufacturing, traditional services, and non-traditional


                                                29
services. See Appendix A.3 for further details.

For each sector, we compute the share of intermediate inputs in gross output and we find that
these shares are fairly stable over time and across countries. The first panel in Figure 6 plots
the 3 sectoral shares in the United States between 1995 and 2011. For the United States,
the average share of intermediate inputs in this period is 0.61 in the manufacturing sector,
0.32 in the non-traditional services sector, and 0.37 in the traditional services sector. The
remaining three panels in Figure 6 plot, for each sector, the average share of intermediate
inputs for each country in the WIOD database. In these panels, the red-dotted line marks
the time series average for the United States. We find that these average shares do not
vary systematically with income. For each sector, we also compute the share of each good
in the intermediate input composite. The first panel in Figures 7, 8, and 9 plots the time-
series for each of these shares in the United States. We find that these shares are also
fairly stable over time in the United States. The remaining panels in Figures 7, 8, and 9
plot the time-series average for all the countries in the dataset. We also find that these
shares tend to not vary systematically with income across countries, with the exception of
the share of manufacturing and non-traditional services used in the production of traditional
and non-traditional services. It is worth noting that traditional and non-traditional services
differ in a systematic way with respect to their use as intermediate inputs, with a higher
share of non-traditional services output being used as intermediate inputs than the share
of traditional services output. These difference occurs even though the characterization of
services (as traditional or non-traditional) is independent of their use as intermediate inputs.

We report the cross-country productivity implications in Table 6. For the results in this
table we set the input-output parameters for all countries equal to their average values
from the time series for the United States. We report results with input-output linkages,
as well as statistics for the case without intermediate inputs (i.e., when αi = 0 for all i’s).
We find that taking the input-output structure into account makes the gap in productivity



                                              30
between non-traditional and traditional services even larger, and the productivity dispersion
in manufacturing somewhat smaller compared to the setting without intermediate inputs.
Consistent with the intuition associated with equation (10), the main impact of the input-
output structure is on the dispersion of productivity in traditional services, because this is
the sector that uses very little of its own output as an intermediate input.


                 Table 6: Development Accounting with Input-Output Linkages


                                                                Am       AsT      A sN
                         With intermediate inputs:
                           D1                                   0.01     0.09     0.01
                           D2                                   0.02     0.13     0.02
                           D5                                   0.05     0.48     0.15
                           D9                                   0.49     0.94     0.61
                           D10                                  0.71     1.17     0.80

                             Ratio D10 /D1                      66.0     12.5     81.2
                             Income elasticity                  1.05     0.67     1.15
                                                                (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.02)


                         Without intermediate inputs:
                           Ratio D10 /D1                        68.8     21.1     75.5
                           Income elasticity                    1.07     0.79     1.13
                                                                (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)


Notes: Ai refers to labor productivity in each sector. The income elasticity is the slope coefficient from
an OLS regression of log productivity on log GDP per capita across all countries in our sample. Standard
errors are in parenthesis. D10 /D1 is the ratio of average labor productivity in each sector in the richest and
poorest 10% of countries.




3.3     Robustness

We assess the robustness of the role of input-output linkages for productivity implications
in two ways. First, we assess the role of differences in the input-output structure across
countries. To this end, we restrict analysis to the 37 countries for which we have both ICP
and WIOD data. We derive productivity implications for these 37 countries using country-

                                                      31
specific input-output parameters and we compare these results to those obtained when using
the US averages (as in Table 6). The results are reported in Table 7.


              Table 7: Development Accounting Robustness - Restricted Sample


                                                                 Am      AsT      A sN
                       Country-specific IO parameters:
                         D1                                     0.05     0.27     0.09
                         D2                                     0.09     0.59     0.28
                         D5                                     0.25     0.85     0.53
                         D9                                     0.64     1.09     0.71
                         D10                                    0.77     1.08     0.85

                           Ratio D10 /D1                        14.7     4.0      9.1
                           Income elasticity                    1.35     0.63     0.99
                                                                (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.03)


                       US IO parameters:
                         D1                                     0.05     0.27     0.09
                         D2                                     0.09     0.59     0.26
                         D5                                     0.25     0.82     0.51
                         D9                                     0.63     1.08     0.71
                         D10                                    0.76     1.07     0.85

                           Ratio D10 /D1                        14.8     4.0      9.3
                           Income elasticity                    1.35     0.61     1.01
                                                                (0.08)   (0.06)   (0.02)


Notes: See notes for Table 6. Sample is restricted to 37 countries.


We find that results are not affected by using country-specific input-output parameters in-
stead of U.S. values. Earlier we documented that the input-output structure is fairly stable
across the countries covered in the WIOD database, except for the composition of the inter-
mediate composite used in the production of traditional and non-traditional services. The
results in Table 7 suggest that these trends have a minor impact on the role of input-output
linkages for productivity implications. Note that the set of countries for which we have both
ICP and WIOD data is not representative of the entire set of countries in the ICP data.
In particular, this restricted set does not include the poorest countries in the world (for

                                                     32
instance, the ratio of GDP per capita between the 10% richest to the 10% poorest is 7.9 in
this restricted dataset while this ratio is 49.2 in the ICP dataset).


                 Table 8: Development Accounting Robustness - Full Economy


                                                           Am      As T     As N      Ao
                     With intermediate inputs:
                       D1                                 0.01     0.10     0.01     0.01
                       D2                                 0.02     0.14     0.02     0.02
                       D5                                 0.04     0.52     0.15     0.09
                       D9                                 0.47     0.96     0.61     0.66
                       D10                                0.69     1.19     0.80     0.93

                        Ratio D10 /D1                     64.0     11.5     81.2     73.1
                        Income elasticity                 1.04     0.65     1.15     1.13
                                                          (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.02)   (0.03)


                     Without intermediate inputs:
                       D1                                 0.01     0.05     0.01     0.01
                       D2                                 0.02     0.08     0.02     0.02
                       D5                                 0.07     0.31     0.14     0.09
                       D9                                 0.53     0.83     0.62     0.62
                       D10                                0.75     1.05     0.80     0.86

                        Ratio D10 /D1                     68.8     21.1     75.5     72.6
                        Income elasticity                 1.07     0.79     1.13     1.11
                                                          (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.01)


Notes: See notes for Table 6. Economy is not restricted to three sectors. Ao refers to labor productivity in
sector “Other.”


Second, we assess the impact for our results of restricting the economy to three sectors.
In Table 8 we report results for the full economy, comprised of four sectors: manufactur-
ing, traditional services, non-traditional services, and other (mostly agriculture), using the
input-output parameters estimated for the 4-sector economy. The results indicate that the
productivity implications from developing accounting for manufacturing and both types of
services are well captured in the economy restricted to these three sectors. For instance,
the income elasticities of sectoral productivity are 1.04 in manufacturing, 0.65 in traditional


                                                    33
services, and 1.15 in non-traditional services when the accounting consists of the entire econ-
omy, whereas these elasticities are nearly identical, 1.05, 0.67, and 1.15 respectively when
the accounting includes only three sectors.




4       Quantitative Analysis

Our previous analysis on the implications of relative prices for sectoral productivity is silent
about aggregate outcomes such as aggregate productivity as well as the forces that drive re-
allocation across sectors. To address these issues and to perform counterfactual experiments,
we develop a sectoral model that features an input-output structure along the lines of the
development accounting in Section 3.



4.1     Description

We develop a general equilibrium multi-sector model that builds on Duarte and Restuccia
(2010) and Ngai and Samaniego (2009).6 There are three sectors: manufacturing, traditional
services, and non-traditional services. Production requires the use of labor and intermediate
inputs and we model the use of intermediate inputs in an input-output structure. We consider
preferences that allow for substitution between traditional and non-traditional services as a
result of changes in relative prices, in line with data as discussed below.



Households There is a stand-in representative household with preferences over consump-
tion of manufactured goods (m) and two types of services, traditional services (sT ) and
    6
    We build from a large quantitative literature emphasizing structural change such as Echevarria (1997),
Kongsamut et al. (2001), Gollin et al. (2002), and Ngai and Pissarides (2007). See also the related work in
the development literature emphasizing the importance of the input-output structure such as Jones (2011),
Moro (2012), and Grobovsek (2013).




                                                    34
non-traditional services (sN ):

                                                            (1 − b)
                 u(cm , csT , csN ) = b log(cm ) +                  log [φ(csT )ρ + (1 − φ)(csN )ρ ] ,    (11)
                                                               ρ

with b and φ between 0 and 1, and ρ ∈ (−∞, 1]. Households are endowed with l units of
productive time each period which can be allocated to work in any sector. There are no
frictions to labor allocation across sectors; for the household to allocate hours in all sectors,
the wage in each sector must be equal and we denote it by w.



Production There are three production sectors in the economy: manufacturing, tradi-
tional services, and non-traditional services. The representative firm in each sector has
access to the gross-output production function given by equation (3) for i ∈ {m, sT , sN }.
The share of produced inputs in each sector is αi and the intermediate input composite hi
is given by equation (4). We denote by gi the total amount of good i used as an input to
production and pi the price of good i, i ∈ {m, sT , sN }.



Equilibrium A competitive equilibrium is a set of prices {pm , psT , psN , w} and allocations
{cm , csT , csN , lm , lsT , lsN , gjm , gjsT , gjsN }j=m,sT ,sN such that:


  (i) Given prices, {li , gmi , gsT i , gsN i } solve the sector i representative firm problem:

                                                            (                                         )
                                                                                   X
                                          max                   pi qi − wli −                pj gji       (12)
                                    li ,gmi ,gsT i ,gsN i
                                                                                j=m,sT ,sN



       subject to (3) and (4).

 (ii) Given prices, {cm , csT , csN } solve the household’s problem:


                                                        max         u(cm , csT , csN )                    (13)
                                                    cm ,csT ,csN




                                                                  35
      subject to
                                       pm cm + psT csT + psN csN = wl.


(iii) Any good or service produced in the current period can be consumed or used as input
      to production. All firms produce for the final goods market and the intermediate
      input market. There is no distinction between firms producing final goods and firms
      producing intermediate inputs. The market clearing conditions for each sector are

                                                                              X
                    ci + g i = q i ,   i ∈ {m, sT , sN },     where gi =                gij .
                                                                           j=m,sT ,sN


      Market clearing in the labor market requires,

                                                  X
                                                            li = l.
                                               i=m,sT ,sN




4.2    Calibration

We calibrate the benchmark economy to data for the United States. As discussed earlier,
for the parameters governing the input-output structure, we use data from the World Input-
Output Database (WIOD) and set these parameters equal to the time-series average for the
United States. We normalize the productivity level in traditional services (BsUTS ) to one. We
set ρ = 0.25 to allow for reallocation of expenditures between traditional and non-traditional
services as a result of relative price changes and we discuss the sensitivity of the results
                                                                         US
to changes in this parameter. The productivity levels in manufacturing (Bm  ) and non-
traditional services (BsUNS ) and the preference parameters b and φ are pinned down jointly to
match four targets from the ICP dataset: the price of traditional and non-traditional services
relative to manufacturing, the ratio of real consumption expenditures in manufacturing to
traditional services and the ratio of real consumption expenditures in traditional services to
non-traditional services in the United States. The parameter values are reported in Table 9.


                                                   36
                                          Table 9: Calibration


      Parameter                Value       Target U.S. Data

      αm , αsT , αsN ,      0.61,0.32,0.37 Share of interm. inputs in sectoral gross output
      ϕmm , ϕsN m             0.64, 0.34   Share of m and sN in hm
      ϕs T s T , ϕs N s T     0.18, 0.61   Share of sT and sN in hsT
      ϕsN sN , ϕmsN           0.77, 0.14   Share of sN and m in hsN



      ρ                          0.25      Baseline
      BsT                         1.0      Normalization
      Bm , BsN                 1.9, 1.5    Relative prices psT /pm and psN /pm
      b                          0.33      Ratio of real expenditures cm /csT
      φ                          0.59      Ratio of real expenditures csT /csN



4.3    Cross-Country Sectoral Productivity

We measure sectoral relative labor productivity (Am , AsT , AsN ) for each country in the ICP
dataset using the model. Following the approach in Duarte and Restuccia (2010), we impose
three targets and solve for the three gross output productivity levels Bi . We then obtain
                                                        αi       1
                                                       1−αi    1−αi
sectoral labor productivity as Ai = (1 − αi )αi               Bi      . The three targets are: (1) the
price of traditional services relative to that of manufacturing; (2) the price of non-traditional
services relative to that of manufacturing; and (3) aggregate labor productivity relative to
that of the United States.

To implement this exercise, we need to map model variables to data in order to match these
three targets. For the first two targets, relative prices psT /pm and psN /pm in the model
map directly to the corresponding relative prices from the ICP dataset. Our third target
imposes that, for each country, the model matches data on aggregate labor productivity
in the manufacturing and service sectors relative to that of the United States. For this
target, we need to compute aggregate labor productivity in the model, which maps to real


                                                  37
output per worker in manufacturing and services in the data. In the model, aggregate
GDP in domestic prices can be calculated for each country from the production side as
Y = i pyi yi or from the expenditure side as Y = i pi ci . To compare quantities across
   P                                             P

countries, we follow the approach of the ICP dataset and compute real aggregate GDP from
                               P US                                                     7
the expenditure side, as y =     i pi ci using U.S. prices as the international prices.   To
compute aggregate labor productivity in the model in each country, we divide real aggregate
GDP y by the total employment allocation to manufacturing and services implied by the
development accounting. For the corresponding target in the data, we use the ICP data
to calculate aggregate labor productivity in each country in the manufacturing and service
sectors using the employment shares implied by the development accounting.

The implications of the model for sectoral labor productivity across countries are summarized
in Table 10, where we report results relative to the United States. The model results are
similar to those from the development accounting. The model implies that the income
elasticity of labor productivity in non-traditional services is the highest (1.17), followed by
manufacturing (1.04) and traditional services (0.69). For comparison, these elasticities in the
development accounting are 1.15, 1.05, and 0.67, respectively. The dispersion of productivity
across countries implied by the model increases for all sectors with the value of ρ, for ρ = 0
the elasticities are 1.15, 1.01, and 0.66 and for ρ = 0.5 1.21, 1.07, and 0.72.

The model also has implications for (nominal and real) consumption shares which can be
compared to data from the ICP dataset. Figure 10 plots the real shares of consumption of
manufacturing, and traditional and non-traditional services by decile. The model replicates
reasonably well the patterns of consumption shares across countries. Figure 11 plots the
share of non-traditional services in total services (both nominal and real) by decile. With
ρ = 0.25 and the declining price of non-traditional services relative to traditional services
   7
    We note that since international prices in the data are quantity weighted geometric averages of prices in
the world, their pattern is strongly influenced by developed-country prices and in particular the U.S. price.
For this reason, our results are robust to using international prices in the model instead of U.S. prices.




                                                     38
                     Table 10: Sectoral Productivity Results from the Model


                                                Relative                  Ai
                                              Productivity       m        sT       sN
                       D1                        0.03           0.02     0.13     0.02
                       D2                        0.04           0.03     0.18     0.03
                       D5                        0.16           0.06     0.53     0.19
                       D9                        0.67           0.54     1.09     0.70
                       D10                       0.89           0.82     1.36     0.91

                       Ratio D10 /D1               35.8         42.1     10.3     51.6
                       Income elasticity            –           1.04     0.69     1.17
                                                                (0.05)   (0.03)   (0.03)


Notes: Relative Productivity refers to aggregate labor productivity (manufacturing plus services) relative to
that of the United States. Ai is labor productivity in each sector relative to that of the United States. The
income elasticity is the slope coefficient from an OLS regression of log productivity on log GDP per capita
across all countries in our sample. Standard errors are in parenthesis.


with income in the data, the model is consistent with the reallocation of nominal and real
expenditures towards non-traditional services observed in the data. The sectoral reallocation
implied by the model varies with the value of ρ, with ρ = 0 producing too little reallocation
of consumption, whereas ρ = 0.5 produces more reallocation than in the cross-country data.

We also note that the Cobb-Douglas utility specification in (11) between manufacturing and
total services implies that the expenditure share of services in income is constant across
countries and over time. Recall that income in our model maps to total expenditures net
of food or total value added net of agriculture in the data. We find some support in the
data that this share does not vary strongly with GDP per capita in the cross-country data.
Unlike the strong correlation between the expenditure share in services and GDP per capita
of 0.59 in Figure 1, there is a much weaker correlation of 0.26 with the share of services in
manufacturing and services across countries, see Figure 12. This weaker correlation arises
because for poor and developing countries there is a strong reallocation away from agriculture
into manufacturing and services. Since our analysis abstracts from agriculture and focuses


                                                     39
on assessing sectoral changes in poor and developing countries, we argue the Cobb-Douglas
assumption is reasonable in this context even though is counterfactual for the time series in
developed countries. In the time series data for the United States, the expenditure share of
services relative to manufacturing and services rises since agriculture accounts for a very small
portion of total income. The fact is that there is much more reallocation from manufacturing
to services in rich countries compared to poor and developing countries and this pattern in
the data is difficult to reconcile with simple preferences. There has been substantial progress
in the literature developing specifications of preferences that can accommodate a variety of
patterns of income and substitution effects across countries (Boppart, 2014; Comin et al.,
2015; Alder et al., 2018). We leave a more detailed analysis of these more complex reallocation
patterns for future work.

We also derive the productivity implications of the model in the absence of the input-output
structure. We recalibrate the benchmark economy assuming no intermediate inputs, α = 0
in all sectors, and re-do the cross-country exercise using the same targets. The results
of the model are consistent with those from the development accounting exercise. Without
intermediate inputs the income elasticity of labor productivity in manufacturing is 1.07, 0.81
in traditional services, and 1.15 in non-traditional services. That is, as before, the largest
impact of the input-output structure is to lower the dispersion of productivity in traditional
services. It also makes the dispersion of productivity in manufacturing somewhat smaller
and that of non-traditional services somewhat larger.



4.4    Aggregate Implications

Our analysis of relative prices has uncovered substantial variation in labor productivity in
non-traditional services, a variation which is as large or larger than in manufacturing and is
much larger than in traditional services. What are the aggregate productivity implications
of these differences? Ultimately, the aggregate impact of sectoral variation in productivity

                                               40
depends on the magnitude of each sector share in the economy and how these shares change
with alternative productivity levels. To assess the aggregate implications of variation in
sectoral productivity levels across countries, we conduct a series of counterfactuals where we
set, for each sector at a time, the productivity level in all countries to the level in the United
States. In each counterfactual for manufacturing, traditional services, and non-traditional
services, we report relative aggregate productivity in Table 11 along with labor productivity
in each sector for deciles of the income distribution.

Setting productivity in manufacturing in all countries to the level in the United States
implies a reduction in aggregate productivity disparity from 35.8-fold between the richest and
poorest deciles of income to 12.4-fold. This is a reduction of 30 percent (log(2.9)/ log(35.8))
in the disparity in aggregate productivity between rich and poor countries. In other words,
eliminating the 42.1-fold variation in manufacturing productivity between rich and poor
countries generates a reduction of 2.9-fold in the income disparity, a result that arises from
the relatively small and constant share of manufacturing in the economy and the fact that
manufacturing uses substantial intermediate inputs from other sectors whose productivity
have not changed. Setting productivity in traditional services in all countries to the level
in the United States implies a reduction in the disparity in aggregate productivity to 7.7-
fold between rich and poor countries. Even though the disparity in traditional services is
relatively small—a factor of 10.3 fold between rich and poor countries—the reduction in
aggregate productivity disparity is 4.7-fold (a 43 percent reduction in disparity) because
this sector accounts for a larger share of the economy that increases in the counterfactual,
especially in poor countries, reducing the share of non-traditional services where productivity
gaps are substantial. Setting productivity in non-traditional services in all countries to
the level in the United States implies a reduction in aggregate productivity disparity to
4.6-fold—a 7.9-fold reduction—which represents a reduction of 58 percent in the aggregate
productivity disparity. This large reduction in aggregate productivity differences arises from
the substantial differences in productivity in non-traditional services—a factor of 51.6-fold

                                               41
      Table 11: Counterfactual Experiments on Sectoral Productivity across Countries


                                                              Relative                Ai
                                                            Productivity      m       sT     sN
          Baseline model:
            D1                                                   0.03        0.02    0.13   0.02
            D2                                                   0.04        0.03    0.18   0.03
            D5                                                   0.16        0.06    0.53   0.19
            D9                                                   0.67        0.54    1.09   0.70
            D10                                                  0.89        0.82    1.36   0.91

            D10 /D1                                              35.8        42.1    10.3   51.6
          Counterfactual: manufacturing
            D1                                                   0.08        1.00    0.13   0.02
            D2                                                   0.11        1.00    0.18   0.03
            D5                                                   0.30        1.00    0.53   0.19
            D9                                                   0.78        1.00    1.09   0.70
            D10                                                  0.93        1.00    1.36   0.91

            D10 /D1                                              12.4         1.0    10.3   51.6
          Counterfactual: traditional services
            D1                                                   0.10        0.02    1.00   0.02
            D2                                                   0.14        0.03    1.00   0.03
            D5                                                   0.24        0.06    1.00   0.19
            D9                                                   0.66        0.54    1.00   0.70
            D10                                                  0.80        0.82    1.00   0.91

            D10 /D1                                              7.7         42.1     1.0   51.6
          Counterfactual: non-traditional services
            D1                                                   0.20        0.02    0.13   1.00
            D2                                                   0.25        0.03    0.18   1.00
            D5                                                   0.36        0.06    0.53   1.00
            D9                                                   0.79        0.54    1.09   1.00
            D10                                                  0.93        0.82    1.36   1.00

            D10 /D1                                              4.6         42.1    10.3    1.0

Notes: Each counterfactual experiment sets the gross output productivity in a sector in each country to
that of the United States, i.e. Bij = BiU S . Relative Productivity refers to aggregate labor productivity
(manufacturing plus services) relative to that of the United States. Ai is labor productivity in each sector
relative to that of the United States.


                                                    42
between rich and poor countries—and the substantial increase in the share of non-traditional
services in poorer countries as a result of the productivity improvement. Overall, these results
reinforce our findings of the importance of non-traditional services for aggregate productivity
differences across countries.

Our analysis of relative prices has also emphasized the importance of heterogeneity in ser-
vices, and in particular, our finding of an important set of individual service categories with
a negative income gradient of relative prices. To assess the aggregate implications of this
heterogeneity in the service sector and the role of the input-output structure, we conduct
an experiment whereby, for each country, we eliminate differences in gross output produc-
tivity between the two types of services. In particular, in this experiment the productivity
levels in both types of services in each country are those implied by the benchmark model
for traditional services BsN = BsT . As a result, this experiment eliminates heterogeneity in
services by making all services equally productive as traditional services within a country.
We choose traditional services because this type of services has a positive income elasticity
of the relative price as aggregate services do. We report in Table 12 the aggregate labor
productivity implied by the model for five deciles of the income distribution together with
relative sectoral labor productivities in the baseline model and the counterfactual with and
without intermediate inputs.

The results indicate that abstracting from heterogeneity in the service sector has a substantial
impact on the differences in aggregate productivity across countries since it reduces the
dispersion in labor productivity in non-traditional services. For instance, whereas the ratio
of labor productivity in non-traditional services is a factor of 51.6-fold in the baseline model,
in the experiment this ratio is 12.4-fold. Even though in the experiment the gross output
productivity is the same as in traditional services, the disparity in value added productivity in
non-traditional services is larger because of intermediate inputs. Nevertheless, this relative
improvement in sectoral labor productivity implies that the aggregate labor productivity



                                               43
                Table 12: Counterfactual Experiment, Heterogeneity in Services


                                                               Relative                 Ai
                                                             Productivity        m      sT      sN
          Baseline model:
            D1                                                    0.03         0.02    0.13    0.02
            D2                                                    0.04         0.03    0.18    0.03
            D5                                                    0.16         0.06    0.53    0.19
            D9                                                    0.67         0.54    1.09    0.70
            D10                                                   0.89         0.82    1.36    0.91

             D10 /D1                                              35.8         42.1    10.3    51.6
          Counterfactual:
            D1                                                    0.05         0.02    0.13    0.11
            D2                                                    0.07         0.03    0.18    0.15
            D5                                                    0.24         0.06    0.53    0.50
            D9                                                    0.81         0.54    1.09    1.09
            D10                                                   1.03         0.82    1.36    1.40

             D10 /D1                                              22.1         42.1    10.3    12.4
          Counterfactual: no intermediate inputs:
            D1                                                    0.03         0.02    0.07    0.07
            D2                                                    0.05         0.03    0.11    0.11
            D5                                                    0.19         0.09    0.36    0.36
            D9                                                    0.72         0.59    0.94    0.94
            D10                                                   0.93         0.86    1.21    1.21

             D10 /D1                                              30.8         44.1    16.3    16.3

Notes: The experiment sets the gross output productivity in the non-traditional sector to that of the tradi-
tional sector in each country, i.e. BsN = BsT so that there is no heterogeneity in the service sector. Relative
Productivity refers to aggregate labor productivity (manufacturing plus services) relative to that of the
United States. Ai is labor productivity in each sector relative to that of the United States.




                                                      44
disparity implied by the model between the top and bottom deciles falls to 22.1-fold from
35.8-fold, a reduction of 14 percent. For comparison, this reduction in income disparity is
about half the reduction from eliminating the cross-country differences in manufacturing
productivity.

Intermediate inputs play an important role in the quantitative assessment of the aggregate
implications of heterogeneity in services. The aggregate impact of eliminating heterogeneity
in services is magnified by the role of non-traditional services as an intermediate input in all
sectors. In the absence of input-output linkages, the same experiment of eliminating hetero-
geneity in productivity levels within services implies a ratio of aggregate labor productivity
between the top and bottom deciles of about 30.8-fold, which is a much smaller reduction in
disparity compared with the intermediate-inputs case.

We conclude with the two sets of experiments that the heterogeneity in services we docu-
mented has substantial implications for aggregate outcomes, especially for poor and devel-
oping countries.




5     Conclusion

We document that many categories in services feature a falling relative price with income.
We also document a substantial reallocation of expenditures in services from categories
with positive income elasticities (traditional services) to categories with negative elasticities
(non-traditional services) as income raises. Using a multi-sector development accounting
framework extended to include an input-output structure, we uncover the importance of
price heterogeneity in services for productivity implications. We find that labor productivity
differences in service categories with falling relative prices with development are at least as
large as those in manufacturing and much larger than those service categories with a rising
relative price with development.


                                               45
Our evidence points to substantial differences in the relative price behavior across service
categories and that these differences matter for productivity inferences. In particular, we
show large aggregate productivity losses due to the heterogeneity in services in poor coun-
tries. Our analysis does not address, however, the origins of observed differences in relative
prices. We leave the identification of the fundamental characteristics of individual service
categories that determine their productivity and price behavior to future research. For in-
stance, it would be interesting to explore the extent to which differences in skill intensity
across disaggregated service categories relates to differences in relative prices across coun-
tries, along the lines of the analysis in Buera and Kaboski (2012) for the United States.
We have also only studied the reallocation patterns of expenditure shares among aggregated
categories of services. In order to identify potential sources of variation over time and across
countries, it may be interesting to study the more disaggregate implications of reallocation
within services. Similarly, it may be useful to study the disaggregate expenditure patterns
across households with different income levels in a country.

One area of particular interest is the role of international trade (or the lack thereof) in services
in accounting for relative prices. While the contribution of services to overall trade remains
relatively low (around 10 percent of world output), it has substantially increased over time.
International trade can play a role in how relative prices behave in the cross-country data,
either by providing competitive pressures in the domestic market or by providing cheaper
intermediate inputs. Increased trade in services and more years of ICP detailed price data
can provide an opportunity to assess the role of trade on relative price facts and sectoral
productivity.

We also think there is an interesting distinction between the possibility of trade in services
and actual trade-ability as many of the service industries that we have shown have large
negative income elasticities of relative prices are in practice often restricted from interna-
tional competition, such as transportation, communications, financial services and insurance.



                                                46
Importantly, we found that the process of development involves a reallocation to these non-
traditional services which, in turn, hinges on productivity in those sectors. Facilitating
development thus requires solving the productivity problem in non-traditional services in
developing countries. However, improving productivity in these industries may require pol-
icy reforms that are more complex than the typical “openness-to-trade” recipe advocated by
many international organizations since many non-traditional service categories, while trade-
able in principle, are plagued in practice in many countries by a heavy burden of restrictions
and regulations.




                                             47
References
Alder, S., Boppart, T., and Müller, A. (2018). A theory of structural change that can fit the
  data. Technical report.

Baily, M. N. and Solow, R. M. (2001). International productivity comparisons built from
  the firm level. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(3):151–172.

Baumol, W. J. (1967). Macroeconomics of unbalanced growth: the anatomy of urban crisis.
  The American economic review, 57(3):415–426.

Baumol, W. J., Blackman, S. A. B., and Wolff, E. N. (1985). Unbalanced growth revisited:
  asymptotic stagnancy and new evidence. The American Economic Review, pages 806–817.

Boppart, T. (2014). Structural change and the kaldor facts in a growth model with relative
  price effects and non-gorman preferences. Econometrica, 82(6):2167–2196.

Buera, F. J. and Kaboski, J. (2012). The rise of the service economy. The American Economic
  Review, 102(6):2540–2569.

Comin, D. A., Lashkari, D., and Mestieri, M. (2015). Structural change with long-run income
  and price effects. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Duarte, M. and Restuccia, D. (2010). The role of the structural transformation in aggregate
  productivity. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125(1):129–173.

Duernecker, G., Herrendorf, B., and Valentinyi, A. (2016). Unbalanced growth slowdown.
  Technical report.

Echevarria, C. (1997). Changes in sectoral composition associated with economic growth.
  International economic review, pages 431–452.

Eichengreen, B. and Gupta, P. (2011). The two waves of service-sector growth. Oxford
  Economic Papers, 65(1):96–123.

Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., and Rogerson, R. (2002). The role of agriculture in development.
  American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 92(2):160–164.

                                             48
Grobovsek, J. (2013). Development accounting with intermediate goods. Technical report,
  Scottish Institute for Research in Economics (SIRE).

Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., and Valentinyi, A. (2013). Two perspectives on preferences
  and structural transformation. The American Economic Review, 103(7):2752–2789.

Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., and Valentinyi, Á. (2014). Growth and structural transforma-
  tion. Handbook of Economic Growth, 2:855–941.

Herrendorf, B. and Valentinyi, A. (2012). Which sectors make poor countries so unproduc-
  tive? Journal of the European Economic Association, 10(2):323–341.

Heston, A. and Summers, R. (1996). International price and quantity comparisons: potentials
  and pitfalls. The American economic review, 86(2):20–24.

Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2007). Relative prices and relative prosperity. The American
  Economic Review, 97(3):562–585.

Inklaar, R. and Timmer, M. P. (2014). The relative price of services. Review of Income and
  Wealth, 60(4):727–746.

Jones, C. I. (2011). Intermediate goods and weak links in the theory of economic develop-
  ment. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(2):1–28.

Jones, R. W., Kierzkowski, H., et al. (1990). The role of services in production and in-
  ternational trade: A theoretical framework. Technical report, The Political Economy of
  International Trade.

Jorgenson, D. W. and Timmer, M. P. (2011). Structural change in advanced nations: a new
  set of stylised facts. The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 113(1):1–29.

Kongsamut, P., Rebelo, S., and Xie, D. (2001). Beyond balanced growth. Review of Economic
  Studies, 68(4):869–882.

Kravis, I. B., Heston, A., and Summers, R. (1983). The share of services in economic growth.
  Global Econometrics: Essays in Honor of Lawrence R. Klein, pages 188–218.


                                            49
Kuznets, S. (1957). Quantitative aspects of the economic growth of nations: Ii. industrial
  distribution of national product and labor force. Economic development and cultural
  change, 5(S4):1–111.

Moro, A. (2012). The structural transformation between manufacturing and services and
  the decline in the us gdp volatility. Review of Economic Dynamics, 15(3):402–415.

Ngai, L. R. and Pissarides, C. A. (2007). Structural change in a multisector model of growth.
  The American Economic Review, 97(1):429–443.

Ngai, L. R. and Pissarides, C. A. (2008). Trends in hours and economic growth. Review of
  Economic Dynamics, 11(2):239–256.

Ngai, L. R. and Samaniego, R. M. (2009). Mapping prices into productivity in multisector
  growth models. Journal of Economic Growth, 14(3):183–204.

Rogerson, R. (2008). Structural transformation and the deterioration of european labor
  market outcomes. Journal of Political Economy, 116(2):235–259.

Summers, R. and Heston, A. (1991). The penn world table (mark 5): an expanded set of
  international comparisons, 1950–1988. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106(2):327–
  368.

Timmer, M., Erumban, A. A., Gouma, R., Los, B., Temurshoev, U., de Vries, G. J., Arto,
  I.-a., Genty, V. A. A., Neuwahl, F., Francois, J., et al. (2012). The world input-output
  database (wiod): contents, sources and methods. Technical report, Institue for Interna-
  tional and Development Economics.

Whelan, K. (2002). A guide to us chain aggregated nipa data. Review of income and wealth,
  48(2):217–233.




                                             50
A      Data Sources and Definitions

A.1      ICP Data

The International Comparison Program (ICP) provides parity and expenditure data for 129
categories for 146 countries for the year 2005. The parity for each category (basic heading)
is generated by the ICP based on detailed price data collected in each country. The parity
ppij for each basic heading i, i = 1, ..., m, in country j, j = 1, ..., n, is expressed in units of
currency of country j to the numeraire currency (the U.S. dollar). The ICP also provides
expenditure data, in national currency units, for each basic heading in each country, Eij .
The expenditure data are obtained from national account systems. Expenditure over all
basic headings aggregates to GDP. At the basic heading level, parities allow expenditure
data to be converted into a common currency, making it comparable across countries. We
convert each country’s expenditure for a basic heading to U.S. dollars by computing notional
quantities, defined as qij = Eij /ppij .

The ICP aggregates basic heading parities and expenditures into higher levels of aggregation
(such as GDP) using the Èltetö, Köves, and Szulc (EKS) method. Although the EKS is
considered the most appropriate method to compare the different aggregates of the GDP
across economies, the expenditures by aggregate are not additive to higher levels of aggrega-
tion. We aggregate the detailed ICP data using the Geary and Khamis (GK) method, which
produces additive results. For the purpose of our paper, additive consistency is an important
property because it enables the calculation of shares (e.g., the share of real services in real
GDP) and their comparison across countries.8

The GK method delivers a set of international prices, πi for each basic heading i. The
valuation of country j’s output in international prices is then RGDPj = m
                                                                        P
                                                                          i=1 πi qij . The
  8
    Note that computing GDP in country j in a common currency by simply adding up notional quantities
for all basic headings would use the relative prices between basic headings that prevailed in the United
States, the numeraire country. Hence, the result would not be invariant to the base country.




                                                  51
international price for heading i is defined as
                                             Pn    ppij
                                              j=1 P P Pj qij
                                      πi =    Pn             ,                            (14)
                                                j=1 qij


where P P Pj is the purchasing power parity over GDP for country j, given by

                                                                 m
                                     GDPj                X
                         P P Pj =         , where GDPj =     Eij .                        (15)
                                    RGDPj                i=1


The international prices are defined so that they imply a purchasing power parity over GDP
for each country that is consistent with the prices. We obtain the international prices πi by
iterating on equations (14) and (15), given an initial guess for P P Pj . At each iteration we
scale the PPP’s so that the P P P for the United States is 1 and we assume that the parity
for net exports and net expenditures of residents abroad is 1.

After computing international prices, we restrict the data set to countries with more than
one million inhabitants in 2005. Our restricted data set covers 130 countries and in this
sample the range of income differences is quite large, for instance, the ratio of top to bottom
deciles of the income per capita distribution is 49.2-fold.



A.2     Detailed GDP Data for the United States

For total services (Figure 4, top panel), we use the series for GDP and services from NIPA
Tables 1.2.5 (Gross Domestic Product by Major Type of Product, billions of dollars) and 1.2.6
(Gross Domestic Product by Major Type of Product, chained dollars) from the Bureau of
Economic Analysis. These tables cover the period 1929-2016. These tables decompose GDP
into goods, services (which includes government consumption expenditures), and structures.
Between 1950 and 2016, the sum of the real (chained-dollar) series for goods, services, and
structures always differs from real gross domestic product by less than 6 percent (and by less
than 4 percent in 48 years). Therefore, we treat these aggregates as approximately additive
between 1950 and 2016 and we compute the real share of services in gross domestic product
as the ratio of real (chained-dollar) services to real GDP.

                                               52
To construct series for traditional and non-traditional services (Figure 4, bottom panel), we
use NIPA Tables 1.5.5 (Gross Domestic Product, Expanded Detail, billions of dollars), 1.5.3
(Gross Domestic Product, Expanded Detail, quantity indexes), 1.5.4 (Price Indexes for Gross
Domestic Product, Expanded Detail), 2.4.5 (Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of
Product, billions of dollars), 2.4.3 (Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type of Product,
quantity indexes), and 2.4.4 (Price Indexes for Personal Consumption Expenditures by Type
of Product) from the Bureau of Economic Analysis. These tables cover the period 1929-2015.
We divide services into traditional and non-traditional by matching the traditional and non-
traditional service categories in the ICP data to the available categories in the NIPA tables.
The traditional service categories are government consumption expenditures (Table 1.5.5,
categories 55, 58, and 61), housing (Table 2.4.5, category 50), health care (Table 2.4.5,
category 60), education services (Table 2.4.5, category 100), personal care and clothing
services (Table 2.4.5, category 105), and other recreational services (Table 2.4.5, category
80).

We compute real (chain-dollar) series for traditional services and non-traditional services
by chain-aggregating the corresponding component categories, see Whelan (2002). Between
1950 and 2015, the sum of real traditional and non-traditional services always differs from
real total services by less than 3.5 percent (and by less than 2.5 percent in all but three
years). Therefore, we treat these aggregates as approximately additive over this period and
we compute real shares of traditional and non-traditional services in total services.

We trend the series for nominal and real GDP, expenditures in services, traditional services
and non-traditional services using the Hodrick-Prescott filter (with smoothing parameter
100).

We compute implicit price deflators for each aggregate as the ratio of the current-dollar value
of the series to its corresponding chained-dollar value, multiplied by 100.




                                              53
A.3     World Input-Output Database

We use the national input-output tables from the World Input-Output Database, see Timmer
et al. (2012). These tables are available yearly, from 1995 to 2011, for 40 countries. The
countries covered are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Brazil, Canada, China, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Germany, Denmark, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, United Kingdom,
Greece, Hungary, Indonesia, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Latvia, Mexico, Malta, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia, Sweden, Turkey, Taiwan, and United States. These tables use a 35 by 35 industry
classification. We aggregate these 35 industries into 4: manufacturing, traditional services,
non-traditional services, and other. The aggregation is the following (NACE codes):


   • manufacturing: D17-37

   • traditional services: K70, L, M, N, P

   • non-traditional services: G, H, I, J, K71-74, O

   • other: A+B, C, D15-16, E, F


For the baseline framework, we restrict the economy to three sectors (manufacturing, tra-
ditional services, and non-traditional services). For each of these sectors we compute α as
the share of intermediate inputs from these three sectors in gross output net of inputs from
“other.” The share of intermediate input i used in sector j, ϕij , is computed as the share of
inputs from sector i in inputs from the three sectors used in sector j.




                                             54
                                                                 Figure 1: Total Services across Countries


                                                                                        Relative Price

                                                       1.2

                                                                                                                                  CHEKWT
                                                        1                                                                        DNK
                                                                                                                               FIN
                                                                                                                                    USA
                                                                                                                              FRAHKG NOR
                                                                                                         JOR             SAUITABEL
                 Relative Price of Services




                                                                                                                   LBN PRT      SWE
                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                AUS
                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                                             ESP  IRL
                                                                                                                                GBR
                                                                                                                         OMNGRC
                                                                                                                           ISR   AUT
                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                               JPN
                                                                                                                 CHL       SVN
                                                                                                                          KOR
                                                                                                  MAR                       NZL
                                                                                                                                  SGP
                                                       0.8                          NPL                       URY
                                                                                                          ECUBRA
                                                                                                                  MEX
                                                                                       BGD        IRQ     PERZAFARG
                                                                                                 IDN CHN COL    MYS          TWN
                                                                                      CIV        PHLSYR             HRVHUN
                                                                                     ZMB      YEM      NAM BIH      POLEST
                                                                              MWI UGA   SENIND
                                                                                      KEN                  THA
                                                                                                           TUNVENMUS
                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                             MKD    LVA CZE
                                                                       LBR      TZA                 PRY        ROM
                                                                                                               SRB
                                                                           NER    TGO BEN
                                                                                     GMB      AGO                 IRN  SVK
                                                                                                    BOL
                                                       0.6                 ETH      BFA
                                                                                   MDG CMR          LKA
                                                                                                                BGR
                                                                                                                  RUS
                                                                                                                KAZ
                                                                                                                     LTU
                                                                               GNBSLE      LSO
                                                                                           MRT
                                                                                            SDNVNM    SWZALB
                                                                                                         EGY       BWA
                                                                                  RWA         PAK
                                                                                                MNG GEO UKR BLR
                                                                                    MLI KHM
                                                                 ZAR     BDI MOZ                                GAB
                                                                                               COG
                                                                                             LAO
                                                                              CAF GINGHA             MDA
                                                       0.4                                NGA    KGZ          GNQ
                                                                              ZWE                         ARM
                                                                                                        AZE
                                                                                            TCD
                                                                                                    TJK
                                                       0.2
                                                                                                                                 Correlation: 0.67


                                                        0
                                                             5     6             7             8            9           10            11             12
                                                                        GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log)

                                                                                      Share of Services

                                                       0.7
                 Share of Services (domestic prices)




                                                       0.6
                                                                                      GMB                                  ISR     USA
                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                             BRA               FRANLD
                                                                                                                                   CHE
                                                                                     ZMB                                          DNK
                                                                                                                             GRCAUS
                                                       0.5                    MWI                 IRQ         ZAF         PRT   FIN
                                                                                                                              ESP
                                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                                              TWN
                                                                                                                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                                                                    BOL JOR        MEX
                                                                                                              URY LBN
                                                                                      KEN                 COL                     HKG
                                                                                                       NAM           POL           IRL
                                                                                                                 BGR       KOR         NOR
                                                                                                            BIH
                                                                                                             MKDROM
                                                                                                                  CHL   HUN
                                                                                                                          CZE
                                                                                                                            SVN
                                                                                                          PER ARG
                                                                                    UGA                           MUS
                                                                                                                 MYS               SGP
                                                       0.4             LBR
                                                                                  SLE
                                                                                           LSO MAR         TUN KAZLVA
                                                                                                             TURSRB
                                                                                                                     HRVSVK
                                                                                                                        EST
                                                                                                                          OMN
                                                                               GNB                        ECU
                                                                                                              VEN
                                                                                    BFA
                                                                                  TGO                      THA     IRN
                                                                                  RWACIV         PHL   GEO
                                                                                                         EGY
                                                                                                         ALBUKR BLRRUSLTU SAU
                                                                                      BEN
                                                                                    MLI             PRY
                                                                                                      SWZ
                                                                                                     SYR                              KWT
                                                                         BDINER    MDG        YEM    MDA
                                                                                         KHMINDVNM   CHN            BWA
                                                       0.3                 ETH          SEN
                                                                                          CMR IDNKGZ
                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                     NPL   MRTCOG
                                                                                                MNG
                                                                                  GIN BGD LAO PAK
                                                                                               AGO               GAB
                                                                              ZWE
                                                                              MOZ           TCD     TJK
                                                                 ZAR                 GHA SDN
                                                                                                          ARM
                                                       0.2                    CAF        NGA
                                                                                                        AZE
                                                                                                               GNQ

                                                                                TZA
                                                       0.1
                                                                                                                                 Correlation: 0.59


                                                        0
                                                             5     6             7             8            9           10            11             12
                                                                        GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log)

Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The relative price of services refers to the PPP price of total services relative
to the PPP price of GDP. The share of services refers to nominal expenditures in total services relative to
nominal GDP.                                         55
                                                                   Figure 2: Income Elasticity of Relative Prices




                                                 0.4        Domestic services

                                                 0.3               Gov education
                                                                                      Medical services
                                                                                                                                          Housing
                                                                                       Hospital services
                                                 0.2                                                             Collective government
       Income Elasticity of the Relative Price




                                                 0.1


                                                   0


                                                 -0.1
                                                                                                           Catering services
                                                                                   Insurance
                                                 -0.2


                                                 -0.3


                                                 -0.4            Telephone services

                                                 -0.5
                                                                                                                                Service categories
                                                              Air transport                                                     Manufacturing
                                                 -0.6                                                                           Aggregate services


                                                        0         2           4        6        8          10        12        14        16          18
                                                                          Share of Real Expenditures in Services USA (%)


Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The elasticity is the slope coefficient of an OLS regression between the log of
the price of a given category relative to the price of GDP on a constant and the log of real GDP per capita.




                                                                                                56
                                                         Figure 3: Non-traditional Services across Countries



                                                   0.6
                                                                                         TCD

                                                                                                           GNQ
                                                                                                            MYS
                 Nominal Share in Total Services
                                                                                              LKA
                                                   0.5                      MWI            COG                               SGP
                                                                                                       THA
                                                                                                          VEN POL           HKG
                                                                                   BENNGA       BOL PER       MEX
                                                                                                              RUS       ESP AUT
                                                                                                                             IRL
                                                                               TGO      CMR
                                                                                         IND                                NLD
                                                                                                                           GBR
                                                                                   CIV          PRY                  KOR         NOR
                                                                                                  CHN
                                                   0.4                             KEN
                                                                                         SDN
                                                                                                            CHL
                                                                                                      ECU ARG
                                                                                                          URY
                                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                  SVK GRCSWE
                                                                                              PHL       UKR             ITA
                                                                                                            KAZ LTU PRT TWN
                                                                                                       TUN BGR            FIN
                                                                                                                           BEL
                                                                                                                         FRA CHE
                                                                                                   GEO            HUNSVN CAN
                                                                                       KHM PAKIDN   ALB  BRAGAB EST       JPN
                                                                        NER                         EGY
                                                                                                      COLTUR LVA OMNCZE
                                                                                     SEN VNM                           NZL AUSUSA
                                                                           CAF             YEM              BLRHRV
                                                   0.3                BDI      GINZMB
                                                                                            AGOMAR AZE MKD
                                                                                              KGZ
                                                                                                         ZAF MUS
                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                                                KWT
                                                                                                              IRN
                                                                             TZA UGA
                                                                                 MLIBGD                    ROM
                                                                        ETH       GHA           TJK        SRBLBN
                                                                            GNB BFA               MDA BIH
                                                                                  NPL                ARM            SAU
                                                                    LBR    ZWE               MNG NAM
                                                   0.2        ZAR
                                                                                          LAO
                                                                                                  SYR
                                                                               SLE       MRT         JOR
                                                                                                   SWZ
                                                                            MOZRWA
                                                                                         LSO                  BWA

                                                                                  MDG
                                                   0.1
                                                                                                IRQ
                                                                                   GMB                                     Correlation: 0.37


                                                    0
                                                         5      6             7            8           9            10            11           12
                                                                     GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log)



                                                   0.6


                                                   0.5                                                                      IRL
                 Real Share in Total Services




                                                                                                             MEX
                                                                                                                        ESPHKG
                                                                                                                            NLD
                                                                                                                     KOR DNKAUT
                                                                                                                             SGPNOR
                                                                                                             IRN PRT GBR
                                                                                                                          DEUCHE
                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                                        ITABEL
                                                                                                                          FIN
                                                                                                                         FRA  USA
                                                                                                           MYS POL
                                                   0.4                                       LKA     THA               GRC
                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                      SVN
                                                                                                    PER
                                                                                               MDA          CHL        NZL
                                                                                                        VEN
                                                                                      IND                                 JPN
                                                                                                                        TWNAUS KWT
                                                                                                    ECU URYARG    SVK
                                                                                                                  HUN
                                                                                                                    OMN
                                                                                                                LTU CZE
                                                   0.3                                         CHN
                                                                                                             RUS
                                                                                                           BGR    EST ISR
                                                                                             BOL ALB
                                                                                           PHL     JOR BRA
                                                                                CIV        IDNPRY    TUN SRB   LVA
                                                                                                               HRV
                                                                                              TJK         ROMLBN
                                                                                                    COL
                                                                                 KENCMRPAK       GEO UKRZAF
                                                                                                       MKD
                                                                                                       TUR
                                                                                                           BLR
                                                                          MWI                                       SAU
                                                                                 BEN SDN MAR
                                                                               ZMB                    BIH KAZ
                                                                             TGO           KGZ
                                                   0.2                 NER
                                                                                  SEN YEM
                                                                                                   EGY
                                                                               NPL       COG      AZE       MUS
                                                                       ETH       BGD     AGO             GNQ
                                                                           TZA
                                                                                    NGA VNM SYR
                                                                                    KHM
                                                                                  BFA                       GAB
                                                                            CAF   UGA
                                                                                  MLI         MNG NAM
                                                   0.1                BDI
                                                                    LBR
                                                                                GIN
                                                                                          TCD
                                                                                                    ARM
                                                                                   GHA
                                                                             GNB
                                                                            MOZ            LAO IRQSWZ
                                                              ZAR                MDG
                                                                               RWA       LSO
                                                                                         MRT                               Correlation: 0.78
                                                                                SLE                           BWA
                                                                            ZWE
                                                                                   GMB
                                                    0
                                                         5      6             7            8           9            10            11           12
                                                                     GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log)

Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The nominal (real) share of non-traditional services refers to nominal (real)
expenditures in non-traditional services relative to nominal (real) expenditures in total services. Nominal
refers to expenditures in domestic prices and real refers to expenditures at international prices.

                                                                                                57
                                                                                    Figure 4: Services in the United States


                                                                                                Share of Services

                                                                        90
                                                                                                                                   real
                                                                                                                                   nominal
                                                                        80



                                                                        70
                  Share of Total Services in GDP




                                                                        60



                                                                        50



                                                                        40



                                                                        30



                                                                        20



                                                                        10
                                                                             1950      1960   1970    1980    1990   2000   2010             2020




                                                                                        Share of Non-traditional Services

                                                                        45
                                                                                                                                   real
                                                                                                                                   nominal
                  Share of Non-traditional Services in Total Services




                                                                        40




                                                                        35




                                                                        30




                                                                        25




                                                                        20
                                                                             1950      1960   1970    1980    1990   2000   2010             2020




Notes: Data from the BEA. Authors’ calculations. The data are H-P trended, see appendix A.2.


                                                                                                       58
  Figure 5: Relative Price of Non-traditional to Traditional Services in the United States



                                                                   1.6



                                                                   1.5
       Relative Price of Non-traditional to Traditional Services




                                                                   1.4



                                                                   1.3



                                                                   1.2



                                                                   1.1



                                                                    1



                                                                   0.9



                                                                   0.8
                                                                         1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2010   2020




Notes: Data from the BEA. Authors’ calculations. The data are H-P trended, see appendix A.2.




                                                                                               59
                                              Figure 6: Share of Intermediate Inputs over Time and across Countries


                                                               USA over Time                                                                                                    Manufacturing across Countries
                                     1                                                                                                                                 1
                                                                                                            Manuf.
                                                                                                            Trad. Svc.
                                    0.9                                                                                                                               0.9
                                                                                                            Non-trad. Svc.


                                    0.8                                                                                                                               0.8

                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN
                                    0.7                                                                                                                               0.7                                                                KOR TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HUN CZE
     Share of intermediate inputs




                                                                                                                                       Share of intermediate inputs
                                                                                                                                                                                       IND                                        SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EST          FRABEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BGR                 ITAJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               POL    PRTSVN         IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TUR   MEXLVA                 SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                FIN NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAN USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEU
                                    0.6                                                                                                                               0.6                                            BRA                          AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN                  ROM RUSLTU         GRC GBR DNK

                                    0.5                                                                                                                               0.5


                                    0.4                                                                                                                               0.4


                                    0.3                                                                                                                               0.3


                                    0.2                                                                                                                               0.2


                                    0.1                                                                                                                               0.1


                                     0                                                                                                                                 0
                                     1995                       2000                        2005                    2010                                                    7    7.5         8           8.5        9           9.5      10       10.5        11
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




                                         Traditional Services across Countries                                                         Non-Traditional Services across Countries
                                     1                                                                                                                                 1


                                    0.9                                                                                                                               0.9


                                    0.8                                                                                                                               0.8


                                    0.7                                                                                                                               0.7
     Share of intermediate inputs




                                                                                                                                       Share of intermediate inputs




                                    0.6                                                                                                                               0.6


                                    0.5                                                                                                                               0.5                                                         EST            BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          BGR      SVK       ITA AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CHN                       HUN           SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LVA       SVN FRAFIN NLD
                                    0.4                                                                                                                               0.4                                                      POL    PRTKOR     GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DEU
                                                                       CHN                                                                                                                                                                       AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ESP JPNCAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       USA
                                                                                                             GBR                                                                                   IDN               TURROM     LTU
                                                                IDN                         RUS       CZE       IRLUSA                                                                                               BRA                   GRCTWN
                                                                                      ROM                                                                                                                                   RUS
                                    0.3                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                             AUS                                                      0.3              IND
                                                                                          LVA                  CAN                                                                                                           MEX
                                                                                               SVK
                                                                                              EST          FIN
                                                                                               HUN KOR TWN NLD
                                                                                  BRA       LTU
                                                                                            POL     SVN
                                                                                                  PRT        AUT
                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                            JPN
                                    0.2                                           TUR BGR                    BEL
                                                                                                            DEU                                                       0.2
                                                                                                       ESP
                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                        MEX
                                    0.1             IND                                                                                                               0.1


                                     0                                                                                                                                 0
                                          7   7.5         8            8.5       9          9.5       10     10.5            11                                             7    7.5         8           8.5        9           9.5      10       10.5        11
                                                              GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005                                                                                          GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




Notes: The panels with shares across countries plot the time series average for each country. In these panels
the red-dotted line marks the time series average for the United States.




                                                                                                                                  60
                                                                   Figure 7: Share of Inputs in Composite used in Manufacturing


                                                                             USA over Time                                                                                                        Manufacturing across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                           Manuf.
                                                                                                                           Trad. Svc.
                                                  0.9                                                                      Non-trad. Svc.
                                                                                                                                                                                        0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                   0.8
     Shares of inputs in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               KOR




                                                                                                                                                      Share in intermediate composite
                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                   0.7                                CHN                                CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HUN    SVN TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JPN
                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                   0.6                                                    MEXLVA SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TUR           ESTPRT         ESP DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IDN               BRA                           ITA  AUT USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       FRABEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         IND                                   RUSPOL                   FIN
                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                   0.5                                                ROM                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BGR                    GRC       IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NLD
                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                           LTU


                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                   0.3


                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                   0.2


                                                  0.1                                                                                                                                   0.1


                                                   0                                                                                                                                     0
                                                   1995                       2000                       2005                       2010                                                      7    7.5         8           8.5        9         9.5           10         10.5       11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




                                                       Traditional Services across Countries                                                          Non-Traditional Services across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                     1


                                                  0.9                                                                                                                                   0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                   0.8
     Share in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                      Share in intermediate composite




                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                   0.7


                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                   0.6


                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IRL

                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                   0.4                                                                           NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FRASWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ITA DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIN
                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                   0.3                                            TUR                    ESP         USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EST      GRC      CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         IND                           BRA      LVA SVKPRTSVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROM RUS                  JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BGR       HUN CZE   TWN
                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                   0.2                          IDN                      MEX

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CHN                                 KOR
                                                  0.1                                                                                                                                   0.1

                                                                                                         LVA                 AUS
                                                                                                                            DEUNLD USA
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                                                             SWE
                                                                                                                               CAN
                                                                              IDN                      RUS POL
                                                                                                           LTU
                                                                                                             EST
                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                              SVKPRT
                                                                                                                   SVN ESP
                                                                                                                      GRC  FIN
                                                                                                                          FRA
                                                                                                                        ITA
                                                                                                                        TWN  AUT
                                                                                                                             GBR
                                                   0              IND                CHN        BRA BGRMEX
                                                                                                TURROM            CZE
                                                                                                                    KOR     JPN
                                                                                                                             BELIRL                                                      0
                                                        7   7.5         8            8.5       9         9.5        10       10.5           11                                                7    7.5         8           8.5        9         9.5           10         10.5       11
                                                                            GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005                                                                                              GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




Notes: The panels with shares across countries plot the time series average for each country. In these panels
the red-dotted line marks the time series average for the United States.




                                                                                                                                                 61
                                                                   Figure 8: Share of Inputs in Composite used in Trad. Services


                                                                             USA over Time                                                                                                          Manufacturing across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                             Manuf.
                                                                                                                             Trad. Svc.
                                                  0.9                                                                        Non-trad. Svc.
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                     0.8
     Shares of inputs in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                        Share in intermediate composite
                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                     0.7


                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6


                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                     0.5                                                 ROM

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHN
                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                     0.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                           IND                                                        GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TUR              HUN     KOR
                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                     0.3                          IDN                                 LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BGRMEX            SVN TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EST
                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                     0.2                                                        RUS                 ESP BELIRLUSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BRA            POLSVKPRT         ITAFIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LVA                  FRASWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                  0.1                                                                                                                                     0.1


                                                   0                                                                                                                                       0
                                                   1995                       2000                       2005                         2010                                                      7    7.5         8           8.5        9            9.5            10        10.5       11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




                                                       Traditional Services across Countries                                                            Non-Traditional Services across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                       1


                                                  0.9                                                                                                                                     0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                     0.8
     Share in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                        Share in intermediate composite




                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                     0.7


                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                     0.6                                            BRA

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MEX            PRT         DNK USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AUS
                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                     0.5                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TWNJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ITA NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TUR                      SVNESP BELCAN
                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                     0.4                          IDN                                                  FIN IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CHN                     RUS          KOR         AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LVA EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HUN CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LTU                  SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           IND                                          POLSVK      GRC
                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                     0.3
                                                                                                                                  CAN
                                                                                                                                 SWE
                                                                                                                                AUS                                                                                                            BGR
                                                                                                                SVK        ITA GBRIRL                                                                                                         ROM
                                                  0.2                                                                            BEL                                                      0.2
                                                                                                         LVA                 FRA
                                                                                                                               DEU
                                                                                                       RUSPOLEST              FINAUT USA
                                                                                                                           TWN NLD
                                                                                                   ROM     LTUHUNPRT           DNK
                                                  0.1                                               BGRMEX        CZE
                                                                                                                   SVNESP                                                                 0.1
                                                                  IND         IDN    CHN                            KOR
                                                                                                                      GRC
                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                                             JPN
                                                   0                                                                                                                                       0
                                                        7   7.5         8            8.5       9         9.5          10       10.5           11                                                7    7.5         8           8.5        9            9.5            10        10.5       11
                                                                            GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005                                                                                                GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




Notes: The panels with shares across countries plot the time series average for each country. In these panels
the red-dotted line marks the time series average for the United States.




                                                                                                                                                   62
                                                              Figure 9: Share of Inputs in Composite used in Non-Trad. Services


                                                                             USA over Time                                                                                                         Manufacturing across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                            Manuf.
                                                                                                                            Trad. Svc.
                                                  0.9                                                                       Non-trad. Svc.                                               0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                    0.8
     Shares of inputs in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                       Share in intermediate composite
                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                    0.7


                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6


                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                    0.5


                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                    0.4              IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHN

                                                  0.3                                                                                                                                    0.3                                                    MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BGRRUSLTU

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TUR            POL             FIN
                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                    0.2                          IDN               BRA               HUN KOR TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SVK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LVA       CZE  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ITAJPN CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SVNGRC    AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA  NLD USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                  0.1                                                                                                                                    0.1                                                                             GBRIRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEU



                                                   0                                                                                                                                      0
                                                   1995                       2000                       2005                       2010                                                       7    7.5         8           8.5        9         9.5           10        10.5        11
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




                                                       Traditional Services across Countries                                                           Non-Traditional Services across Countries
                                                   1                                                                                                                                      1


                                                  0.9                                                                                                                                    0.9


                                                  0.8                                                                                                                                    0.8                                                                               IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NLD USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEU
     Share in intermediate composite




                                                                                                                                                       Share in intermediate composite




                                                  0.7                                                                                                                                    0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CZE       SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ITAJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TUR                    SVN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SVK
                                                  0.6                                                                                                                                    0.6                                            BRA         LVA HUN       GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MEX LTU         KOR FIN

                                                  0.5                                                                                                                                    0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ROM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BGRRUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CHN                                      TWN
                                                  0.4                                                                                                                                    0.4              IND


                                                  0.3                                                                    TWN                                                             0.3


                                                  0.2                                                                                                                                    0.2


                                                                                                         LVA HUN KOR         SWE
                                                                                                                           FIN
                                                                                                                             AUS
                                                  0.1                                                                 GRC   DEUCAN                                                       0.1
                                                                              IDN                   BGRMEX
                                                                                                       RUSPOLEST
                                                                                                           LTU    CZE
                                                                                                                       ESPFRA
                                                                                                                        ITA    NLD USA
                                                                                                                             AUT
                                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                                              DNK
                                                                                     CHN
                                                                                                BRA
                                                                                                TUR           SVKPRTSVN     JPN
                                                                                                                             BELIRL
                                                                  IND                              ROM
                                                   0                                                                                                                                      0
                                                        7   7.5         8            8.5       9         9.5        10       10.5            11                                                7    7.5         8           8.5        9         9.5           10        10.5        11
                                                                            GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005                                                                                               GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log) - 2005




Notes: The panels with shares across countries plot the time series average for each country. In these panels
the red-dotted line marks the time series average for the United States.




                                                                                                                                                  63
                                                Figure 10: Real Shares of Consumption
       Manufacturing




                                  0.4                                                         Model
                                                                                              Data
                                  0.3
                                  0.2
                                  0.1
                                   0
                                        1   2       3     4      5        6      7   8   9   10

                                   1
       Traditional Services




                                  0.5



                                   0
                                        1   2       3     4      5        6      7   8   9   10
       Non-Traditional Services




                                  0.4
                                  0.3
                                  0.2
                                  0.1
                                   0
                                        1   2       3     4      5        6      7   8   9   10
                                                          Decile of GDP per capita



Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The real share of consumption refers to real expenditures in each sector
relative to real total expenditures. Real refers to expenditures at international prices.




                                                                     64
                       Figure 11: Share of Non-Traditional Services in Total Services



                 0.5
                              Model
                 0.4          Data


                 0.3
       real




                 0.2

                 0.1

                  0
                          1       2    3     4      5        6      7     8      9       10



                 0.5

                 0.4
       nominal




                 0.3

                 0.2

                 0.1

                  0
                          1       2    3     4      5        6      7     8      9       10
                                             Decile of GDP per capita



Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The nominal (real) share of non-traditional services refers to nominal (real)
expenditures in non-traditional services relative to nominal (real) expenditures in total services. Nominal
refers to expenditures in domestic prices and real refers to expenditures at international prices.




                                                        65
     Figure 12: Nominal Share of Services Expenditures in Manufacturing and Services
         Nominal Share of Services (in Manuf.+Svc.)




                                                                                                                                       Model
                                                       1

                                                                                   GMB

                                                      0.8                        MDGKEN MRT
                                                                                  UGA
                                                                                RWA
                                                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                          ISR
                                                                                                                            ESP  CHE
                                                                      LBR       TGO            PHL
                                                                                             AGOMAR
                                                                                                  BOL   COL
                                                                                                       JOR
                                                                                                     NAM                   GRC AUS
                                                                                                                              JPN  USA
                                                                                   ZMB          IRQ     PERBRA
                                                                                                            ZAFKAZBWA    KOR
                                                                                                                           NZL SWE
                                                                                                                             FRA
                                                                                                                            TWN NLD
                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                            MWI
                                                                             GNB BFA               CHN      VEN                BEL
                                                                                                                               GBR
                                                                                         LSO         GEOARMMKD BLR
                                                                                                               MYS
                                                                                                              ROM
                                                                                                               ARG LVA
                                                                                                                   POL
                                                                                                                  LBN   PRT     CAN
                                                                                                                                AUT
                                                                                                                                 IRL
                                                                       BDI MOZ    MLI                  EGY  URYBGR
                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                 IRN
                                                                                                               GAB
                                                                                                                CHL   EST
                                                                                                                        OMN
                                                                                                                        CZE ITA
                                                                                    BEN
                                                                                      SEN
                                                                                SLE CIV KHM  COG    SWZ   BIH SRB
                                                                                                         TUN       HRVHUNSVN DEU
                                                                                                                      SVK       HKG
                                                                                                                                 SGP
                                                                                                                                     NOR
                                                                         ETH
                                                                         NER              IND
                                                                                          TCD  IDNSYR
                                                                                             VNM
                                                                                            YEM         ECU
                                                                                                      AZE UKR
                                                                ZAR                        LAO             TUR RUS SAU
                                                                                   NPL            TJK  ALB
                                                                                                         THA
                                                                                GIN BGDCMR     KGZ
                                                                                          SDN MNG                                   KWT
                                                      0.6                                         PRY
                                                                                                  LKA
                                                                                            PAK MDA          GNQ
                                                                                                                    LTU
                                                                            CAF    GHA

                                                                                         NGA
                                                                            ZWE
                                                                             TZA
                                                      0.4


                                                      0.2
                                                                                                                               Correlation: 0.26


                                                       0
                                                            5     6            7               8          9           10            11             12
                                                                       GDP per capita (PPP adjusted, log)
Notes: Data for 2005 from ICP. The share of services refers to nominal expenditures in services relative to
manufacturing and services.




                                                                                                   66
