                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE NEO-FISHER EFFECT IN THE UNITED STATES AND JAPAN

                                          Martín Uribe

                                      Working Paper 23977
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23977


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 2017




I am indebted to Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé for comments and suggestions. I also thank for
comments seminar participants at the Bank of England and Queen Mary University. Yoon-Joo Jo
and Seungki Hong provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Martín Uribe. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Neo-Fisher Effect in the United States and Japan
Martín Uribe
NBER Working Paper No. 23977
October 2017
JEL No. E52,E58

                                          ABSTRACT

I investigate the effects of an increase in the nominal interest rate on inflation and output in the
United States and Japan during the postwar period. I postulate a structural autoregressive model
that allows for transitory and permanent nominal and real shocks. I find that nominal interest-rate
increases that are expected to be temporary, lead, in accordance with conventional wisdom, to a
temporary increase in real rates that is contractionary and deflationary. By contrast, nominal
interest-rate increases that are perceived to be permanent cause a temporary decline in real rates
with inflation adjusting faster than the nominal interest rate to a higher permanent level.
Estimated impulse responses show that inflation reaches its long-run level within a year.
Importantly, because real rates are low during the transition, the economy does not suffer an
output loss. This result is relevant for the design of monetary policy in economies plagued by
chronic below-target inflation, for it is consistent with the prediction that a credible
announcement of a gradual return of nominal rates to normal levels can bring about a swift
convergence of inflation to its target level without negative consequences for aggregate activity.


Martín Uribe
Department of Economics
Columbia University
International Affairs Building
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
martin.uribe@columbia.edu
1     Introduction

What is the effect of an increase in the nominal interest rate? One can argue on theoretical
grounds that the answer to this question depends on whether the increase in the interest rate

is expected to be permanent or transitory. Viewed through the lens of the new-Keynesian

model with a central bank that observes the Taylor principle, a transitory positive distur-
bance in the nominal interest rate causes a transitory increase in the real interest rate, which

in turn depresses aggregate demand and current inflation. By contrast, if the increase in
the nominal interest rate is perceived to be permanent, sooner or later, inflation will have to

increase by roughly the same magnitude, since the real interest rate, given by the difference

between the nominal rate and expected inflation, is unlikely to be determined by nominal
factors in the long run. This one-to-one long-run relationship between nominal rates and

inflation is known as the Fisher effect and is built into most modern dynamic macroeconomic

models, including those in the new-Keynesian tradition. The Fisher effect, however, does
not provide a prediction of when inflation should be expected to catch up with a permanent

increase in the nominal interest rate. It only states that it must eventually do so. A natural
question, therefore, is how quickly does inflation adjust to a permanent increase in the nom-

inal interest rate? Recent theoretical work argues that a credible permanent increase in the

nominal interest rate causes an immediate increase in inflationary expectations. This result
has come to be known as the neo-Fisher effect. In this paper, I investigate the short-run

effects of permanent nominal-interest-rate shocks from an empirical perspective.
    I postulate a structural vector autoregressive (SVAR) model in three endogenous vari-

ables, output, inflation, and the nominal interest rate. The model is driven by four distur-

bances: a permanent monetary shock, a transitory monetary shock, a permanent nonmon-
etary shock, and a transitory nonmonetary shock. To identify these four driving forces, I

impose a number of restrictions on the structure of the model: First, I assume that both

inflation and the nominal interest rate are cointegrated with the permanent monetary shock
and share a common cointegrating vector. This assumption implies that the Fisher effect

                                               1
holds in the long run. Section 2 provides some evidence in support of this assumption. Sec-
ond, I assume that output is cointegrated with the permanent nonmonetary shock. Finally,

I assume that temporary increases in the nominal interest rate have a nonpositive impact

effect on output and inflation. I estimate the SVAR model on postwar quarterly data from
the United States and Japan using Bayesian techniques.

   The estimated SVAR model predicts that a transitory increase in the nominal interest

rate produces dynamics that are in line with the conventional wisdom: the real interest rate
increases on impact and converges from above to its steady-state, with depressed levels of

aggregate activity and inflation. By contrast, the estimated SVAR model predicts that in
response to a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate, the one-to-one adjustment

in the inflation rate predicted by the Fisher effect happens in the short run, by which I

mean less than a year. Furthermore, inflation rises faster than the nominal interest rate.
As a result, the real interest rate falls on impact and converges from below to its steady

state. In line with this effect on real rates, the SVAR model predicts that the adjustment
to a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate does not generate a loss of aggregate

output.

   This paper is related to a number of theoretical and empirical contributions on the ef-
fects of interest-rate policy on inflation and aggregate activity. On the theoretical front,

Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2014 and 2017) show that the neo-Fisher effect obtains in the

context of standard dynamic optimizing models with flexible or rigid prices, respectively.
Specifically, they show that a credible increase in the nominal interest rate that is expected

to be sustained for a prolonged period of time can give rise to an immediate increase in
inflationary expectations. Cochrane (2017) shows that a standard macroeconomic model

coupled with an equilibrium selection criterion that avoids interest-rate jumps delivers ne-

ofisherian dynamics in which the nominal interest rate and inflation positively comove in the
short run. Cochrane (2015) presents an nontechnical exposition of the neo Fisher effect and

uses it to shed light on the role of monetary policy during the Great Contraction of 2007


                                              2
and its aftermath. Erceg and Levin (2003) study a calibrated dynamic general equilibrium
model with nominal rigidity in which private agents have imperfect information about the

permanent and transitory components of monetary-policy shocks. They show that imperfect

information of this type can provide an adequate explanation of the observed inflation per-
sistence during disinflation episodes. To my knowledge, there are no econometric studies of

the neo-Fisher effect. However, there is a related empirical literature devoted to estimating

long-run movements in the parameters describing monetary policy, including the inflation
target, and their economic effects, to which I now refer in a non-exhaustive manner. Sims

and Zha (2006) estimate a regime-switching model for U.S. monetary policy and find that
during the postwar period there were three policy regime switches, but that they were too

small to explain the observed increase in inflation of the 1970s or the later disinflation that

started with the Volker chairmanship. Ireland (2007) estimates a new-Keynesian model with
a time-varying inflation target and shows that, possibly as a consequence of the Fed’s attempt

to accommodate supply-side shocks, the target increased significantly during the 1960s and
1970s and fell sharply in the early 2000s. Using a similar framework, Milani (2009) shows

that movements in the inflation target become less pronounced if one assumes that agents

must learn about the level of the inflation target. De Michelis and Iacoviello (2016) estimate
an SVAR model with permanent inflation-target shocks to evaluate the Japanese experience

with Abenomics. Finally, Fève, Matheron, and Sahuc (2010) study a dynamic optimizing

model with persistent inflation-target shocks and show, by means of counterfactual experi-
ments, that had the European monetary authority been less gradual in lowering its inflation

target during the late 2000s, the eurozone would have suffered a milder slowdown in economic
growth.

   The remainder of the paper is presented in 6 sections. Section 2 presents evidence con-

sistent with the long-run validity of the Fisher effect. Section 3 presents the SVAR model.
Section 4 discusses the observables used in the estimation, the assumed prior distributions

of the estimated parameters, and the estimation procedure. The main results of the paper


                                              3
are contained in sections 5 and 6, which present the estimated effects of permanent and tem-
porary interest-rate shocks in the United States and Japan, respectively. Section ?? closes

the paper with a discussion of actual monetary policy in the ongoing low-inflation era from

the perspective of the estimated model.



2     The Fisher Effect

My analysis of the neo-Fisher effect assumes the empirical validity of the Fisher effect,
interpreted as a description of the long-run relationship between the nominal interest rate and

inflation. In this section, I present some empirical evidence consistent with this relationship.

The Fisher equation takes the form


                                       it = Rt + Et πt+1


where it denotes the nominal interest rate, Rt denotes the real interest rate, πt denotes the
inflation rate, and Et denotes expectations conditional on information available in period t.

This expression says that the nominal interest rate incorporates two types of compensation

to lenders, one is a compensation for the loss of purchasing power of money due to expected
inflation during the investment period, and the other is a real retribution for the sacrifice

of present consumption. Assuming that in the long run expected inflation equals actual
inflation, we have that

                                          i = R + π,

where variables without a subscript refer to long-run values. Further assuming that in

the long run the real interest rate is determined solely by real factors (such as technology,

distortionary taxes, or economic openness), the above expression delivers a one-to-one long-
run relationship between the nominal interest rate and the rate of inflation.

    Figure 1 displays average rates of inflation and nominal interest rates across countries.


                                               4
                         Figure 1: Average Inflation and Nominal Interest Rates: Cross-Country Evidence
                                      99 countries                                                        26 OECD countries
                        30

                        25
nominal interest rate




                                                                     nominal interest rate
                                                                                             15
  percent per year




                                                                       percent per year
                        20

                        15                                                                   10

                        10
                                                                                              5
                         5

                         0                                                                    0
                             0      10              20      30                                    0   5             10        15
                                      inflation rate                                                         inflation rate
                                    percent per year                                                       percent per year
             Notes. Each dot represents one country. For each country, averages are taken over the longest
             available noninterrupted sample. The average sample covers the period 1989 to 2012. The solid
             line is the 45-degree line. Source: World Development Indicators (data.worldbank.org/indicator).
             Inflation is the CPI inflation rate (code FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG). The nominal interest rate is the t-bill
             rate, computed as the difference between the lending interest rate (code FR.INR.LEND) and the
             risk premium on lending (lending rate minus treasury bill rate, code FR.INR.RISK). Countries for
             which one or more of these series were missing as well as outliers, defined as countries with average
             inflation or interest rate above 50 percent, were dropped from the sample.




                                                                 5
                                 Figure 2: Inflation and the Nominal Interest Rate in the United States and Japan
                                                                         United States

                                                                                                     inflation
                            15                                                                       nominal interest rate
         percent per year




                            10


                             5


                             0

                                     1960           1970          1980                1990    2000           2010
                                                                               year

                                                                            Japan

                            30                                                                       inflation
                                                                                                     nominal interest rate
percent per year




                            20


                            10


                             0


                       −10
                                     1960           1970          1980                1990    2000           2010
                                                                               year
                    Notes. Quarterly frequency. Source: See section 5 for the United States and section 6 for Japan.


                    The average sample covers the period 1989 to 2012. The scatter plots look consistent with

                    the Fisher effect, in the sense that on average increases in the interest rate are roughly
                    associated with one -for-one increases in the rate of inflation. This is the case for all the

                    countries in the sample as well as for the subsample of OECD countries, which are on average
                    half as inflationary as the group of no-member countries.

                             Figure 2 presents empirical evidence consistent with the Fisher effect from the time

                    perspective. It plots inflation and the nominal interest rate in the United States and Japan



                                                                           6
over the period 1955 to 2016. In spite of the fact that the data have a quarterly frequency,
it is possible to discern a positive long-run association between inflation and the nominal

rate. In both countries, the high-inflations of the 1970s and 1980s coincided with high levels

of the interest rate. Symmetrically, the disinflations that took place in both countries since
the 1990s were accompanied by low nominal rates.

    Having provided some evidence consistent with the assumption that the Fisher effect

holds in the long run, I now turn to the central focus of my investigation, the identifica-
tion of permanent and temporary nominal-interest-rate shocks and their dynamic effects on

inflation, output, and the real interest rate.



3     The SVAR Model

The empirical model aims to capture the dynamics of three macroeconomic indicators,

namely, the logarithm of real output per capita, denoted yt, the inflation rate, denoted
πt and expressed in percent per year, and the nominal interest rate, denoted it and also

expressed in percent per year. Let Yt be a vector collecting these three variables,
                                                    
                                               yt 
                                                  
                                         Yt ≡ 
                                               πt  .
                                                   
                                                  
                                                it


I assume that Yt is driven by four exogenous shocks: a nonstationary (or permanent) mon-
etary shock, denoted Xtm , a stationary (or transitory) monetary shock, denoted ztm , a non-

stationary nonmonetary shock, denoted Xtn , and a stationary nonmonetary shock, denoted

ztn . As mentioned earlier, the focus of my analysis is to compare the short-run effects of
permanent and transitory interest-rate shocks, embodied in the exogenous variables Xtm

and ztm . The shocks Xtn and ztn are meant to capture the nonstationary and stationary

components of combinations of nonmonetary disturbances of different natures, such as tech-


                                                 7
nology shocks, preference shocks, or markup shocks, which my analysis is not intended to
individually identify.

   Let Ỹt be a vector containing detrended output, detrended inflation, and the detrended

nominal interest rate. Formally,
                                                                    
                                          (yt −     Xtn )
                                                     × 100           
                                                                    
                                   Ỹt ≡ 
                                              πt − Xtm              .
                                                                     
                                                                    
                                               it − Xtm


Because the shocks Xtm and Xtn are not observable, neither is Ỹt . Let Ŷt denote the deviation
of Ỹt from its unconditional mean, that is,
                                                   
                                           ŷt 
                                                
                                    Ŷt ≡ 
                                           π̂ t
                                                  = Ỹt − E Ỹt ,
                                                 
                                                
                                            ît


where E denotes the unconditional expectations operator. I assume that Ỹt is stationary.
This means that output is cointegrated with Xtn and that inflation and the nominal interest

rate are both cointegrated with Xtm . Because inflation and the nominal interest rate share
a common nonstationary component, they are cointegrated. In other words, I am assuming

that the Fisher effect holds, in the sense that shocks that cause a permanent change in the

nominal interest rate also cause the same permanent change in the inflation rate. But the
assumption that Ŷt is stationary says nothing about the neo-Fisher effect, that is, about the

short-run effect on inflation and output of a permanent change in the interest rate.

   I assume that the law of motion of Ŷt takes the autoregressive form

                                             L
                                             X
                                     Ŷt =          Bi Ŷt−i + Cut                          (1)
                                              i=1




                                                     8
where                                                    
                                                     xm
                                                      t
                                                         
                                                         
                                                zm       
                                                t
                                          ut ≡           ,
                                                          
                                                n
                                                xt
                                                          
                                                          
                                                         
                                                 ztn

                                       xm     m
                                        t ≡ ∆Xt − ∆X
                                                     m



and

                                   xnt ≡ (∆Xtn − ∆X n ) × 100.

with ∆ denoting the time-difference operator, ∆X m ≡ E∆Xtm , and ∆X n ≡ E∆Xtn . The

variables xm      n
           t and xt denote demeaned changes in the nonstationary shocks. The objects Bi ,

for i = 1, . . . , L, are 3-by-3 matrices of coefficients, C is a 3-by-4 matrix of coefficients, and

L is a scalar denoting the lag length of the SVAR system.

   I assume that ut follows an AR(1) law of motion of the form


                                       ut+1 = ρut + ψt+1,                                      (2)


where ρ and ψ are 4-by-4 diagonal matrices of coefficients, and t is a 4-by-1 i.i.d. disturbance
distributed N(∅, I).

   Thus far, I have introduced three identification assumptions, namely, that output is

cointegrated with Xtn and that inflation and the interest rate are cointegrated with Xtm . In
addition, I impose the following restrictions


                              C12 ≤ 0,    C22 ≤ 0, and C31 ≥ −1,


where Cij denotes the (i, j) element of C. The first two of these conditions restrict transitory

exogenous increases in the interest rate to have nonpositive impact effects on output or

inflation. The restriction on C31 implies that a permanent exogenous increase in the nominal


                                                 9
interest rate has a nonnegative impact effect on the nominal interest rate itself. Finally, I
introduce the normalizations C32 = C14 = 1.



4     Observables, Priors, and Estimation Method

To estimate the unobservable system (1)-(2), I use observations of output growth expressed
in percent per quarter, the change in the nominal interest rate, and the interest-rate-inflation

differential, defined as
                                            rt ≡ i t − π t .

These three variables are stationary by the above identification assumptions. The following
equations link the observables to variables included in the unobservable system (1)-(2):


                           100 × ∆yt = 100 × ∆X n + ŷt − ŷt−1 + xnt

                                  rt = r + ît − π̂t                                        (3)

                                 ∆it = ∆X m + ît − ît−1 + xm
                                                             t




where r ≡ Ert represents the unconditional mean of the interest-rate-inflation differential. I
assume that ∆yt, rt , and ∆it are observed with measurement error. Formally, letting ot be

the vector of variables observed in quarter t, I assume that
                                                              
                                          ∆yt × 100           
                                                              
                                    ot = 
                                              rt               + µt
                                                                                           (4)
                                                              
                                             ∆it


where µt is a 3-by-1 vector of measurement errors distributed i.i.d. N(∅, R), where R is a

diagonal variance-covariance matrix.
    I estimate the model on quarterly data using Bayesian techniques. To compute the




                                                  10
likelihood function, it is convenient to use the state-space representation of the model. Let

                                                       
                                                  Ŷt
                                                       
                                                       
                                             Ŷt−1     
                                                       
                                                 ..    
                                       ξt ≡ 
                                                  .    .
                                                        
                                                       
                                             Ŷt−L+1
                                                       
                                                        
                                                       
                                                 ut


Then the system composed of equations (1), (2), (3), and (4) can be written as follows:


                                      ξt+1 = F ξt + P t+1


                                      ot = A0 + H 0 ξt + µt ,

where the matrices F , P , A, and H are known functions of Bi , i = 1, . . . L, C, ρ, ψ, ∆X n ,
∆X m , and r and are presented in the appendix. This representation allows for the use of the

Kalman filter to evaluate the likelihood function (see, for example, Hamilton, 1994, chapter
13).

   I consider two lag specifications, 4 and 8 quarters, which are the lag lengths used in

the vast majority of the related literature. Prominent examples of each specification are
Christiano, Eichenbaum, and Evans (2005) who estimate an SVAR model with stationary

monetary and nonmonetary shocks with 4 lags, and Blanchard and Quah (1989), who esti-
mate the effects of stationary and nonstationary shocks in an SVAR model with 8 lags.

   Table 1 displays the prior distributions of the estimated coefficients. The prior distribu-

tions of all elements of Bi , for i = 1, . . . , L, are assumed to be normal. In the spirit of the
Minnesota prior (MP), I assume a prior parameterization in which at the mean the elements

of Ỹt follow univariate autoregressive processes. So when evaluated at the prior mean, only

the main diagonal of B1 takes nonzero values and all other elements of Bi for i = 1, . . . , L
are nil. Because the system (1)-(2) is cast in terms of stationary variables, I deviate from


                                                11
                                       Table 1: Prior Distributions

        Parameter                                     Distribution               Mean.        Std. Dev.
        Main diagonal elements of B1                  Normal                     0.95         0.5
        All other elements of Bi , i = 1, . . . , L   Normal                     0            0.25
        C21                                           Normal                     -1           1
        −C12, −C22, 1 + C31                           Gamma                      1            1
        All other estimated elements of C             Normal                     0            1
        ψii , i = 1, 2, 3, 4                          Gamma                      1            1
        ρii , i = 1, 2, 3                             Beta                       0.3          0.2
        ρ44                                           Beta                       0.7          0.2
                                                                                              q
        100 × ∆X n , r, ∆X m                          Normal                     mean(ot )       var(ot )
                                                                                              q T
                                                      Uniform 0, var10(ot )      var(ot )        var(ot )
                                                             h              i
        Rii                                                                        20               120


Note. T denotes the sample length.


the random-walk assumption of the MP and instead impose an autoregressive coefficient of
0.95 in all equations, so that all elements along the main diagonal of B1 take a prior mean

of 0.95. As in the MP, I impose higher prior standard deviations on the diagonal elements

of B1 (0.5) than on the remaining elements of Bi (0.25) for i = 1, . . . , L.
       The coefficient C21 takes a normal prior distribution with mean -1 and standard deviation

1. The value assigned to the mean of this distribution implies a prior belief that the impact
effect of a permanent interest rate shock on inflation, given by 1 + C21, can be positive or

negative with equal probability. All other unrestricted parameters of the matrix C are as-

signed a normal prior distribution with mean 0 and standard deviation 1.1 The remaining 3
   1
     One might wonder whether a rationale like the one I used to set the prior mean of C21 could apply to
C13 , the parameter governing the impact output effect of a nonstationary nonmonetary shock, Xtn , which
is given by 1 + C13 . To see why a prior mean of 0 for C13 might be more reasonable, consider the effect
of an innovation in the permanent component of TFP, which is perhaps the most common example of a
nonstationary nonmonetary shock in business-cycle analysis. Specifically, consider a model with the Cobb-
Douglas production function yt = Xtn + ztn + αkt + (1 − α)ht expressed in logarithms. Consider first a
situation in which capital and labor, denoted kt and ht , do not respond contemporaneously to changes in
Xtn . In this case, the contemporaneous effect of a unit increase in Xtn on output is unity, which implies that
a prior mean of 1 for 1 + C13, or equivalently a prior mean of 0 for C13 is the most appropriate. Now consider
the impact effect of changes in Xtn on kt and ht . It is reasonable to assume that the stock of capital, kt , is
fixed in the short run. The response of ht depends on substitution and wealth effects. The former tends to
cause an increase in employment, and the latter a reduction. Which effect will prevail is not clear, giving
credence to a prior of 0 for C13 . One could further think about the role of variable input utilization. An
increase in Xtn is likely to cause an increase in utilization, favoring a prior mean of 0 over one of -1 for C13.



                                                       12
estimated elements of C are, as explained above, subject to inequality restrictions. Specifi-
cally, −C12, −C22, and 1 + C31 are restricted to be nonnegative. I assume that these objects

have Gamma prior distributions with mean and standard deviations equal to one.

   The parameters ψii , for i = 1, . . . , 4, representing the standard deviations of the four
exogenous innovations in the AR(1) process (2) are all assigned Gamma prior distributions

with mean and standard deviation equal to one. I impose nonnegative serial correlations on

the four exogenous shocks (ρii ∈ (0, 1) for i = 1, . . . , 4), and adopt beta prior distributions for
these parameters. I assume relatively small means of 0.3 for the prior serial correlations of the

two monetary shocks and the nonmonetary nonstationary shock and a relatively high mean
of 0.7 for the stationary nonmonetary shock. The small prior mean serial correlations for the

monetary shocks reflect the usual assumption in the related literature of serially uncorrelated

monetary shocks. The relatively small prior mean serial correlation for the nonstationary
nonmonetary shock reflects the fact that the growth rate of the stochastic trend of output is

typically estimated to have a small serial correlation. Similarly, the relatively high prior mean
of the serial correlation of the stationary nonmonetary shock reflects the fact that typically

these shocks (e.g., the stationary component of TFP) are estimated to be persistent. The

prior distributions of all serial correlations are assumed to have a standard deviation of 0.2.
   The unconditional means of the three observables are assumed to have normal prior

distributions with means equal to their sample means and standard deviations equal to

their sample standard deviations divided by the square root of the length of the sample
period. Finally, the variances of all measurement errors are asumed to have a uniform prior

distribution with lower bound 0 and upper bound of 10 percent of the sample variance of
the corresponding observable indicator.

   Finally, to draw from the posterior distribution of the estimated parameters, I apply the

Metropolis-Hastings sampler to construct an Monte-Carlo Markov chain of one million draws
after burning the initial 100 thousand draws. Posterior means and error bands around the

impulse responses shown in later sections are constructed from a random subsample of the


                                                 13
MCMC chain of length 100 thousand with replacement.



5     The Neo-Fisher Effect in the United States

For the United States, I use quarterly data spanning the period 1954:Q3 to 2016:Q4. The

proxy for yt is the logarithm of real GDP seasonally adjusted in chained dollars of 2009
minus the logarithm of the civilian noninstitutional population 16 years old or older. The

proxy for πt is the growth rate of the implicit GDP deflator expressed in percent per year.
In turn, the implicit GDP deflator is constructed as the ratio of GDP in current dollars and

real GDP both seasonally adjusted. The proxy for it is the monthly Federal Funds Effective

rate converted to quarterly frequency by averaging and expressed in percent per year. The
source for nominal and real GDP is the Bureau of Economic Analysis (bea.gov), the source

for population is the Bureau of Labor Statistics (bls.gov) and the source for the Federal

Funds rate is the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (federalreserve.gov).
    The identification scheme assumes that the interest rate, inflation, and output, all possess

unit roots, and that the interest rate and inflation are cointegrated. Before plunging in the
predictions of the SVAR model, it might be of some interest to briefly report the empirical

relevance of these assumption from the perspective of univariate representations of the data.

Specifically, the augmented Dickey-Fuller (ADF) test, which is a commonly used test of the
null hypothesis of a unit root, fails to reject the null hypothesis for yt , it , and πt , and rejects

it for it − πt at standard confidence levels of 10 percent or less.2
    Figure 3 displays mean posterior estimates of the responses of inflation, output, and the

nominal interest rate to permanent and temporary interest-rate shocks, along with asymmet-

ric 95-percent error bands constructed using the method proposed by Sims and Zha (1999).
    2
      Specifically, for a random variable xt , the ADF test considers the null hypothesis that xt = xt−1 + η0 +
PI
       ηi ∆xt−i + t , where t is white noise, against the alternative hypothesis that xt = δxt−1 + γt + η0 +
Pi=1
   I
   i=1 ηi ∆xt−i + t , with δ < 1. For it and πt , I restrict γ to be zero (no time trend), and for it − πt I
restrict tgamma and η0 to be zero (no time trend or drift). I include 4 lags of ∆xt (I = 4). The p values for
xt = yt , it , πt , it − πt are, respectively, 0.705, 0.154, 0.142, and 0.0365.



                                                      14
                                                              Figure 3: Impulse Responses to Interest-Rate Shocks: United States
                                                            Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                        Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                   2                                                                                                                1
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                         deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                          percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                               Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                               Inflation
                                                  1.5                                                                                                              0.5                          Inflation 95% band


                                                   1                                                                                                                0


                                                  0.5                         Interest Rate                                                                       −0.5
                                                                              Inflation
                                                                               Inflation 95% band
                                                   0                                                                                                               −1
                                                        0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                 quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                             Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
        percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                         percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                 Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                  1.5                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                       Output
                                                                                       95% band                                                                     0
                                                   1

                                                                                                                                                                  −0.5
                                                  0.5
                                                                                                                                                                   −1

                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                  −1.5                                  Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                        95% band
                                                 −0.5                                                                                                              −2
                                                        0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                 quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                                       Notes. The SVAR model includes 4 lags. Impulse responses are posterior mean estimates. Asym-
                                       metric error bands are computed using the Sims-Zha (1999) method.




                                                                                                      15
Figure 4: Response of the Real Interest Rate to Permanent and Transitory Interest-Rate
Shocks
                                                  4−Lag SVAR                                                                     8−Lag SVAR
                                   1.5                                                                            1.5
                                                           Permanent shock                                                                Permanent shock
    Deviation from steady state




                                                                                   Deviation from steady state
                                    1                      Transitory shock                                        1                      Transitory shock
         percent per year




                                                                                        percent per year
                                                                                                                  0.5
                                   0.5
                                                                                                                   0
                                    0
                                                                                                                 −0.5
                                  −0.5                                                                            −1

                                   −1                                                                            −1.5
                                         0   5          10         15         20                                        0   5          10         15         20
                                             quarters after the shock                                                       quarters after the shock

Notes. Posterior mean estimates. The real interest rate is defined as it − Etπt+1 .


The size of the permanent interest-rate shock is set to ensure that on average it leads to a

1 percent increase in the nominal interest rate in the long run, where the average is taken
over the posterior distribution of impulse responses. Because inflation is cointegrated with

the nominal interest rate, it also is expected to increase by 1 percent in the long run. The
main result conveyed by figure 3 is that the adjustment of inflation to its higher long-run

level takes place in the short run. In fact, inflation increases by 1 percent on impact and

remains around that level thereafter.
   On the real side of the economy, the permanent increase in the nominal interest rate

does not cause a contraction in aggregate activity. Indeed, output exhibits a transitory
expansion. This effect could be the consequence of low real interest rates resulting from the

swift reflation of the economy following the permanent interest-rate shock. The left panel of

figure 4 displays with a solid line the response of the real interest rate, defined as it − Et πt+1,
to a permanent interest-rate shock. Because of the faster response of inflation relative to

that of the nominal interest rate, the real interest rate falls by 0.8 percent on impact and

converges to its steady-state level from below, implying that the entire adjustment to a
permanent interest-rate shock takes place in the context of low real interest rates.

   By contrast, the responses of nominal and real variables to a transitory interest-rate


                                                                               16
shock, shown in the two right-side panels of figure 3 are quite conventional. Both inflation
and output fall below trend and remain low for a number of quarters. The real interest rate,

whose impulse response is shown with a broken line in the left panel of figure 4, increases on

impact and remains above its long-run value during the transition, which is in line with the
contractionary effect of the transitory interest-rate shock.

        Figure 5 displays impulse responses predicted by an SVAR specification that includes 8

lags of the endogenous variables. All other aspects of the model and its estimation are as
before. The general message of the figure is the same as under the 4-lag specification, that

is, following a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate, the rate of inflation rises
to its long-run level in the short run. A difference with respect to the 4-lag specification

is that now reflation does not occur instantaneously, but takes one quarter to materialize.

In the quarter in which the interest-rate shock takes place (period 0), inflation falls by
one annualized percentage point. However, just one quarter later (period 1) inflation is

0.5 annualized percentage points above its pre-shock level and in the second quarter after
the shock (period 2) it reaches 0.93 percentage points above its pre-shock level, which is

virtually equal to its long-run value. As in the 4-lag SVAR specification, the response to

a permanent interest-rate shock is characterized by an expansion in aggregate activity and
low real interest rates (figure 4).



6         The Neo-Fisher Effect in Japan

I now use Japanese data to estimate the SVAR model developed in section 3. The prior

distributions continue to be the ones displayed in table 1. The data is quarterly and spans the

period 1955:Q2 to 2016:Q4. Real GDP and the GDP deflator are taken from Japan’s Cabinet
Office (esri.cao.go.jp).3 Population is taken from Official Statistics of Japan (e-stat.go.jp) and
    3
    The source presents the data in three subsamples, 1955:Q2-1999:Q1, 1980:Q1-2011:Q2, and 1994:Q1-
2017:Q1, which requires concatenation. The GDP deflator for the first subsample appears not to be seasonally
adjusted (no information in English is provided by the source in this regard). For this reason, this series was
seasonally adjusted using the software x-13arima-seats, developed by the United States Census Bureau. In


                                                      17
                        Figure 5: Impulse Responses to Interest-Rate Shocks: United States, Eight-Lag SVAR Spec-
                        ification
                                                                    Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                                Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                          1.5                                                                                                               1
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                 deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                                  percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interest Rate
                                                           1                                                                                                                                           Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Inflation 95% band
                                                          0.5                                                                                                              0.5

                                                           0

                                                         −0.5                                                                                                               0
                                                                                      Interest Rate
                                                          −1                          Inflation
                                                                                       Inflation 95% band
                                                         −1.5                                                                                                             −0.5
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                                     Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                                 percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                         Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                          1.5                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                               Output
                                                                                               95% band
                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                            0

                                                          0.5

                                                                                                                                                                          −0.5
                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                95% band
                                                         −0.5                                                                                                              −1
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                        Note.See notes to figure 3.




                                                                                                              18
comes at an annual frequency. A quarterly series was obtained by geometric interpolation.
The proxy for the nominal interest rate is the discount rate until the second quarter of 1995

and the call rate from the third quarter of 1995 until the end of the sample, reflecting the

Japanese monetary authority’s choice of the policy instrument. The source for both series
is the Bank of Japan (stat-search.boj.or.jp) and both are monthly. A quarterly series was

obtained by averaging. Given the series for real GDP, the GDP deflator, population, and

the nominal interest rate, the proxies for the observables used in the estimation of the SVAR
model, ∆yt, rt, and ∆it, were constructed as in the case of the United States.

    ADF tests fail to reject the null hypothesis that yt and it have a unit -root and reject
the hypothesis that it − πt has a unit root at standard significance levels, which is consistent

with the assumed identification scheme, but does reject the hypothesis that πt has a unit

root.4
    Although the sample begins in 1955, I use 1975:Q1 as the starting point of the baseline

estimation, because the growth rate of real GDP per capita displays a significant break
around this time. Figure 6 displays the level and growth rate of real GDP per capita over

the period 1955 to 2016. It is clear from the figure that Japan experiences a significant

slowdown in the trend of GDP per capita around 1975, possibly marking the end of the
postwar reconstruction. The average growth rate of GDP per capita from 1955 to 1975 was

more than three times as large as over the period 1975 to 2016 (7.03 versus 1.98 percent

per year). The first subperiod was also more volatile, with a standard deviation of real per
capita GDP growth of 6.04 percent compared to 4.08 percent over the more recent subperiod.

This marked change in the statistical properties of output growth can affect the estimated
cyclical properties of the SVAR model, justifying the exclusion of the earlier subsample.

Notwithstanding this problem, at the end of this section, I conduct an estimation of the

SVAR model over the entire sample, as a robustness check.
the third subsample, the observation 2017:Q1 was dropped, as it was preliminary when it was downloaded.
   4
     The p values for yt , it , πt , and it − πt are 0.414, 0.549, 0.032, and 0.001, respectively. These tests are
robust to starting the sample in 1975:Q1, with associated p values of 0.843, 0.306, 0.027, and 0.021. See
footnote 2 for more details.


                                                       19
                 Figure 6: Real GDP Per Capita: Japan 1955:Q3 to 2016:Q4
                                              Level (in logarithm)
               2.5

                 2

               1.5

                 1

               0.5

                 0
                     1960      1970        1980             1990           2000   2010
                                                     date

                                       Growth Rate (in percent per year)
                30

                20

                10

                 0

               −10

               −20
                     1960      1970        1980             1990           2000   2010
                                                     date




   Figure 7 displays impulse responses of inflation, the nominal interest rate, and output to

permanent and transitory interest-rate shocks. The construction of the figure is as explained

in section 5. As in the case of the estimation on U.S. data. In response to a permanent
increase in the interest rate of 1 percent, the economy reflates quickly. One quarter after the

shock, the inflation rate is 0.75 percent above its pre-shock level, and three quarters after the
shock it is 0.98 percent above its pre-shock level, virtually at its long-run position. Output

experiences a short contraction, but recovers quickly after period 2, rising and staying above

trend afterward, with a net output gain throughout the adjustment process. By contrast, a
transitory increase in the interest rate causes falls in output and inflation, with both variables

converging from below to their respective steady states.

   The response of the real interest rate to permanent and transitory interest-rate shocks
follows the same pattern identified in the estimates using U.S. data. In particular, as figure 8

shows, a permanent increase in the interest rate is associated with a fall in the real interest
rate and a gradual convergence from below, exactly the opposite of what happens after a


                                                    20
                                                          Figure 7: Impulse Responses to Interest-Rate Shocks: Estimates on Japanese Data
                                                                    Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                                Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                           2                                                                                                                2
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                 deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                                  percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interest Rate
                                                          1.5                                                                                                              1.5                         Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Inflation 95% band
                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                           1
                                                                                                                                                                           0.5
                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                      Interest Rate
                                                           0                          Inflation                                                                           −0.5
                                                                                       Inflation 95% band
                                                         −0.5                                                                                                              −1
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                                     Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                                 percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                         Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                          0.4                                                                                                              0.5

                                                                                                                                                                            0
                                                          0.2
                                                                                                                                                                          −0.5

                                                           0                                                                                                               −1

                                                                                                                                                                          −1.5
                                                         −0.2
                                                                                               Output                                                                      −2                                   Output
                                                                                               95% band                                                                                                         95% band
                                                         −0.4                                                                                                             −2.5
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                        Notes. The SVAR model includes 4 lags. See notes to figure 3.




                                                                                                              21
Figure 8: Response of the Real Interest Rate to Permanent and Transitory Interest-Rate
Shocks: Estimates on Japanese Data
                                                  4−Lag SVAR                                                                     8−Lag SVAR
                                   2.5                                                                            1.5
                                                           Permanent shock                                                                Permanent shock
    Deviation from steady state




                                                                                   Deviation from steady state
                                    2                      Transitory shock                                        1                      Transitory shock
         percent per year




                                                                                        percent per year
                                   1.5
                                                                                                                  0.5
                                    1
                                                                                                                   0
                                   0.5
                                                                                                                 −0.5
                                    0

                                  −0.5                                                                            −1

                                   −1                                                                            −1.5
                                         0   5          10         15         20                                        0   5          10         15         20
                                             quarters after the shock                                                       quarters after the shock

Note. See note to figure 4.


temporary increase in the interest rate, which triggers a rise in the real interest rate and

convergence from above.
   I close this section with two robustness checks. The first one, illustrated in figure 9

extends the lag length of the SVAR model from 4 to 8 quarters. The main result of the

paper obtains, namely, a permanent increase in the interest rate is accompanied by a swift
convergence of the inflation rate to its higher permanent level. Importantly, the small and

short-lived contraction in output implied by the 4-lag version of the model is not present
in the 8-lag specification, suggesting that a recession caused by a permanent increase in the

nominal interest rate is not a robust prediction of the SVAR model estimated on Japanese

data. Finally, figure 10 displays the predictions of the SVAR model estimated on Japanese
data over the period 1955:Q3 to 2016:Q4. The quick reflation of the economy following the

announcement of a long-run increase in interest rates also obtains over the long sample.

As expected, given the analysis of the break in the output trend discussed earlier in this
section, the model estimated on the long sample has difficulties identifying the output effect

of monetary shocks, which is reflected in wide error bands. Nonetheless, the point estimates
indicate that a permanent increase in the nominal interest rate is not contractionary.




                                                                               22
                        Figure 9: Impulse Responses to Interest-Rate Shocks: Eight-Lag SVAR Model Estimated
                        on Japanese Data
                                                                    Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                                Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                      Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                           2                                                                                                               1.5
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                 deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                                  percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Interest Rate
                                                          1.5                                                                                                               1                          Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                                                        Inflation 95% band
                                                           1                                                                                                               0.5

                                                          0.5                                                                                                               0
                                                                                      Interest Rate
                                                           0                          Inflation                                                                           −0.5
                                                                                       Inflation 95% band
                                                         −0.5                                                                                                              −1
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock

                                                                     Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                    Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                                 percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                         Response of Output                                                                                               Response of Output
                                                          1.5                                                                                                              0.5
                                                                                               Output
                                                                                               95% band                                                                     0
                                                           1

                                                                                                                                                                          −0.5
                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                           −1

                                                           0
                                                                                                                                                                          −1.5                                  Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                                95% band
                                                         −0.5                                                                                                              −2
                                                                0        5          10         15           20                                                                   0        5          10         15           20
                                                                         quarters after the shock                                                                                         quarters after the shock
                        Note.See notes to figure 3.




                                                                                                              23
                                             Figure 10: Impulse Responses to Interest-Rate Shocks: Estimates on Japanese Data from
                                             1955:Q3 to 2016:Q4
                                                         Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                       Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
                                                     Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation                                                                         Response of the Interest Rate and Inflation
                                                3                                                                                                                    2
deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                           deviation from pre−shock level
 percentage points per year




                                                                                                            percentage points per year
                                                                                                                                                                                               Interest Rate
                                                2                                                                                                                                              Inflation
                                                                                                                                                                     1                          Inflation 95% band
                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                0
                                                                           Interest Rate                                                                            −1
                                               −1                          Inflation
                                                                            Inflation 95% band
                                               −2                                                                                                                   −2
                                                     0        5          10         15           20                                                                      0        5          10         15           20
                                                              quarters after the shock                                                                                            quarters after the shock

                                                          Permanent Interest−Rate Shock                                                                                       Temporary Interest−Rate Shock
    percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                                                                                           percent deviation from pre−shock level




                                                              Response of Output                                                                                                  Response of Output
                                               1.5                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                    Output
                                                                                    95% band                                                                         0
                                                1

                                                                                                                                                                    −1
                                               0.5
                                                                                                                                                                    −2

                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                    −3                                  Output
                                                                                                                                                                                                        95% band
                                             −0.5                                                                                                                   −4
                                                     0        5          10         15           20                                                                      0        5          10         15           20
                                                              quarters after the shock                                                                                            quarters after the shock
                                             Note.See notes to figure 3.




                                                                                                      24
7     Conclusion

Discussions of how monetary policy can lift an economy out of chronic below-target inflation
are almost always based on the logic of how transitory interest-rate shocks affect real and

nominal variables. Nowadays, there is little theoretical or empirical controversy around

how this type of monetary shock transmits to the rest of the economy: An increase in
the nominal interest rate causes an increase in the real interest rate, which puts downward

pressure on both aggregate activity and price growth. Within this logic, a central bank
trying to reflate a low-inflation economy will tend to set interest rates as low as possible.

Soon enough these economies find themselves with zero or negative nominal rates and with

the low-inflation problem not going away. After some time, the Fisher effect kicks in, and the
situation perpetuates. The monetary authority keeps the interest rate low because inflation

is still below target (the temporary-interest-rate-shock logic) and inflation is low because the

interest rate has been low for a long period of time (the Fisher effect).
    In this paper I argue, based on econometric evidence drawn from U.S. and Japanese data,

that a gradual and permanent increase in the nominal interest rate causes a fast adjustment
of inflation to a permanently higher level, low real interest rates, and no output loss. These

findings are consistent with the neo-Fisherian prediction that a credible announcement of a

gradual return of the nominal interest rate to normal levels can achieve a swift reflation of
the economy with sustained levels of economic activity.




                                              25
Appendix

Matrices of the State-Space Representation

Let
                                       B ≡ [B1 · · · BL ],

and let Ij denote an identity matrix of order j, ∅j denote a square matrix of order j with all

entries equal to zero, and ∅i,j denote a matrix of order i by j with all entries equal to zero.

Also let L, S, and V denote, respectively, the number of lags, the number of shocks, and the
number of endogenous variables included in the SVAR model. Then, for L ≥ 2 we have
                                                                          
                             B              Cρ                  Cψ        
                                                                         
                F =                                     ,P =  ∅           ;
                                        
                    IV (L−1) ∅V (L−1),V ∅V (L−1),S            V (L−1),S   
                                                                          
                           ∅S,V L             ρ                     ψ

                                      
                                   n
                       100 × ∆X                                    
                                      
                 A0 = 
                            r          , and H 0 = M ∅
                                                     ξ  V,V (L−2) Mu   ,
                                      
                           ∆X m

where, in the specification considered in the body of the paper (S = 4, V = 3, and a

particular ordering of the endogenous and exogenous variables in the vectors Ŷt and ut), the
matrices Mξ and Mu take the form

                                                                          
                     1 0 0 −1 0 0                          0 0 1 0 
                                                                   
               Mξ = 
                     0 −1 1 0 0 0
                                                  and Mu =  0 0 0 0  .
                                                                    
                                                                   
                      0 0 1 0 0 −1                            1 0 0 0


The case L = 1 is a special case of L = 2 in which B2 = ∅V .




                                               26
References

Blanchard, Olivier, and Danny Quah, “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and
   Supply Disturbances,” American Economic Review 79, 1989, 655-73.

Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles L. Evans, “Nominal Rigidities

   and the Dynamic Effects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,” Journal of political Economy
   113, 2005, 1-45.

Cochrane, John H., “Doctrines Overturned,” The Grumpy Economist Blog, February
   2015.

Cochrane John H., “The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap,” Journal of Monetary Economics

   92, December 2017, 47-63.
De Michelis, Andrea, and Matteo Iacoviello, “Raising an Inflation Target: The Japanese

   Experience with Abenomics,” European Economic Review 88, 2016, 67-87.

Erceg, Christopher J., and Andrew T.Levin, “Imperfect Credibility and Inflation Persis-
   tence?,” Journal of Monetary Economics 50, May 2003, 915-944.

Fève, Patrick, Julien Matheron, and Jean-Guillaume Sahuc, “Inflation Target Shocks and
   Monetary Policy Inertia in the Euro Area,” The Economic Journal 120, September

   2010, 1100-1124.

Hamilton, James D., Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press: Princeton, NJ,
   1994.

Ireland, Peter N., “Changes in the Federal Reserve’s Inflation Target: Causes and Conse-
   quences,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 39, December 2007, 1851-1882.

Milani, Fabio, “Learning and the Evolution of the Feds Inflation Target,” manuscript,

   University of California, Irvine, July 2009.
Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Liquidity Traps: An Interest-Rate-Based

   Exit Strategy,” Manchester School 82, S1, September 2014, 1-14.

Schmitt-Grohé, Stephanie, and Martı́n Uribe, “Liquidity Traps And Jobless Recoveries,”
   American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 9, January 2017, 165-204.

                                             27
Sims, Christopher, and Tao Zha, “Error Bands for Impulse Responses,” Econometrica 67,
   1999, 1113-1156.

Sims, Christopher A., and Tao Zha, “Were There Regime Switches in U.S. Monetary Pol-

   icy?,” American Economic Review 96, March 2006, 54-81.




                                         28
