                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




PRODUCTION FLEXIBILITY, MISALLOCATION AND TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY

                                      Burak R. Uras
                                       Ping Wang

                                    Working Paper 23970
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w23970


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 2017




We would like to thank Costas Arkolakis, Mark Bils, Hal Cole, Chang-Tai Hsieh, Boyan
Jovanovic, Sam Kortum, Ed Prescott, Robert Porter, B. Ravikumar, Chong Yip, two anonymous
referees and the editor for useful comments and recommendations. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Burak R. Uras and Ping Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Production Flexibility, Misallocation and Total Factor Productivity
Burak R. Uras and Ping Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 23970
October 2017
JEL No. D24,E23,O11,O33

                                           ABSTRACT

Economy-wide institutional deficiencies causing factor misallocation have been emphasized as
essential determinants of aggregate TFP differences. This paper argues that production flexibility
at the micro-level is an economic characteristic that should be given priority in TFP aggregation
exercises. We investigate a heterogeneous firms model with two distinct notions of flexibility: (i)
the firm-specific capacity to optimize over a set of production techniques that serve to organize
capital and labor; and, (ii) the industry-specific substitutability between efficient units of capital
and labor. We show the presence of a strong interaction between "ability to choose techniques"
and "input substitutability": high complementarity at the industry-level amplifies imperfections
associated with techniques choice at the firm-level. Using the micro-founded structure, we
develop measures for factor, output and technique distortions across a distribution of firms and
quantify their TFP effects. For a broad range of U.S. manufacturing industry clusters, technique
distortions generate more TFP losses than misallocation resulting from capital and output
distortions, with larger TFP gains from removing technique distortions in industries that exhibit
high degrees of factor complementarity. Our key quantitative results are robust to outliers,
production function specification, mismeasurement and parameterization of the model and are
strongly present in developing country datasets.


Burak R. Uras
Department of Economics
Tilburg University
Tilburg, The Netherlands
r.b.uras@uvt.nl

Ping Wang
Department of Economics
Washington University in St. Louis
Campus Box 1208
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and NBER
pingwang@wustl.edu
              “Why Are Total Factor Productivities Different? My candidate for the factor is
          the strength of the resistance to the adoption of new technologies and to the efficient
          use of currently operating technologies, and this resistance depends upon the policy
          arrangement a society employs. What is needed is a theory of how arrangement affects
          total factor productivity.” [Prescott (1998, p. 549)]


1        Introduction

Thanking to the increased availability of reliable micro datasets, there is a growing literature over
the past decade uncovering the sources and the aggregate consequences of factor and output-
misallocation across firms.1         This literature not only helps explaining productivity gaps across
countries, regions as well as sectors, but also provides valuable policy prescriptions for means to
advance a macroeconomy. While many studies have concluded with sizeable aggregate gains to
be obtained from improving allocative efficiency, the findings have recently been challenged in the
aspects of adjustment costs, overhead costs, heterogeneous demand elasticities, and measurement
errors.2 In this paper, we focus on a dimension which has remained largely unexplored in the lit-
erature to address the following question: what is the role of the degree of micro-level interactions
between production factors, which is broadly defined as production flexibility by economists and as
flexible manufacturing systems (FMS) by management scientists, in explaining the macroeconomic
consequences of allocative efficiency?
        The study of production flexibility in economics can be traced back to Stigler (1939) who advo-
cates flexibility as a competitive advantage especially for smaller firms unable to reach the necessary
scale for cost minimization. The concept of production flexibility has not gained much attention in
academics until the revolutionary production process developed by Toyota in late 1970s and early
1980s for combating rising costs as a result of oil crises – a process broadly referred to as flexible
manufacturing system.3 In their now-classic work, Milgrom and Roberts (1990 and 1995) stress
that, due to the advantages brought by integrated production technologies, for many firms flexi-
bility has become an integral part of the fundamental logic in modern manufacturing.4 Building
upon this literature, Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2002) further observe that “firms do not
    1
        See Restuccia and Rogerson (2013) and Hopenhayn (2014) for comprehensive survey of the literature.
    2
        See Asker, Collard-Wexler and de Loecker (2014), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013), Song and Wu
(2015), and Bils, Klenow and Ruane (2017), for each of the four aspects, respectively.
   3
     This concept is sometimes referred to as “lean” or “just-in-time” production (see Womack, Jones and Roos (1990)
and Shah and Ward (2007), respectively).
   4
     Milgrom and Roberts (1990) provide, among others, two leading examples: (i) “Ford’s factories is being replaced
by flexible machine tools and programmable, multi-task production equipment” (p. 511); and, (ii) “General Electric
has reduced the design and production time it takes to fill an order for a circuit-breaker box from three weeks to three
days” (p. 512).



                                                           1
simply plug in computers or telecommunications equipment and achieve service quality or efficiency
gains. Instead they go through a process of organizational redesign” (pp. 340-341). This strand
of research therefore elaborates that high manufacturing flexibility implies ability to design (and
re-design) firm-specific blue-prints before initiating production processes which can improve upon
the competitiveness of a firm by exploiting the interactions between factors of production. In this
paper, we are after to formally embed such micro-level interactions borne by manufacturing flex-
ibility - and especially its implications for firm-specific choice of blue-prints - into a quantitative
macro-framework.
       To address the important set of questions raised above, we develop a generalized production
framework in which we allow for firm-and-industry level components of production flexibility that
serve to organize raw measures of factors efficiently. While developing this model-framework we
adopt the terminologies in the literature on the microfoundation of the aggregate production function
pioneered by Houthakker (1955-1956) and revived by Kortum (1997) and Jones (2005), namely firm-
specific blue-prints or production techniques.5 We allow production techniques to be endogenously
determined by firms’ decision makers, which we define as firm-level flexibility in customizing a
production-line. We also utilize the concept industry-specific elasticity of technique-augmented factor
substitution to govern the process of flexibility at the aggregate level, which we will refer as (aggregate
or industry-wide) production flexibility for the rest of the paper.
       In order to capture firm-specific limitations to flexibly choose the most appropriate blue-prints,
we also incorporate the element of technique distortions into the framework. What we have in mind
is that before hiring factors of production a firm needs to establish a “unique business plan”. The
implementability of such idiosyncratic processes at early stages of the production-line are in general
subject to uncertainty, limited information and resistance – as motivated in the management science
literature. For instance, as pointed out by Fine and Freund (1990), “available tools for considering
cost/benefit tradeoffs for investments in flexible automation often contradict the intuition of their
managers” (p. 449). Pailles, Yannou and Bocquet (1996) stress that “despite the popularity of
Flexible Manufacturing, managers still use inadequate recipes to efficiently incorporate flexibility
into their strategic decisions” (p. 79). Most importantly, Siggelkow (2002) echoes “in complex
systems, firms’ decision makers may not always have a precise understanding of the exact strength
of the interaction between activities ... incentive and accounting systems may lead decision makers
to ignore or misperceive interactions” (p. 900, emphasis added).
       To account for inflexible techniques choice at the firm-level – that could be borne due to limited
understanding of the interactions between factors of production or resistance to adopt certain tech-
   5
       A primary focus of this line of research has been on qualifying the shape of the aggregate production function
based on the distribution of production techniques or on the adoption or assimilation of a global frontier technology
by local firms.




                                                           2
niques – we allow for structural mistakes (distortions) in operational production techniques. These
distortions force firms to deviate from operating at the most-efficient combination of techniques that
could be chosen from the menu of blue-prints. Formally, in our model techniques choice will be
subject to mistakes which are ex ante not perceivable or foreseeable. This means after a technique
combination is chosen and before hiring factors, the owner of the firm realizes that its operational
capital-technique may turn out to deviate from an optimal benchmark.
   In our framework while we allow firms to differ in technology frontiers, factor and output dis-
tortions, as well as techniques-choice distortions, we allow industries to differ in substitutability
between technique augmented production factors. By developing a structure to aggregate these
heterogeneous firms to produce an industry-level total factor productivity measure, we are able to
isolate, both theoretically and quantitatively, the TFP effects of factor and output misallocation
from that of technique distortions. To be more specific, we study a manufacturing firm producing
with the use of two factor inputs, capital and labor. Each input is augmented by a factor-specific
production technique. The two production techniques are chosen from a technology menu, depend-
ing on the technology scale measuring the information capacity and capability of the firm’s decision
makers. The two technique-augmented factor inputs are then combined in a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) form to produce the output. As a key property of this benchmark framework,
we derive a positive association between industry-level factor substitutability and the cost efficiency
of the firm: Flexible substitutability between technique-augmented factor inputs reduces the unit
cost of production. This result echoes the industry-level evidence documented in the management
science literature that we will summarize in Section 2.
   Building upon this generalized production framework, we then incorporate distortionary frictions
into the firm’s factor, output and techniques decisions. For better comparison with previous studies,
the factor and output frictions are modelled as distortionary “taxes”. The technique choice friction
– new to the literature – is a distortion resulting from firm-specific technique inflexibilities, as
delineated above. The key theoretical result shows that while all three distortions, as expected,
reduce the efficiency of the firm as well as the aggregate TFP, we establish another key property.
Low flexibility of production, or a high degree of complementarity between factors, amplifies the cost
distortions arising from technique mistakes. This finding also confirms a key conclusion from the
management science literature: Siggelkow (2002) argues that misperceiving interactions should be
regarded of particular importance especially for complementary activities in a firm.
   Furthermore, our model also predicts a particular correlation between two structural (endoge-
nous) wedges that technique distortions influence: specifically, capital and output wedges that are
augmented by technique distortions would be negatively correlated with each other if firms face
distortions to their technique decisions. We refer to Compustat North America database and show
that such a negative correlation is significantly visible in firm-level data.


                                                    3
   Upon establishing the theoretical implications of techniques choice and the potential conse-
quences of technique mistakes for firm-level performance, an immediate question arises: Is this new
mechanism quantitatively important for explaining TFPs across a distribution of manufacturing in-
dustries? To address this question, we utilize firm-level balance sheet data for publicly traded firms
from Compustat North America, in conjunction with industry-level production parameters, to sep-
arately back out manufacturing firms’ capital, output and technique distortions. We then measure
firms’ physical and revenue productivities (TFPQ and TFPR, respectively). By aggregating over a
heterogeneous firms distribution, we construct a deep-structural measure of industry-level TFP to
examine the consequences of capital, output and technique distortions. And to this end, because we
measure TFP directly without relying on a particular assumption on the joint distribution of TFPQ
and TFPR, we also eliminate the associated measurement issues pointed out by Bils, Klenow and
Ruane (2017).
   Using the quantitative framework, we conduct counterfactual exercises to measure the impact of
each source of distortion for industry TFPs – in particular, the role of flexibility played in explaining
aggregate efficiency losses. Our quantitative experiments yield several important insights. First, for
a variety of manufacturing industry-clusters technique distortions and output distortions account
for much more substantial efficiency losses at the level of industry TFPs than capital distortions.
Second, the impact of technique distortions in generating efficiency losses in the aggregate is in gen-
eral larger than that of output distortions. Third, the inefficiency impact of technique distortions
get mitigated by the industry-wide flexibility of production, i.e. TFP gains from removing technique
distortions are substantially smaller in industries where factors are highly substitutable. Fourth,
capital distortions are negligible for industry-level TFPs – matching the findings of past research,
which utilized publicly-traded firm data. Fifth, the key quantitative findings – that technique dis-
tortions are significantly more important than capital finance distortions and at least as important
as output distortions for industry TFPs – are robust to the measurement of firm-level productiv-
ity, parameter specifications, outliers and the mismeasurement of capital-stock and cost of capital
variables.
   We also repeat our quantitative experiments for India and China. Cross-country comparisons
developed using Chinese and Indian firm-level data show that technique distortions are substantial
for industry-TFPs in these two developing countries as well.
   Our results echo the Lawrence Klein Lecture delivered by Prescott (1998): TFP differences
depend crucially on the strength of the resistance to the efficient use of currently operating technolo-
gies. The underlying policy arrangement causing such resistance is captured in our framework by the
technique distortions and the resulting variation in such distortions due to intra-industry technique
misperception, which are shown to be essential for the aggregate industry productivity.

Related Literature The paper is related to three strands of literature. One strand is on understanding


                                                   4
the sources of misallocation and its consequences for aggregate productivity. Another strand is
on the introduction of factor-specific production techniques to qualify the shape of the aggregate
production function and to investigate the adoption or assimilation of a global frontier technology
by local firms. The third strand is the business and organization literature that aims to understand
the role of flexibility for firm performance. We delineate our contribution to each strand as follows.
   The first strand of literature goes back to Banerjee and Duflo (2005) who identify the large
dispersion in the marginal product of capital among firms in India as an important source for
underperformance in overall output. More closely related to our paper are Restuccia and Rogerson
(2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) show that when factor and
output distortions hit physically productive firms, this has quantitatively important consequences
for the total factor productivity of the macroeconomy. Hsieh and Klenow (2009) find that when the
dispersion in production distortions are alleviated in India and China to the extent of the U.S., the
TFP gap between the U.S. economy and these two countries could shrink up to 40%. Jones (2013)
further elaborates that misallocation at the micro level leads to lower TFP at the macro level, thereby
helping explain cross-country TFP gaps. To understand the sources of misallocation, Banerjee and
Moll (2010), Midrigan and Xu (2013), Buera and Shin (2013) and Moll (2014) construct dynamic
general equilibrium models of misallocation with capital market imperfections, whereas Jovanovic
(2014) studies misallocation using an assignment framework with heterogeneous firms and workers.
Finally, using a measured TFP approach and secondary bond price data for publicly traded firms
from the U.S., Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek (2013) provide evidence for that removing the dispersion
in borrowing costs observed in the bond-price data for U.S. manufacturing firms would improve the
TFP of the manufacturing industry only by 1-2 percentage points.
   We also work in an environment of factor misallocation, where firms face factor input distortions à
la Restuccia and Rogerson (2008) and Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Yet, we go beyond by incorporating
a structure to study distortions to production techniques and quantify the substantial impact of
technique distortions on industrial TFPs using data from publicly traded firms. Moreover, with our
emphasis on production flexibility, we generalize the Cobb-Douglas production function commonly
used in the literature by allowing different non-unity elasticities of substitution for firms in different
industries. Importantly, we also confirm the findings of Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek (2013) by
showing that for publicly traded firms removing capital distortions would have negligible effects for
industry-level TFPs.
   The second strand of literature owes to the seminal work by Houthakker (1955-1956), where firms
produce using different Leontief technologies (local production) with production techniques following
a Pareto distribution. The aggregate (global) production across production units then exhibits the
Cobb-Douglas form. Kortum (1997) shows that if researchers sample production techniques from
Pareto distributions, then productivity growth is proportional to the growth of the research stock and


                                                    5
accounts for the empirical regularities concerning productivity growth and researcher employment
observed over the past 50 years. Jones (2005) generalizes Houthakker’s result and shows that as
long as the techniques arrive to firms following a Pareto distribution, firms’ global production would
be Cobb-Douglas. Wang, Wong and Yip (2014) develop a technology assimilation framework using
the global technology approach and show that the lack of assimilation of the frontier technology can
be instrumental for differentiating between trapped and growth miracle economies. Also related to
our paper is the framework of Caselli (1999), Acemoglu (2003), and Caselli and Coleman (2006).
In Caselli (1999), firms decide both on production factors and techniques, whereas in Acemoglu
(2003) firms undertake both labor- and capital-augmenting technological improvements. Caselli and
Coleman (2006) investigate the implications of endogenous techniques choice for the cross-country
technology frontier.
   As in this second strand of literature, we also explore an alternative production framework
incorporating the concept of production techniques at the firm level. However, we differ by modeling
techniques choice under a generalized CES framework with a distribution of firms heterogeneous in
their technology frontiers as well as in capital, output and technique distortions. Thus, we are able
to highlight the role of production flexibility for TFP aggregation exercises as well as to differentiate
the implications of technique distortions from those of conventional sources of factor and output
distortions.
   Third, there is a also vast literature on production flexibility in addition to those cited in the
Introduction. The literature highlights “insurance” and “strategic competitiveness” roles of FMS.
To the end of insurance role, including Fine and Freund (1990), Fine (1993) and Netessine, Dobson
and Shumsky (2002), many have argued that managers see flexibility as an adaptive response when
hedging against uncertain environments (factor or technology related uncertainty as well as product
uncertainty). Moreover, Jones and Ostroy (1984) stress that the preserving of flexibility when faced
with uncertainty is important for making decisions on whether to undertake irreversible investments.
In the same vein, Tombak (1990) constructs a game-theoretic model to determine investments in
FMS by firms competing in an oligopolistic market, whereas Roller and Tombak (1993) extend to a
two-stage game in which firms choose between a flexible and a less flexible technology in the first stage
followed by choosing production quantities in the second stage. With respect to the competitiveness
role, as pointed out for example by Roller and Tombak (1991, 1993), high manufacturing flexibility
of a particular firm can induce higher competitive pressure for its rivals, and increase profit margins
for the relatively more flexible firm. Eaton and Schmitt (1994) further show that while flexibility
leads to market concentration, the resulting equilibrium need not be welfare-dominated by one where
firms are prohibited from merging, forming cartels, or engaging in market preemption. Concerning
both views: Firms might “bank flexibility”, that is holding flexibility in reserve to meet future needs.
In this sense flexibility is an investment which creates future options for a company.


                                                   6
    Different from the papers in this third line of literature we formally embed the concept of FMS in
a generalized CES production function with endogenously determined production techniques. This
specification in turn allows us to calibrate industry and firm-level production function parameters
and run counterfactual policy experiments using a structural model consistent with firm-level data
from manufacturing industries.




2    Motivational Evidence: (Distorted) Flexibility of Production
     and Performance

In order to motivate the interaction between flexibility of production and performance, in this section
we provide evidence from the business literature for efficiency gains through flexibility while also
delineating on the potential sources of inflexibility at the firm-level.
    Generally speaking, in many manufacturing industries producers often receive demand orders
after employing the production factors (such as materials, land, capital and labor). One such
case is in the pharmaceuticals industry. For instance, flu vaccines and various inputs required to
manufacture vaccines cannot be stored for longer periods. The demand for a particular type of flu
serum is usually unpredictable and quite volatile with respect to year-to-year comparisons, asking
for the capacity to efficiently use a variety of different input combinations when demand for vaccines
arise. To highlight this point, at a public speech in 2007, Jeffrey Kindler – the former CEO of Pfizer
– prioritized establishing a highly flexible production base as one of his company’s key short-term
targets.
    There are other examples from manufacturing industries that promote the role of the micro-level
flexibility on firm-level outcomes. For instance, Adler, Goldoftas and Levine (1999) study the effect
of organizational flexibility on efficiency in the car-manufacturing industry. By providing detailed
micro-level evidence from Toyota’s NUMMI plant in California, authors document that company’s
policy changes that have led to increases in its labor input flexibility stimulated production efficiency
at the beginning of 1990s, and gained Toyota a large competitive advantage over its big rivals Ford,
Chrysler and General Motors.
    In other innovation intensive industries – such as the high-tech IT manufacturing, flexible manu-
facturing is now the standard business practice. In the IT sector, it is often suggested that investment
in technique flexibility is much more efficient than investment in ability to forecast demand fluctua-
tions. Due to fast technological advancements IT products cannot be inventorized in large quantities
for extended periods. In this sector, most of the success of manufacturers in Taiwan, Korea and
Japan is credited to the operational flexibility of production lines and the induced efficiency in
product quality and delivery rates (see Beach, Muhlemann, Price, Paterson and Sharp (2000)).


                                                    7
   Empirical research that aims to evaluate the relationship between flexible production and firm-
performance relies on surveys, case studies as well as formal econometric methods, which we delineate
in the following.


2.1   Surveys

Using a manufacturing survey, administered by INSEAD, Boston University and Waseda University,
on the manufacturing strategy of large manufacturers of Europe, Japan and North America, de
Meyer, Nakane, Miller and Ferdows (1989) conclude that Japanese were ahead of their European
and North American competitors in utilizing flexible manufacturing to cut costs through rapid
production and design changes.
   Using the manufacturing futures survey data in 1983-86 in Europe and in 1985 in North America,
Tombak and de Meyer (1988) find that manufacturers in both Europe and North America use Flexible
Manufacturing Systems for adapting to input variations rather than product design changes. Our
technique-based modeling strategy is consistent with this finding.
   Jaikumar (1986) conducts a focused study of 35 manufacturers in the U.S. and 60 in Japan,
finding that on average American firms are more capital-biased whereas Japanese firms are more
labor-biased when choosing their production processes. Finally, Cusumano, Fine and Suarez (1996)
study 31 printed circuit board plants of 14 electronics firms in the U.S., Japan, and Europe and
find out complementary relationships among different layers of production flexibility – and as to be
seen below, our findings depend critically on the complementarities between industry- and firm-level
production flexibilities.


2.2   Case Studies

There are numerous case studies in the business literature concerning the efficiency gains to be ob-
tained through establishing flexible production processes. For brevity, we summarize only selectively
the following cases:

   1. Toyota: Womack, Jones and Roos (1990) point of the advantage of Toyota FMS to produce at
      the time needed and in the quantities needed to avoid unnecessary inventories and to reduce
      manufacturing costs significantly, thereby enabling it to outgrow Ford, Chrysler and General
      Motors.

   2. Lincoln Electric Company (producing welding equipment): Milgrom and Roberts (1995) il-
      lustrate that a welding equipment producer, Lincoln Electric Company, had much better per-
      formed than peer-competitors due to its flexible work rules with cross-trained workers and
      cross-functional development teams, accompanied by strong promotion and employee bonus
      incentives, making General Electric eventually drop out of the welding equipment business.

                                                 8
  3. UMC-Media Tek Integrated Circuits (IC) Design Company: In the (IC) industry the key
      competitiveness of Korea and Taiwan lies in the speed to implement and the flexibility in
      response to changes in market demand. Chang and Tsai (2002) argue that Taiwan enjoys a
      competence of a cheap but outstanding local design capability pool. By mobilizing such process
      flexibility, Taiwan adopts the strategy of being a rapid follower to provide quick IC design that
      is less expensive than what can be provided by most advanced countries, with quality much
      better than that delivered by other developing countries. Design for manufacturability, in this
      respect, emerges as a key concept to enhance productivity in a resource limited country such
      as Taiwan. To give a concrete example, in CD-ROM and DVD production Taiwan enjoyed
      a competitive advantage during 1990s thanks to its capacity to redesign quickly with respect
      to market changes. A key example was illustrated by Chang and Tsai (2002): UMC (United
      Microelectronic Co.), an IC company, converted its multimedia design department to form
      the Media Tek IC Design Company specialized in CD-ROM and DVD products. Based on
      its Design for Manufacturing capacity, the company was able to rapidly acquire the required
      techniques (within a period of less than a year) and launched the production of the CD-
      ROM chip. With world-wide-acceptable quality and at a very competitive price (compared to
      Japanese competitors), these CD-ROM chips quickly took up the global market share, peaking
      at 4-5 million chips of monthly output at the end of 1990s.

  4. Schwabe Pharmaceuticals: In RolandBerger (2009) report, Dr. Rainer Oschmann, the Exec-
      utive General Manager of Schwabe Pharmaceuticals, emphasizes the flexibility of their opera-
      tional techniques as a clear strategic objective of his company.

  5. Plastech: Berry and Cooper (1999) find that Plastech had drastic reduction in profitability
      when expanding product scope prematurely without suitable production flexibility.

  6. Minnesota Manufacturers: Gerwin (1993) provides evidence that, as market unpredictability
      and competitiveness increase, Minnesota manufacturers become more flexible in their produc-
      tion processes to cut their manufacturing costs.


2.3   Econometric Analysis

Despite the abundance of survey and case studies, more systematic econometric analyses have been
rare that concentrated on understanding the impact of flexibility on production efficiency. We list
some exceptions in the following.
   By conducting an empirical analysis on over 3000 companies from 83 industries over the period of
1979-87, Fiegenbaum and Karnani (1991) identified flexibility as a competitive advantage for small
firms, as argued by Stigler (1939), especially in volatile and capital-intensive industries. Using a
database of about 3,000 businesses, Roller and Tombak (1993) find that FMS plays an important

                                                  9
role in lowering the manufacturing cost. The theoretical results that we will present below are
consistent with this finding. In MacDuffie (1995), based on a 1989-90 survey of 62 auto firms, an
increase in a production organization index (consisting of three subcomponents: skills and motivation
for discretionary effort toward flexible production and integration of human resources with a flexible
production system) is found to lower labor hours per vehicle and lead to higher productivity.
   Ichniowski, Shaw and Prennushi (1997) use a panel data of 36 finishing lines of steel companies or
mills in the U.S., finding that flexible work rules, such as flexible job design and training to provide
workers with multiple skills, raise worker productivity far above those under more traditional rigid
work practices. In his later piece, Ichniowski (1999) investigate 41 steel production lines from
Japan and the U.S. and identifies significant productivity gains through flexible human resource
management practices.
   Finally, Ling-yee and Ogunmokun (2008) provide empirical evidence from a sample of 222 export
product/market ventures, confirming that a firm’s manufacturing flexibility enhances production
performance.
   Conclusion. The motivational evidence that we summarized in this section so far argues for
that flexibility improves efficiency of production. In order to capture this key property of production
processes, in our theoretical analysis we will incorporate firm- and industry-level flexibility concepts
into an otherwise standard structural macro framework.


2.4      Motivating Distortions to Production Flexibility

Full-fledged flexibility might not be a virtue for every firm. How flexibly a firm can process the
relative efficiency of its production techniques could be subject to within firm resistance, limited
information concerning the interactions between factors of production and simply unintended mis-
takes.
   In the Introduction, we highlight three sources of such mistakes in practice based on three key
papers in the management science literature, namely, Fine and Freund (1990), Pailles, Yannou
and Bocquet (1996) and, most relevantly, Siggelkow (2002). An important property established is
that such mistakes arising from misperceptions with respect to production input activities are more
costly when these activities are complements rather than substitutes (cf. Siggelkow (2003)). In a
more recent paper, Ghemawat and Levinthal (2008) study strategies for achieving higher levels of
performance and offsetting past mistakes through tactical adjustments. In justifying mistakes, they
argue that “[g]rappling with interactions among choices poses challenges for decision makers” due
to “the curse of dimensionality” (à la Bellman). They further elaborate “rich interactions among a
large number of choices imply the nonexistence of a general, step-by-step algorithm that can locate
the best set of choices in a “reasonable” period of time” (p. 1639).
   In a follow-up study to Siggelkow (2002), Rivkin and Siggelkow (2003) examine interdependen-


                                                  10
cies among a firm’s vertical hierarchy, incentive system and limits on the ability of managers to
process information and find that workforce incentives and managerial capabilities are complements
to an active hierarchy when there are sufficiently pervasive interactions among production process
decisions. Empirically, Jeffers, Muhamma and Nault (2008) investigate whether there exist com-
plementarities between IT resources and non-IT resources at the production process level. They
conclude: “For decision-makers, our findings demonstrate that the performance impact of IT re-
sources is shaped and influenced by their interactions with other non-IT resources. . . . Failure to
recognize complementary interactions could lead to unnecessary overemphasis on certain categories
of investment, whereas failure to take into consideration substitutive interactions could lead to a
failure to address redundancies that may dampen the anticipated net impact of some investments”
(p. 7). Based on survey data of the retail industry in the U.S., Powell and Dent-Micallef (1997)
find that IT alone does not explain firms’ performance variation, but that their ability to combine
explicit IT technology resources with complementary human and business resources gives advantages
over the competitors.
    In our theoretical analysis, we will capture distorted flexibility of production by incorporating
ex post mistakes into the technique decision making process of the firm by allowing the degree of
technique-distortions to vary across firms. We will then indirectly back-out these distortions by
exploiting the structure of the model with firm-level data. In a Handbook Chapter, Brynjolfsson
and Milgrom (2013) emphasize that understanding complementary practices may shed light on
whether “organizational complements to new technologies [may] explain changes in productivity
growth across geography, time, and industry” and suggest that “[u]se of novel metrics of activity
and performance, such as fine-grained, practice-specific inputs and outputs” may be a fruitful area
for economists to investigate in order to advance our understanding with respect to the role of
production complementarities played in “valuing the organizational capital and other intangible
assets of firms” (Section 5.2: An Agenda for Economists). Our paper therefore addresses in part
potential research avenues proposed by Brynjolfsson and Milgrom (2013).


3    A Benchmark Production Function with Techniques Choice

The benchmark economy features a representative firm, manufacturing a product with two factor
inputs, capital and labor. Different from the neoclassical production framework, we augment raw
measures of factor inputs with a combination of production techniques that serves to organize the
factor inputs in an effective manner in order to enhance the performance of the production process.
Importantly, the production-techniques combination is a firm-level control variable, which is to be
chosen from a firm-specific technology menu. For the time being, we assume that there are no
distortions associated with production factor inputs or the choice of production techniques. Also,



                                                 11
in this section we focus solely on firm’s production structure – by leaving the details to the end of
demand structure and production distortions to Section 4.


3.1       The Basic Environment

Let us denote capital with K and labor with L. The combination of production techniques is captured
by a pair (aK , aL ) which augment the two factor inputs (K, L) to govern their usage and coordinate
their match. The concept of production techniques is in line with the literature on the property
of the firm and the aggregate production function developed by Houthakker (1955-1956), Kortum
(1997) and Jones (2005). It also captures factor-augmenting technology improvement modeled by
Caselli (1999), Acemoglu (2003), and Caselli and Coleman (2006). In this respect, one may also
rename aK and aL , respectively, as capital-augmenting and labor-augmenting techniques. The aim
of this paper is to understand the aggregate consequences of inflexible production design through
technique-choice distortions and to compare the qualitative as well as quantitative implications of
technique-distortions against those of factor and output distortions.
       Our framework follows the above mentioned Houthakker-Kortum-Jones literature – on the shape
of aggregate production function – by assuming that the availability of techniques is subject to a
technology constraint

                                             H(aK , aL ) = z,                                                    (1)
                                                      aK    ≥ aK > 0,                                            (2)
                                                      aL ≥ aL > 0,                                               (3)

where z is the firm-specific technology frontier. The firm is said to be more efficient in the process
of production if it has a higher level of z. Together with the chosen techniques combination, the
technology-frontier specifies firm’s physical total factor productivity.6 The parameters aK and aL are
industry-specific limit production-techniques, which allow the unit cost-function to be well-behaved
at the boundaries.
       Throughout the paper, we will assume that H(aK , aL ) = aαK a1−α
                                                                    L . This technology constraint
specifies the full menu of production techniques – describing the extent of trade-off across differ-
ent combinations of (aK , aL ) under a given technology frontier z. The trade-off associated with
techniques is qualitatively similar to the concept of iso-quant, which can be referred as the iso-tech.
       We then depart from Houthakker-Kortum-Jones where a Cobb-Douglas “global” production
function can be derived as an envelope of the Leontief “local” production function with techniques
drawn from an independent Pareto distribution. We instead assume that the representative firm’s
   6
       With (aK , aL ) and the associated knowledge level z, there is no need to add another scaling parameter to the
production function.




                                                           12
production function takes the Constant Elasticity Substitution (CES) form
                                                                          1
                                      Y = [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ .

The parameter ρ ∈ (−∞, 1] is industry-specific and it captures the flexibility of the production
technology in allowing the firm to substitute between the technique-augmented factor inputs, aK K
and aL L, with 1/(1 − ρ) measuring the elasticity of substitution. The parameter λ is thus the
effective capital share of production.


3.2     Firm’s Optimization

The representative firm optimizes by choosing a combination of production techniques and produc-
tion factors. In this respect, the production is a two-staged process: (i) in Step 1, the firm chooses a
suitable combination of production techniques from the technology menu to ensure the full efficiency
of the production process; and (ii) in Step 2, the firm decides on the quantities of capital and labor
to achieve a given level of output. While Step 2 is the standard optimization under the neoclassical
production framework, Step 1 is the techniques choice problem. We solve for the optimal techniques-
combination and optimal factor demands backward: at first we solve for the optimal K and L of
the firm by taking factor prices and production techniques (aK , aL ) as given; we then determine the
optimal (aK , aL ) combination.
   Specifically, the firm in Step 2 solves the following cost minimization problem

                               min        rK + wL                                                   (4)
                               K,L
                                                                          1
                               s.t.       [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ = Y.

The solution to the neoclassical cost minimization yields a unit cost function conditional on a
particular pair of production techniques, c̃(aK , aL ; r, w).
   In Step 1, the firm pins down techniques choice to achieve the lowest unit cost of production
under a given techniques menu

                                           min       c̃(aK , aL ; r, w)                             (5)
                                          aK ,aL
                                            s.t.     H(aK , aL ) = z.

Throughout the paper we will refer to Step 1 program as techniques choice and Step 2 program as
neoclassical cost minimization.


3.2.1    Neoclassical Cost Minimization

We start by solving the neoclassical cost-minimization problem. Throughout the paper, we shall
relegate all detailed mathematical derivations and proofs to the Appendix. The first-order conditions

                                                      13
from the neoclassical cost minimization yields
                                                   1 
                                     w  1  λ  1−ρ      ρ
                               K         1−ρ           aK 1−ρ
                                 =                            .                                                            (6)
                               L      r        1−λ     aL
Thus, the capital-labor ratio is inversely related to the factor price ratio, which is standard. How the
capital-labor ratio responds to the techniques ratio depends crucially on the industry-level production
flexibility. When the two technique-augmented factor inputs are Pareto complements (ρ < 0), the
capital-labor ratio is negatively related to the techniques ratio. This is quite intuitive: under Pareto
complementarity, it is profitable to balance between the two technique-augmented factor inputs.
In this case, if the organization of factor inputs is biased towards one particular factor, then it is
expected that the firm would employ more of another factor to ensure balanced factor usage. When
the two technique-augmented factor inputs are Pareto substitutes (0 < ρ < 1), the opposite is true:
the firm employs more of the input associated with a better technique.
   The unit cost function resulting from the neoclassical cost minimization is a function of produc-
tion techniques (aK , aL )
                                          "             ρ                                ρ                    # ρ−1
                                                                                                              ρ
                                                r       ρ−1        1            w        ρ−1              1
                   c̃(aK , aL ; r, w) =                       λ   1−ρ   +                      (1 − λ)   1−ρ           .   (7)
                                               aK                               aL

This equation indicates that the unit cost of production is a CES aggregator of the technique-deflated
factor costs. The endogenous adjustments in production techniques are the key to differentiate this
unit cost function from the standard neoclassical one, to which we shall turn.


3.2.2   Techniques Choice

When solving for the optimal techniques combination we need to keep in mind that both interior
and corner solutions are possible. We define an interior solution as follows.

Definition (Interior Techniques Choice) Denoting the optimal techniques combination that mini-
mizes the unit cost of production with (a∗K , a∗L ), (a∗K , a∗L ) is an interior solution to the techniques
choice problem if and only if a∗K 6= aK and a∗L 6= aL .

   At first we characterize the interior solution to techniques choice program. After deriving the
unit cost of production we will also characterize the parameter constellations of the model that
induce the interior solution to be optimal. The interior solution to techniques choice problem gives
                                                                  1                 ρ−1
                                     a∗K
                                                    
                                           r            1−λ         ρ       1−α            ρ

                                       ∗ =                                                      ,                          (8)
                                     aL    w             λ                   α
which depends positively on the factor price ratio. Intuitively, when a factor input becomes pricier,
it is profitable to devote more effort toward enhancing the technique associated with that particular
factor in order to minimize the neoclassical unit cost.

                                                              14
   Plugging (8) in (6) solves for the capital-labor ratio of
                                            K   w α
                                              =       .                                                  (9)
                                            L   r 1−α
While the optimized capital-labor ratio induced by the interior techniques-combination continues to
                                                                        rK
be inversely related to the factor price ratio, the factor cost share   wL    turns out to be a constant.
                                                                                                 α
Furthermore, the K/L ratio depends only on the relative shares in the technology menu,          1−α ,   and
not on the relative relative share of efficient units of capital and labor in the production function,
 λ
1−λ .
   In order to determine the levels of production techniques dictated by the interior solution, we
combine (8) with (1) to derive:
                                                                             
                            w −(1−α)  α (1−α) 1−ρρ
                                                        
                                                          1 − λ (1−α)
                                                                              1
                                                                               ρ
                 a∗K   = z                                                             > aK ,           (10)
                             r          1−α                 λ
                                                           
                                             1−ρ             1
                                         −α ρ
                                                   1 − λ −α ρ
                            w α                     
                                     α
                 a∗L   = z                                       > aL .                                 (11)
                             r      1−α              λ

Intuitively, both techniques are linear in the level of technology-frontier. Moreover, they depend on
the factor price ratio rather than the individual factor prices: a higher wage-rental ratio induces
techniques combination to be more biased towards labor. Importantly, industry-level production
flexibility affects the choice of techniques through the share of factor incomes and the share of
techniques in the technology menu. Next we turn to analyzing the properties of the unit cost of
production and derive the parameter conditions of the model that promote the interior (a∗K , a∗L )-
solution to be optimal.


3.3     Unit Cost of Production

By combining the optimal techniques choice with the neoclassical cost expression that we derived
at (7), we can solve for the unit cost of production implied by our framework:
                                          1 α               1         !1−α
                                    1     α ρ r            1−α    ρ    w
                          c(w, r) =                                                .                    (12)
                                    z     λ   α            1−λ        1−α

This final form of unit cost allows us to obtain the following important result.

Proposition 3.1 (Optimality of the Interior Techniques Choice) For ρ ∈ (−∞, 0), the interior-
solution for the techniques-choice, (a∗K , a∗L ), minimizes the unit cost of production. For the case of
ρ ∈ (0, 1], the optimal techniques-choice is a corner.

Proof All proofs are relegated to the Appendix.



                                                  15
   Figure 1 illustrates the interior solution as an optimal choice of production techniques. As we
will delineate in Section 7, for all manufacturing industries that we focus on in this study, empirical
estimates from the literature show that the condition ρ < 0 holds. Therefore, in the remainder of the
theoretical as well as quantitative analysis we solely concentrate on the case of ρ < 0 when deriving
and evaluating the properties of our framework.
   Having derived the parameter condition that supports the interior solution to be optimal, we
move on and analyze further properties of the unit cost of production, that we derived at (12). We
first note a standard property of the unit cost function: A rise in technology frontier (higher z)
reduces the unit cost of production.
   Interestingly, while the conditional unit cost function (that we derived at (7)) is a CES aggregator
of factor prices, the final form of the unit cost function, after taking into account the optimal
techniques choice, becomes a Cobb-Douglas aggregator of factor prices weighted by technique usage
rather than factor income shares. Moreover, this Cobb-Douglas aggregator depends on the ratios of
                                           α         1−α
technique usage to factor income shares,   λ   and   1−λ ,   and production flexibility ρ.
   Finally, we turn to studying the implications of (industry-level) production flexibility for the unit
cost of production. To begin, using (12) we establish the following limit properties. In the limit
cases, with extreme flexibility, when ρ → −∞ the unit cost converges to
                                                                   1−α
                                             1  r α          w
                                   c(w, r) =                               ,
                                             z α              1−α

whereas when ρ → 1, the unit cost cost converges to
                                                                   1−α
                                             1  r α          w
                                   c(w, r) =                               .
                                             z λ              1−λ

Thus, while the factor prices are always weighted by technique usage shares, how much they affect
the unit cost depends crucially on production flexibility. When industry flexibility is shut down
(ρ → −∞), or in other words efficient factors are perfect complements, the production technology
(the CES aggregator) precludes technique-augmented factor inputs from substituting each other. As
a result, factor prices are deflated only by their technique usage shares. With a greater technique
usage share, a factor price would not raise the unit cost of production as much. When flexibility
is perfect, on the contrary, factor prices are deflated only by their income shares. In this case, an
increase in the price of a factor with a greater income share would become less damaging to the unit
cost of production.
   With the extreme cases addressed, in the next proposition we present what happens with inter-
mediate levels of flexibility.

Proposition 3.2 (Production Flexibility and Unit Cost) Industry’s production flexibility (ρ) mono-
tonically reduces the unit cost of production for any given pair of factor prices.


                                                     16
    Proposition 3.2 indicates a positive effect of aggregate production flexibility on firm performance.
This result echoes an extensive list of findings highlighted in the management science literature, such
as Roller and Tombak (1993), Gerwin (1993) and Adler, Goldoftas and Levine (1999), all of whom
argue that overall production flexibility is an important determinant of efficiency.
    In the next section, we introduce distortions into our benchmark model and investigate the
interactions between industry-level production flexibility and distortions originating from factor,
output and most importantly from technique decisions of the firm.


4    Capital, Output and Technique Distortions

Distortions to firms’ factor inputs and output and their aggregate implications for misallocation have
been extensively analyzed in the literature. In this section we introduce a novel form of distortion
emerging from firms’ technique decisions and formalize a foundation to conduct aggregation exercises
with factor, output and technique distortions. For this purpose, we extend the specification of
Section 3 to incorporate a demand structure to the benchmark model and importantly to also allow
for distortions in firms’ production decision margins. The full-fledged decision program of the firm
is summarized as follows – with details of each stage to be described thereafter.


                                                                                1
                        Stage 1       max Y = [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ                         (13)
                                      aK ,aL

                              s.t.    aαK a1−α
                                           L     = z,
                                      aK ≥ aK > 0,
                                      aL ≥ aL > 0,
                        Stage 2       Nature chooses a technique distortion φ
                        Stage 3       min r(1 + ηK )K + wL,                                          (14)
                                      K,L
                                                                         1
                              s.t.    Y = [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ ,
                        Stage 4       max (1 − ηY )pY d (p) − c(φ, η)Y d (p),                        (15)
                                        p
                                                 p −σ
                              s.t.    Y d (p) =         YJ .
                                                 P
Stages 1 and 2 capture firm-level techniques choice with distortions, where the distortion to techniques-
choice combination is firm-specific and is denoted with φ, whose origins are to be delineated below.
Stage 3 is the factor choice with distortions, where we introduce the firm-specific factor distortion
without loss of generality from the side of capital and denote it with ηK . Stage 4 is the final decision-
making stage in which, the firm decides on its unit output price p, by taking the demand structure,
aggregate industry price-level (P ) and industry-level output (YJ ) as given in order to maximize its


                                                    17
profits. We assume that the firm’s profit maximization program is subject idiosyncratic distortions
as well, which we call as output distortions, denoted with ηY . We assume that ηK and ηY are known
in Stage 1. However, allowing uncertainty for ηK and ηY would not necessarily impact qualitative
and quantitative findings. Throughout the theoretical analysis we maintain the following structural
assumption.

Assumption 1. ρ ∈ (−∞, 0).

   Based on this key assumption – which we will justify in Section 7, we again solve recursively by
starting from the output pricing decision.


4.1   Demand and Output Distortion

We assume that firms are monopolistic competitors a la Dixit-Stiglitz with a demand structure as
specified at (15). Given the output distortion ηY and the demand specification, the unit price of
output is expressed as
                                                     σ c(w, r; ηK , φ)
                                               p=                      ,                                                        (16)
                                                    σ−1   1 − ηY
with a prevailing firm-level profit of
                                        σ
                                       σ
                             π=             (σ − 1)−1 c(r, w; ηK , φ)1−σ YJ .                                                   (17)
                                    σ−1

4.2   Capital Distortion

We assume that the cost of capital exhibits a firm-specific friction. A capital cost friction can prevail
from capital market imperfections as well as capital taxes, as widely discussed in the misallocation
literature. This component can be conveniently expressed as r(1 + ηK ), where ηK can take positive
as well as negative values. Positive values of ηK imply the “taxation of capital”, whereas negative
values of ηK mean “subsidization” (in a broader sense). In our quantitative analysis we will back
out a distribution of “taxes” and “subsidies” across firms using firm-level data.
   Taking firm-specific capital distortion into account, neoclassical cost minimization yields
                                                           1                  1                ρ
                             K                 w            1−ρ         λ        1−ρ       aK       1−ρ
                               =                                                                          ,                     (18)
                             L             r(1 + ηK )                  1−λ                 aL

and the conditional unit cost of production becomes
                                       "                     ρ                                ρ                    # ρ−1
                                                                                                                   ρ
                                            r(1 + ηK )       ρ−1        1            w        ρ−1              1
                c̃(aK , aL ; r, w) =                               λ   1−ρ   +                      (1 − λ)   1−ρ           .   (19)
                                               aK                                    aL

Applying comparative statics at (19) shows that for a given pair of techniques (aK , aL ), the unit
cost of production rises as the capital distortion (ηK ) increases. Not surprisingly, capital distortions
result in a higher capital user cost, which in turn increases the unit cost of production.

                                                                  18
4.3      Techniques Choice with Distortions

Techniques choice is subject to distortions that are unforeseeable as of Stage 1. This means after
a techniques combination is chosen in Stage-1, such as (a∗K , a∗L ), the firm realizes in Stage-2 that it
made a mistake when choosing techniques, such that its operational capital-technique will turn out
to be âK = a∗K (1 + φ), with φ ∈ (−1, φ̄] and φ̄ > 0, instead of a∗K .7 Despite the fact that techniques
combination of the firm gets distorted from an optimal benchmark, the firm will continue to operate
on the same technology frontier, determined by z, as we depict in Figures 2 and 3.
      In our framework, the notion of “technique mistakes” is broadly defined in order to capture
a spectrum of different sources of (in)flexible techniques decision-making at the firm-level. As we
highlighted in the Introduction and in Section 2, limited flexibility can prevail for various reasons.
For instance, when establishing the blue-print of a firm, the manager might need to work with lim-
ited information about how factors of production will interact with each other when the foundation
of the unique business-plan is in place. This can generate ample room for misperceptions in tech-
niques decision-making to play a role and distort technique-outcomes from an optimal benchmark
as discussed by Siggelkow (2002) in a related context. Another dimension of technique distortions
may arise if the ownership and the manager of a business are separated from each other and the
manager is in charge of technique decisions. In such situations, although the ownership intends
to observe a particular optimal techniques-combination ex ante (a∗K , a∗L ), it might end up with a
distorted one ex post (âK , âL ) because of managerial resistance to not deviate from a particular
techniques-combination and to bias the efficiency of a particular factor, as deliberated in Fine and
Freund (1990) and Pailles, Yannou and Bocquet (1996). Finally, the manager of the firm could also
make unintended errors when establishing the blue-print of a unique business-plan and generate
distortions in production techniques compared to a desired optimal benchmark. We model these
limits to flexible techniques-choice as unforeseeable mistakes (so by construction E[φ] = 0).
      The structural assumptions that govern the technique-mistakes yield then an effective (âK ,âL )
combination for the firm denoted as

                                                âK    = (1 + φ)1−α a∗K ,                                              (20)
                                                 âL = (1 + φ)−α a∗L ,                                                 (21)

where
                                                                                                            
                                               −(1−α)          (1−α)       1−ρ                 (1−α)    1
                                       w                     α                  ρ            1−λ              ρ
                   a∗K   = z                                                                                       ,
                                   r(1 + ηK )               1−α                               λ
                                                                                              
                                               α         −α 1−ρ                     −α    1
                                       w                α          ρ       1−λ                  ρ
                   a∗L   = z                                                                         ,
                                   r(1 + ηK )          1−α                  λ
  7
      The upper bound φ̄ is needed when proving Proposition 4.1(iii-b) particularly for the case of ρ < 0 and φ > 0.



                                                             19
and hence
                                                          1                 ρ−1
                           âK   r(1 + ηK )       1−λ           ρ   1−α          ρ
                               =                                                       (1 + φ).                      (22)
                           âL       w             λ                 α
   Firm’s operational techniques-ratio reveals that lowering ηK and φ induce techniques combination
to be biased toward labor-augmenting regardless of the elasticity of substitution between technique-
augmented factor inputs. Plugging the distorted techniques-combination (âK ,âL ) in (18) provides
                                                                          ρ
                                       K   w α (1 + φ) 1−ρ
                                         =                 ,                                                         (23)
                                       L   r 1 − α 1 + ηK
with
                                                                                        ρ
                                                  1
                                                                      − ρ1       1
                       K = c(r, w; φ, ηK ) 1−ρ [r(1 + ηK )]                           1−ρ
                                                                              λ 1−ρ âK   Y d (p),                   (24)
                                                           −1                     ρ
                                               1                           1
                        L = c(r, w; φ, ηK )   1−ρ     w   1−ρ   (1 − λ)   1−ρ   âL Y d (p).
                                                                                 1−ρ
                                                                                                                     (25)

The expression we obtained for the K/L ratio at (23) implies that for ρ < 0 and φ > 0, an increase
in φ lowers the K/L ratio of the firm, as such mistakes distort the decision on capital-techniques.


4.4    Unit Cost with Distortions

The unit cost of production with both capital and technique distortions is expressed as follows
                                            α "      1     #1−α
                   (1+φ)α  α  ρ1 r(1+ηK )
                         
                                                   1-α ρ w         h            ρ     i ρ−1
                                                                                           ρ
 c(r, w; φ, ηK ) =                                                  1 + α (1+φ) 1−ρ − 1       , (26)
                      z     λ         α            1-λ    1-α

whose full derivation can be found in the Appendix. An increase in capital distortion (ηK ) raises the
unit cost of production. Evaluating the effect of φ on the unit cost function shows that at φ∗ = 0 the
unit cost of production reaches a global minimum, which is true as long as Assumption 1 holds. Hence
both positive and negative distortionary deviations from optimal techniques are undesirable. The
intuition for technique-distortions to raise unit cost is that an inefficient combination of techniques
induces the firm to operate along a higher iso-cost curve as we illustrate in Figure 3. This conclusion
confirms the findings that we referred in the Introduction and in Section 2: Flexible decision making
is a highly desirable asset to improve firm-level outcomes and limitations to it (which we capture
with technique distortions) can cause efficiency losses. Our model captures this important property,
whose aggregate implications we will investigate in Section 7.
   An important component of flexibility stems from the industry. In other words, industry-level
production flexibility gives rise to the extent to choose efficient factors flexibly. The next question to
be addressed becomes then whether the distortionary effects of the capital and technique frictions
on the unit cost of production are influenced by the industry-level production flexibility, ρ. We also
inquire whether capital and technique distortions reinforce each other when determining the unit
                                                                      ∂2c               ∂2c
cost of production. We are basically interested in signing           ∂φ∂ρ       and    ∂φ∂ηK .   The following proposition

                                                          20
provides the key properties of the unit cost of production to this end – with details of the comparative
statics to be found in the Appendix.

Proposition 4.1 (Production Flexibility, Distortions and Unit Cost of Production)

(i) Increasing the capital cost distortion or deviating with the technique distortion from φ∗ = 0 raises
        the unit cost of production.

(ii) Production flexibility does not mitigate the detrimental effects of capital distortions on the unit
        cost of production.
                  1 ρ
(iii)    a. if    α ρ−1   > 1, production flexibility mitigates the distortionary effects of |φ| on unit cost;
                  1 ρ
          b. if   α ρ−1   < 1, production flexibility mitigates the distortionary effects of |φ| on unit cost if
                                                                           1
                                                 1 + φ < φ̄ ≡                  ρ−1 ;                     (27)
                                                                       1 ρ        ρ
                                                                  1−   α ρ−1


(iv) The detrimental effects of capital and technique distortions on the unit cost of production re-
        inforce each other.

    We would like to note that the quantitative properties of the framework that we analyze in
Section 7 will satisfy the sufficient condition (27) – promoting industry-level production flexibility as
a mitigating factor of technique distortions. The intuition for this property is the following: when ρ
is low, then the technique-augmented factors turn out to be complements and dismissing this strong
interaction between factors (and sub-optimally biasing one factor) becomes costly. When ρ is high,
the technique-augmented factors are substitutes and do not exhibit a strong interaction with each
other, under which case dismissing this weak interaction (and biasing one factor) does not cause large
efficiency losses. This result and the underlying intuition echoes Siggelkow (2002), who in a related
context using very different modeling strategy argues that in early-stage decision making process of
a business, misperceiving the interactions between complements would be much more distortionary
for the performance of the business than misperceiving the interactions between substitutes.


5       Empirical Justification for the Theoretical Structure

Is there an empirically testable prediction that one can derive based on the structure of our model to
confront with data? In order to address this question we make the following observations regarding
the structural implications of ηK , ηY and φ distortions. First,
                                                                           ρ
                                            K   w α     (1 + φ) 1−ρ
                                              =       ·             ,                                      (28)
                                            L   r 1−α     1 + ηK
                                                        | {z }
                                                                   1
                                                               ≡ 1+τ
                                                                       K



                                                         21
which means that capital-labor ratio is a function of a (structural) endogenous wedge, denoted with
                                                                        h             ρ     i ρ−1
                                                                                                 ρ
τK , which in turn is a function of ηK and φ. Second, defining Σ(φ) ≡ 1 + α (1 + φ)   1−ρ −1        ,
the ratio between the total cost of labor and the total revenues of a firm can be expressed as
                                                           1        −1           1       ρ
                              wL       c(r, w; φ, ηK ) 1−ρ w 1−ρ w(1 − λ) 1−ρ (âL ) 1−ρ Y
                                     =                  σ
                              pY                      σ−1 c(r, w; φ, ηK )Y
                                                                   ρ
                                         σ−1                     1     ρ−1
                                     =            (1 − α) ·                (1 − ηY ) .                               (29)
                                           σ                   Σ(φ)
                                                             |          {z           }
                                                                         =1−τY

Hence, the ratio between the total cost of labor and revenues yields another structural wedge as a
function of ηY and φ, which we denote with τY . Applying comparative statics at τK and τY – as
defined in equations (28) and (29) – shows that
                                                   ∂τK      ∂τY
                                                       > 0,     < 0.
                                                    ∂φ      ∂φ
This means τK and τY would be negatively correlated among a cross-section of firms, if firms face
distortions to optimal production techniques. This is a testable prediction of our model.
       In order to confront this key prediction of the model with data, we conduct an empirical analysis
using Compustat North America – a database, which we will also utilize in our quantitative analysis
in Section 7. In our empirical analysis we focus on the manufacturing industry clusters that we list
Table 1. We back out τK and τY using firm-level values on capital, total labor expenditures and
revenues, and aggregate estimates on α and σ. We estimate α at the level of each industry using
U.S. NBER Productivity Database and present the estimates of α in Table 2. We set σ = 3 as in
Hsieh and Klenow (2009). Then, using estimates of α and σ = 3 in (28) and (29) we recover τK and
τY , whose distributional properties we present in Tables 3a and 3b.
       We estimate the following regression model

                                        τY,it = β0 + β1 τK,it + γXit + µj + θt ,                                     (30)

where Xi is a vector of firm-level control variables (containing R&D expenditures, Total Assets,
Intangible Assets, Earnings Retention, Long-term Debt and Profits – all scaled by the number of
employees) and µj and θt are, respectively, 4-digit-industry- and time-fixed effects. The time-span
of our analysis is 1995-2014. Firm-level control variables and industry- and time-fixed effects are
included to capture other factors and unobserved heterogeneities that are not addressed in our
framework. In the regression analysis we impose τY < 1 and τK < 50 in order to control for outlier
effects.8
   8
       To give an example, for instance, it can be the case that R&D intensive firms receive subsidies from the government
based on their output.




                                                               22
    We present estimation results for the regression specification (30) in Table 4. After controlling for
a variety of firm-level controls and industry and time fixed-effects, the regression result shows that
the correlation between τK and τY is negative and it is statistically significant at 1% level – providing
an indirect – but an important – empirical basis for the validity of our theoretical structure.


6     Identification, Firm-level Productivity and Aggregation

In this section we present the identification of firm-specific distortions (ηK , ηY , φ) and the technology-
frontier (z) using firm-level data and the measurement of firm-level physical and revenue produc-
tivities (TFPQ and TFPR), aggregating which we will then also develop industry-level measures of
total factor productivity (TFP).


6.1    Identifying Distortions

The steps that allow the identification of firm-specific distortions are as follows:

    1. We utilize estimates for industry-level production flexibility, ρ, from Oberfield and Raval (2014)
       and Raval (2015), who quantify production flexibility parameters using a Generalized Constant
       Elasticity of Substitution production function across 4-digit manufacturing industry-clusters
       of the US economy. Estimates of ρ are provided in Table 2. As we present in Table 2, among
       manufacturing industries, estimates of ρ are found to take negative values, inducing the interior
       techniques choice that we derived in Section 3 as the unique optimal solution for all firms that
       we will cover in our data.

    2. As described in the previous section, we estimate α at the level of each industry using U.S.
       NBER Productivity Database (Table 2).

    3. We apply the identification steps also utilized by Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and

         a. assume σ = 3 and r = 1.1,
                                            1
         b. and normalize κJ ≡ (P σ YJ )− σ−1 = 1.

    Then using firm-level observables on total cost of capital (TC ), total labor expenditures (wL),
total revenues (TR), capital (K ) and the industry-level structural parameters we uniquely identify
ηK , ηY and φ. Specifically, the sum of total cost of capital and the total cost of labor gives us a
total cost (T C) figure. Using, T C and T R in (16) provides the output distortion as

                                        σ c(r, w; φ, ηK )Y     σ      TC
                         T R = pY =                        =                 ,
                                       σ−1   (1 − ηY )       σ − 1 (1 − ηY )



                                                     23
or, after simplification,
                                                     σ TC       σ TC
                                        1 − ηY =            ≡          .                            (31)
                                                   σ − 1 pY   σ − 1 TR
We then recall from (29) that
                                                                             1−ρ
                                            1−α        σ−1                 pY       ρ
                            (1 + φ) =                            (1 − ηY )    −1       .            (32)
                                             α          σ                  wL
Using (31), wL, and T C in (32) identifies the technique distortion:
                                                           1−ρ
                                             1 − α TC            ρ
                                (1 + φ) =               −1         .                                (33)
                                               α     wL
Finally, using (33), T C, wL and K in (23), we back out the capital distortion:
                                                          1
                                            1 + ηK =        (T C − wL).                             (34)
                                                         rK
Therefore, three independent structural relations - by using information on T C/T R, T C/wL and
(T C − wL)/K - separately and uniquely identify each of (ηK , ηY , φ). Finally, using κJ = 1 in the
demand equation as in Hsieh and Klenow (2009) we identify an augmented measure of ẑ as:
                                                                               σ
                                         1                          (pY d ) σ−1
                     ẑ ≡ z λα (1 − λ)1−α ρ =
                           
                                                                                            1   ,   (35)
                                                       [(γK (ηK , φ)K)ρ + (γL (ηK , φ)L)ρ ] ρ
where
                                                                                  
                                                       (1−α) 1−ρ
                                                 −(1−α) 
                                        w            α            ρ
                     γK     ≡                                        (1 + φ)1−α ,
                                    r(1 + ηK )     1−α
                                                           
                                          α      −α 1−ρ
                                    w            α       ρ
                     γL     ≡                                 (1 + φ)−α .
                                r(1 + ηK )      1−α
As an important conclusion of these identification steps, we stress that we did not need to assign a
value for λ to recover firm-specific distortions and the technology-frontier of the firm.


6.2     Firm-level Total Factor Productivity

We are now ready to use ηK , ηY , φ and ẑ to develop measures of firm-level productivity. To
establish an industry-level measure of TFP, at first we need to define firm-level physical and revenue
productivities (TFPQ and TFPR). We work with two alternative measures of TFPQ, based on which
we then also measure TFPR under two alternatives.
   In our first TFPQ measure (which we will refer as TFPQ1), we suppose that the firm – instead
of being exposed to the staged-decision making process that we analyzed so far – starts out with a
TFPQ such that when it solves the neoclassical cost minimization problem it ends up with the unit
cost function that we expressed at (26). Specifically, we solve for TFPQ1 recursively using

                                        min        r(1 + ηK ) + wL                                  (36)
                                        K,L
                                        s.t.       G = T F P Q1 · f (K, L),                         (37)

                                                           24
and recovering the T F P Q1 which would yield the unit cost function (that we derived using our
4-staged decision program) specified at (26) as
                                      α       1     !1−α
         (1 + φ)α  α  ρ1 r(1 + ηK )
                  
                                            1−α ρ w                        ρ      ρ−1
                                                                                       ρ
     c=                                                       1 + α (1 + φ) 1−ρ − 1       .
             z       λ         α            1−λ    1−α
     The production function in the form of T F P Q1 · f (K, L) that yields (26) is uniquely expressed
as
                                       ρ1                                                 1−ρ
                   λα (1 − λ)1−α
                                                                               ρ
                                                       −α                                    ρ     α 1−α
               G=z α                         (1 + φ)            1 + α((1 + φ)   1−ρ   − 1)      ·K  L },
                   α (1 − α)1−α                                                                  | {z
                                                                                                =f (K,L)
with
                                             −1                       ρ       1−ρ
                 T F P Q1 = ẑ αα (1 − α)1−α ρ (1 + φ)−α 1 + α((1 + φ) 1−ρ − 1)
                                                                                 ρ
                                                                                     ,                     (38)
where T F P Q1 is maximized at φ∗ = 0.
     Having specified T F P Q1, next we measure TFPR1, where T F P R1 = p · T F P Q1 as standard in
the literature. Using the pricing equation (16) and the expression for T F P Q1 at (38) we get
                                                         1−α
                                                               (1 + ηK )α
                                                  
                                        σ  r α      w
                          T F P R1 =                                      ,                    (39)
                                      σ−1 α         1−α          1 − ηY
which is identical to the TFPR measure of Hsieh and Klenow (2009).
     As our second TFPQ measure, which we call T F P Q2, we set
                                                             1
                              T F P Q2 = ẑ = z λα (1 − λ)1−α ρ ,
                                               
                                                                                                           (40)

and then from T F P R2 = p · T F P Q2, we obtain
                                    1−α                                             ρ−1
                                          (1 + ηK )α
                             
                  σ  r α       w                                          ρ         ρ
     T F P R2 =                                      (1 + φ)α 1 + α((1 + φ) 1−ρ − 1)      .                (41)
                σ−1 α          1−α          1 − ηY
     We can notice three important features of the two alternative physical productivity specifications,
namely T F P Q1 and T F P Q2:

     1. Factor and output distortions (ηK , ηY ) only affect T F P R in both specifications.

     2. Technique distortions (φ) only affect T F P Q1 in the first specification.

     3. Technique distortions (φ) only affect T F P R2 in the second specification.

     4. Therefore, while TFPQ1 measure accounts all gains from improving technique distortions to
        the physical productivity, the TFPQ2 measure accounts all technique distortion gains to the
        revenue productivity.

     As we will delineate in the next section these two alternative TFPQ (and TFPR) specifications
provide quantitatively similar insights when measuring the aggregate industry TFP and estimating
the TFP effects of firm-specific distortions. This property is essential because it will ensure that our
quantitative findings are not sensitive to special-case measurements of firm-level productivities (i.e.,
(T F P Q1, T F P R1) vs. (T F P Q2, T F P R2)).

                                                            25
6.3   Industry-level Total Factor Productivity

We are now ready to develop a measure for industry-level TFP. In order to do so, we first observe
that the aggregate price index for an industry – composed of M firms – is given by
                                                                1
                                                M
                                                             ! σ−1
                                                X
                                         P =          pσ−1           .
                                                i=1

Using T F P R = p · T F P Q, we can re-write the aggregate price index as
                                                                    1
                                          M 
                                                                 ! σ−1
                                              T F P Q σ−1
                                          X          
                                   P =                                   .                       (42)
                                                 TFPR
                                          i=1

Denoting the industry-level aggregate revenue productivity with T F P R, we can observe that

                                                     TFPR
                                               P =        ,
                                                      TFP
using which together with (42) we express a closed-form measure of industry-wide TFP.
                                                                            1
                                         M           σ−1               ! σ−1
                                         X       TFPR
                              TFP =         TFPQ                                 .               (43)
                                                 TFPR
                                         i=1

Finally, we note that the industry-wide aggregate T F P R can be recovered as
                                    1−α                                             ρ−1
                                          (1 + ηK )α
                             
                  σ  r α      w                                           ρ         ρ
      TFPR =                                         (1 + φ)α 1 + α((1 + φ) 1−ρ − 1)      ,      (44)
                σ−1 α          1−α          1 − ηY

where 1 + ηK , 1 − ηY , and 1 + φ are industry-wide averages across firms. Finally, we note from (43)
that – as in standard models of misallocation and TFP – when firm-level TFPR across all firms are
equalized in an industry, such that T F P R = T F P R for every firm, industry-wide TFP becomes a
function of the aggregation of firm-level TFPQs.


7     Quantitative Analysis

We have established several important properties of a generalized production framework with en-
dogenous techniques choice and distortions. We are now prepared to utilize firm-level data and
conduct quantitative exercises to illustrate the effects of capital, output and technique distortions
on aggregate industry-TFPs.


7.1   Firm-level Data

To conduct our quantitative analysis, we use firm-level balance sheet data, for publicly traded-firms,
from Compustat North America’s Fundamentals Annual database. For this purpose we use several

                                                     26
waves of cross-sectional manufacturing sector data between the years of 1995 and 2015. For our ag-
gregation analysis, we concentrate on the 4-digit SIC manufacturing industry clusters that we list in
Table 1, which are “Food & Tobacco”, “Paper & Printing”, “Chemicals and Petrol-Rubber-Plastic”,
“Primary & Fabricated Metal”, “Machinery Manufacturing”, “Electrical Equipment Manufactur-
ing”, and “Transportation Equipment Manufacturing”.
       The key firm-level variables that are required for our identification and aggregation purposes are
annual figures for labor, capital, total cost of labor, total cost of capital and total revenues from sales.
We construct the variables of interest as follows.

   1. Labor (L) is captured by the total number of employees data item in Compustat North
         America Fundamentals Annual (the name of the variable in the database is emp).

   2. Capital (K) is generated by applying the inventory accumulation method using property, plant
         and equipment gross and net totals data items in Compustat North America Fundamentals
         Annual (data-names ppegt and ppent).9

   3. Total labor cost (wL) is captured by the total staff expense data item in Compustat North
         America Fundamentals Annual (data name xlr ).

   4. Total capital cost (r(1 + ηK )K) is generated by summing up the capital expenditures data
         item in Compustat North America Fundamentals Annual for the current period with r(1−δ)K
         from the previous period, where r = 1.1 and δ = 0.05 as in Hsieh Klenow (2009). (data name
         for capital expenditures is capx ).

   5. Total revenue (T R) is captured by the total revenue data item in Compustat North America
         Fundamentals Annual (data name revt).

       In Table 5 we provide descriptive statistics with respect to the distribution of these five firm-level
variables across establishments for the years between 1995-2014 in manufacturing industry clusters
that we focus on in the quantitative analysis.
       The industry-level parameters are extracted from NBER productivity database and existing
research. To summarize again, (i) capital’s share in technology menu (α) is computed using the
NBER productivity database and (ii) industry-level production flexibility parameter estimates (ρ)
are from Oberfield and Raval (2014) and Raval (2015). To the end of the latter, the authors utilize
U.S. manufacturing data between 1987-2007 in order to estimate factor substitutability parameters
for a generalized CES production function. Both α and ρ vary across manufacturing industry-clusters
   9
       We apply the inventory accumulation as follows. We set the value of the initial capital stock equal to the first
available entry of ppegt. After having set the value of the initial capital stock we let the capital accumulate using
kit = (1 − δ)kit−1 + iit , where we compute the net investment as iit − δkit = ppentit+1 − ppentit .



                                                           27
as we document in Table 2. To the end of the key industry-level production flexibility parameter of
the framework, we note that “Food & Tobacco” and “Transportation Equipment Manufacturing”
industries are the most flexible industry-clusters whereas “Primary & Fabricated Metal” industry is
the least flexible industry.
   Finally we set σ = 3 as a benchmark value so that our quantitative strategy and findings can
be comparable to the existing literature. In Section 7.4.2 we will check the sensitivity of our results
with respect to variations in r and σ.


7.2   Benchmark

Based on the data items listed above we execute the identification strategy, proxy firm level measures
of TFPQ and TFPR (using the two alternative methods, (T F P Qi, T F P Ri), i = 1, 2) and finally
quantify the benchmark TFP by using the aggregation rule (43) for each industry-cluster over the
time-period 1995-2015 - as we described in Section 6. As an important quantitative feature of the
benchmark framework, we choose the limit techniques aK and aL such that the distribution of
technique distortions satisfies φ ∈ [0.999, 30] in every industry-cluster. In this section, as well as in
the rest of the quantitative analysis, we present results for the years of 1995, 2005 and 2014, where
2014 is the last year of observations in our data. In the Online Appendix we provide results for
additional years between 1996-2012.
   Table 6 presents relative TFP estimates across the distribution of manufacturing industry-
clusters. When presenting the TFP estimates, in each year we set the TFP of the industry-cluster
with the lowest measured TFP in a particular year equal to 1 and then provide the TFP estimate
of each industry relative to this base-industry.
   The TFP estimates in Table 6 reveal that the ranking of the TFPs across the 7 manufacturing
industry clusters largely remains the same when TFPs are ranked according to the physical produc-
tivity measure TFPQ1 or according to the measure TFPQ2. Specifically, in years 2005 and 2014
the TFP-ranking of industries coincide completely with TFPQ1 and TFPQ2 physical-productivity
measures. For the year of 1995 the ranking of TFPs is mostly unaltered as well when switching from
TFPQ1 measure to TFPQ2, with the exception that the most- and the second-most productive
industries change ordering when the physical productivity measurement is altered.
   In Tables 7a-7c, we provide distributional properties with respect to TFPQ and TFPR measures
– in logs, whose aggregations provide the TFP estimates presented in Table 6. For each industry-
cluster, the distributional properties of TFPQ1, TFPR1 and TFPR2 are relatively stable over-time.
In Table 7 we do not provide the properties of TFPQ2 measure, to which we refer in the next block
of tables, because T F P Q2 = ẑ.
   In Tables 8a-8d we present the distributional properties (means and standard deviations) of firm-
specific distortions ηK , ηY and φ and also firm-level technology frontier ẑ. Table 8a illustrates that


                                                   28
from 1995 to 2014 the average firm across all manufacturing industries switched from being slightly
subsidized to being slightly taxed when it comes to capital distortions. For output distortions, ηY ’s,
as presented in Table 8b, a wide dispersion is observed for many industries, which will turn out
to be important for misallocation and TFP accounting. Importantly, technique distortions, φ’s, are
different than zero-optimum throughout the years and across the industry clusters – with significantly
large dispersions, which promotes technique distortions as a potentially important barrier for TFP
growth. Finally, Table 8d shows that the distribution of ln(ẑ) (equivalent to TFPQ2) is relatively
stable over-time, aligning with the stability of over-time variation in TFPQ1, TFPR1 and TFPR2
that we established in Tables 7a-7c.


7.3     Counterfactual Experiments with the Benchmark TFP Specification

We use the TFP measure developed at (43) in order to conduct counterfactual quantitative ex-
periments and to understand by what proportion the TFP of each manufacturing industry-cluster
would rise (or deteriorate) if we were to reduce the distortions originating from capital, output and
technique decisions of the production process.
   Before we proceed with our results we would like to note that for the case of TFPQ2 measure,
we will only provide quantitative results with respect to technique distortions, because the measured
impacts of capital and output distortions on industry-TFPs do not vary with the measurement of
TFPQ. This is the case because capital and output distortions affect the industry TFP through firm-
specific TFPR dispersion under both TFPQ specifications. Finally, the counterfactuals presented in
this section focus on the years of 1995, 2005 and 2014 while a wider coverage of counterfactual TFP
results over the period 1996-2012 are reported in the Online Appendix Tables OA1a-OA1d.


7.3.1    Reducing Distortions under Productivity Measures (TFPQ1,TFPR1)

We set each distortion one-at-a-time for each firm equal to zero and compute the resulting TFP
gains (or losses). Specifically, in each quantitative exercise we shut down a particular source of
heterogeneity resulting from capital, output or technique distortions, respectively by setting ηK =
0, or ηY = 0, or φ = 0 for all firms in an industry, re-compute firm-level TFPQs and TFPRs
resulting from this exercise, measure the counterfactual TFP and report the ratio between the
counterfactual TFP and the benchmark TFP in Tables 9a-9d. Therefore, in Tables 9a-9d as well
as in all counterfactual experiment tables of the quantitative analysis ∆T F P > 1 indicates an
expansion in the industry-TFP after the removal of the distortions, whereas ∆T F P < 1 implies a
contraction.
   In Table 9a we report the TFP gains resulting from setting ηK = 0 for all firms. When ηK = 0 is
set for all firms, this also affects the industry-wide T F P R, which contains a geometric average of cap-
ital distortions. Taking into account this implication of the quantitative experiment for the aggregate

                                                   29
industry revenue productivity along-side the implied changes in firm-specific revenue productivities,
we re-compute the resulting TFP using (43) and report the ratio between the counterfactual TFP
and the benchmark TFP in Table 9a.
   The results in Table 9a reveal that the dispersions in capital distortions are not very important
in determining industry-TFPs for manufacturing industry-clusters. Specifically, reducing capital
distortions (both taxes and subsidies) to zero for all firms raises the industry TFP only marginally.
For the year of 2014, the largest impact of eliminating capital distortions are obtained for the cases of
“Electrical Equipment” and “Metal” industry-clusters, respectively, with 3.4% and 1.6% expansion
of the aggregate industry-TFP. In 2014, for the remaining industry-clusters, the effects of capital
distortions and the resulting misallocation on industry TFPs are less than 1%. The overall effect of
“capital misallocation” on industry TFPs is smaller for the years of 1995 and 2005 – with negative
net aggregate effects of removing capital distortions fully for the case of some industries (such as
“Paper” and “Metal” in 1995 and “Food”, “Metal” and “Machinery” in 2005). The reason for
such negative consequences from removing capital distortions is associated with “subsidized capital
finance” on average, which can be observed from the distributional properties of ηK that we present
in Table 8a.
   The negligible TFP consequences of capital distortions that we capture in our framework aligns
with the findings of Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek (2013). Using a measured TFP approach and
secondary bond price data for publicly traded firms from the U.S., Gilchrist, Sim and Zakrajsek
(2013) show that the dispersion in borrowing costs observed in the bond-price data for manufacturing
firms results in an efficiency loss due to capital misallocation which is equivalent of 1-to-2 percent
of the measured benchmark TFP. Our overall findings with respect to the TFP effects of capital
distortions are also within the range of few percentage points as we present in Table 9a.
   We then proceed and report in Table 9b the TFP effects from setting the output distortions
equal to ηY = 0 for all firms. Similar to the case of ηK , when ηY = 0 is set for all firms, this
affects the industry-wide T F P R. The quantitative results show that the role of output distortions
is much more substantial compared to capital distortions in determining TFP losses. Even when a
few outlier-cases are put aside, the overall positive TFP effects of output distortions are as high as
80-90% (“Machinery” and “Electrical Equipment” industry-clusters) of the benchmark TFP – with
30-40% potential TFP gains on average across clusters of manufacturing industries and over time
from removing output distortions.
   Finally, Table 9c reports the TFP effects resulting from setting φ = 0 for all firms. Different
from the cases of ηK = 0 and ηY = 0, when φ distortions are shut down to zero for all firms
under the TFPQ1 measure, industry-wide TFPR is not affected – with productivity gains channeled
through the increases in firm-specific TFPQs only. The results show that technique distortions are
quantitatively very significant in generating efficiency losses and reducing industry TFPs, where in


                                                   30
some industry cases (such as 5 out of 7 industries for the year of 2014) the TFP effects of technique
distortions are even stronger than those of output distortions. In all three years, for which we provide
quantitative results, reducing the technique distortions to zero for all firms results in TFP gains that
for most industries exceed 100% of the benchmark industry TFP.
   As we illustrate in the Online Appendix Tables OA1a-OA1d, strong and persistent quantitative
effects of technique distortions and relatively negligible effects of capital distortions are present not
only for a selected few years, but for a wide coverage of years between 1996-2012.


7.3.2   Reducing Distortions under Productivity Measures (TFPQ2,TFPR2)

We repeat the previous quantitative analysis for the case of TFPQ2 measure in order to ensure
the robustness of our quantitative results with respect to the measurement of physical productivity
of firms. As already highlighted before, when doing that, we only provide results from technique
distortion exercises, since the implications of capital and output distortions for industry TFPs remain
the same under the two alternative TFPQ measures.
   In this alternative framework the TFP effects of technique distortions get channeled through
the TFPR dispersion. We again set φ equal to zero for all firms and compute TFP effects in every
industry-cluster and report them in Table 9d. Our results indicate that, although the TFP effects
of technique distortions slightly contract under the TFPQ2 measure, the overall effects remain sub-
stantially large throughout the years and across the manufacturing industry clusters. One exception
to this pattern is the “Food-Tobacco” industry for the year of 2005: in that particular year, the
variance of technique distortions equals to zero for the Food-Tobacco industry and hence there are
no TFPR-dispersion driven gains to be obtained for the aggregate industry TFP.
   We conclude that the two alternative productivity measures that we construct generate overall
comparable TFP effects of technique distortions. Thus, our main quantitative findings are not
sensitive to special-case measurements of firm-level productivities.


7.3.3   Industry Flexibility ρ and TFP Gains

The results presented in Tables 9c and 9d reveal the substantial implications of technique distortions
for industry TFPs. An important feature of our theoretical structure is the mitigating effect of
industrial production flexibility, ρ, on counterproductive consequences of technique distortions. Next
we investigate the quantitative relevance of this theoretical channel. Specifically, we are interested
in addressing the following question: How does the industry-level production flexibility affect the
TFP consequences of technique distortions?
   As one can observe in the expressions for TFPQ1 (at (38)) and TFPR2 (at (41)), flexibility of
production mitigates technique distortions in generating efficiency losses for industry TFPs as long
as the conditions set at item (iii) of Proposition 4.1 hold. We first note that the condition (iii-a)

                                                   31
holds for all industries except for “Food & Tobacco” industry. Second, the lower limit aL that
we impose at the industry level ensures that the condition (iii-b) holds for the “Food & Tobacco”
industry. Therefore, for all industries in our quantitative framework the conditions of Proposition 4.1
get satisfied; and hence, theoretically the higher the industry-level flexibility of production the lower
should be the distortionary effects of technique distortions. Hence, the TFP gains from removing
technique distortions are expected to be the highest in industries in which the efficient units of
capital and labor are strong complements.
   The quantitative results in Tables 9c and 9d are in line with this key theoretical prediction. The
industries with the lowest level of production flexibility (where factors are more complementary),
as we presented in Table 2, are “Metal”, “Paper” and “Chemicals”. When focusing on the average
TFP gains over the three years of our study, these industries feature the largest measured TFP
gains from removing technique distortions. On the other extreme, “Food-Tobacco” industry has
the highest production flexibility (where factors are more substitutive), which also turns out to
have the smallest measured TFP gains from correcting technique distortions. Machinery, Electrical
Equipments and Transportation Equipments industries have intermediate levels of flexibility and
these industries have mediocre potential of TFP-growth from correcting technique distortions.
   In order to deepen our understanding on the interaction of industry-flexibility with technique
distortions and the quantitative implications of this interaction, we conduct another set of counter-
factuals: In Tables 9e-9h we raise the level of production of flexibility for each industry to -0.15,
which is the level of production flexibility of the Food-Tobacco industry. This allows us to account
for the contribution of ρ in explaining the variation in TFP gains across industry-clusters from cor-
recting distortions. Before we present the quantitative results we note that “counterfactual TFP
exercises with the counterfactual-ρ” generate two opposing effects resulting from the expansion in
ρ. On the one hand, as we discussed above in detail, the rise in ρ lowers the benefits from reducing
technique distortions. This property follows from Proposition 4.1. On the other hand, increasing
ρ raises TFP because of its direct impact on TFPQ1 as well as TFPQ2, a property which follows
from the result in Proposition 3.2. If the former effect is strong enough to dominate the latter,
compared to what we have obtained in Tables 9c and 9d, we should record quantitatively smaller
TFP expansions from φ-counterfactuals in Tables 9g and 9h.
   The results in Tables 9e-9h reveal that for almost all industry-year combinations the mitigation
effect of ρ is quite strong such that production flexibility explains a large fraction of the TFP gains
from reducing technique distortions. Although the TFP gains from reducing ηK and ηY distortions
do also change slightly when, ceteris paribus, ρ is increased to the level of Food-Tobacco industry, the
reductions in TFP gains from removing technique distortions contract substantially: by raising ρ of
each industry to the level of the industry with the lowest ρ we observe that a large part of the inter-
industry variation in TFP-gains from reducing technique distortions vanishes. As we also report in


                                                   32
Tables 9g and 9h, 40-80% of TFP gains from reducing technique distortions are explained by the
difference between the actual flexibility of production in a particular industry and the flexibility
of production of the Food-Tobacco industry. Hence, we conclude that industry-wide production
flexibility is a quantitatively important component to explain the TFP consequences of technique
distortions.


7.4     Robustness

In this section we test the sensitivity of our main findings with respect to the specification of produc-
tion framework, the benchmark values of macro parameters, outliers and finally the mismeasurement
of firm-level variables.


7.4.1    Comparison with the Special Case of Neoclassical Production Function

We study counterfactual experiments in an hypothetical environment, where firm-level T F P Q is
given by T F P Q = ẑ, aK = aL = ẑ is exogenously set for all firms and there is no flexible techniques
decision-making at the firm-level. This specification represents the framework of a Neoclassical Pro-
duction Framework: firms choose optimal factor quantities to minimize the unit cost of production,
given a production technology specified as
                                                                1
                                      Y = z [λK ρ + (1 − λ)Lρ ] ρ .                                 (45)

   Using this framework we conduct a set of quantitative experiments, where we reduce capital
and output distortions to zero when the technology is given by (45) and the firms are subject to
heterogenous factor (ηK ) and output (ηY ) distortions, which we continue to back out using (31) and
(34). The results from shutting ηK and ηY distortions to zero are presented in Tables 10a and 10b
for the years of 1995, 2005 and 2014. The results indicate that capital distortions are essentially
negligible while output distortions are substantial in determining the TFP efficiency losses – aligning
with a key finding from the benchmark analysis. This quantitative property provides a robustness
check for that the results that we obtained with respective to the relative importance of capital and
output distortions for TFP in our benchmark specification are not artifact of the way we specified
the benchmark production framework.


7.4.2    Sensitivity to r and σ

Following a standard practice in the misalloaction literature, we had exogenously specified the values
of two parameters of the model: The average cost of capital r and the elasticity of substitution across
varieties, captured by σ. When choosing the values for these parameters we followed the benchmark
parameterization assumptions of Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and set r = 1.1 and σ = 3. In Tables


                                                   33
11a-b and 12a-b we check the sensitivity of our TFP counterfactual results with respect to variations
in r and σ, where in Tables 11a and 11b we vary the value of σ to 2 and 4 and in Tables 12a and
12b we vary the value of r to 1.07 and 1.13 from benchmark values. We report counterfactual TFP
results from shutting down ηK , ηY , φ (with TFPQ1 and TFPQ2 measures) one at-a-time as we did
in benchmark exercises.
   To preserve space we provide the sensitivity analysis only for the year of 2014, although quanti-
tative results that we do not report here are quite comparable for the years of 1995 and 2005. The
counterfactual TFP results from these alternative specifications exhibit no change from our previ-
ous primary quantitative findings: (i) Capital distortions are relatively negligible next to output
and technique distortions in determining industry TFPs, (ii) both output and technique distortions
are quantitatively substantial for efficiency losses, (iii) with the exception of “Food-Tobacco” and
“Chemicals” industry-clusters technique distortions account for the largest efficiency losses in man-
ufacturing industries, (iv) ρ mitigates the distortionary effects of technique distortions and (v) the
magnitude of the quantitative effects that we capture in each counterfactual experiment throughout
the alternative specifications are comparable to the benchmark quantitative effects that we report
in Tables 9a-9d.


7.4.3   Outliers

Next we perform a robustness test by eliminating outlier-firms from the analysis based on the level of
revenue productivities (with measures of TFPR1 and TFPR2) for the year of 2014. Before we present
the analysis, we first note that when backing out the technique distortions we already truncated the
distribution of TFPQs and TFPRs across firms by limiting the extreme values that φ can take. In
the counterfactual TFP analysis of Table 13a (and in 13b) we take a further step and leave out any
firm from our analysis whose TFPR1 (and TFPR2) takes a value that is not within 1.5 standard
deviation of industry’s mean TFPR1 (and TFPR2) for the year of 2014. The resulting sample sizes
(relative to the benchmark sample size) from this exercise are presented in the last columns of Tables
13a and 13b.
   As the last columns of Tables 13a and 13b document, the sample sizes shrink by 10-20% when we
perform this sub-sample analysis. However, the primary quantitative findings from the benchmark
analysis fully remain. Capital distortions are negligible and with the exception of Food-Tobacco
and Chemicals industry-clusters technique distortions account for the largest efficiency losses in
manufacturing industries – followed by output distortions. The industry-level production flexibility,
ρ, is a quantitatively important mitigator of technique distortions. Finally, the magnitude of the
TFP effects of each distortion that we capture after getting rid off outlier observations are highly
comparable to the benchmark quantitative effects in Tables 9a-9d.




                                                 34
7.4.4   Mismeasurement

There are five firm-level variables that we utilize in the quantitative analysis: Revenues, number
of employees, total cost of labor, capital stock, and total cost of capital. Among these five vari-
ables, capital stock and total cost of capital are the two variables which might be prone to some
mismeasurement issues. In this section we provide robustness checks to address concerns regarding
the mismeasurement of capital stock and the total cost of capital, where we delineate a theoretical
discussion with respect to the former and a quantitative analysis to address the latter.
   At first we consider the case of mismeasured capital stock. Specifically, we suppose that the
“capital stock” measure that we observe, call it K̂ from now on, is a distorted version of the actual
capital stock utilized by the firm (denoted with K). We note that the measurement problem is not
with “total capital expenditures” but with “capital stock”. That is K̂(1 + uK ) = K, where uK is
a firm-specific capital mismeasurement distortion. Then the maximization program stays the same
for the firm as we have analyzed previously (with 3 distortions), but the K/L ratio equation, whose
left-hand-side comes from the data becomes:
                                                         ρ
                                 K̂   w α     (1 + φ) 1−ρ 1
                                    =       ·                 .
                                 L    r 1−α     1 + ηK 1 + uK
   Then, the 3 equations to be utilized to back out distortions become:
                                                 σ TC
                                     1 − ηY   =         .                                        (46)
                                               σ − 1 pY
                                                             1−ρ
                                                 1 − α TC         ρ
                                       1+φ =               −1        .                           (47)
                                                   α    wL
                                                          
                                               wL T C
                          (1 + ηK )(1 + uK ) =          −1 .                                     (48)
                                               rK̂ wL
   The output distortion ηY still gets uniquely identified by (46) and φ is uniquely identified by
(47), whereas (1 + ηK )(1 + uK ) gets jointly identified through (48) but we cannot decouple ηK and
uK . Hence, even if we allow for a fourth firm-level distortion as mismeasured capital, we can still
identify φ – exactly the way we identified it in the benchmark framework – as well as the output
distortion ηY . This property is a theoretical robustness check for the identification of technique
distortion term φ.
   Since allowing for mismeasured capital stock does not affect the identification of technique and
output distortions, it does not influence their quantitative impact on TFP either. Identification
of capital distortions could of course get affected by capital-stock mismeasurement. But, given
the relatively negligible quantitative effects of capital distortions that we captured – that are also
comparable to the previous findings of the literature – we move on and study the quantitative
implications of mismeasured total cost of capital.
   Mismeasured cost of capital could affect the identification of distortions. Since we cannot observe
mismeasurement in cost of capital at the firm-level, we study two aggregate cases that we present in

                                                  35
Tables 14a and 14b. In the TFP counterfactuals that we investigate in these two tables, we assume
that the total cost of capital is larger (smaller) than the benchmark measurement by 15% in the
analysis of Table 14a (Table 14b) and investigate the TFP efficiency loss implications of capital,
output and technique distortions, by shutting down ηK , ηY and φ to zero one-at-a-time for the year
of 2014. The results that we present in Tables 14a and 14b reveal that the counterfactual TFP
results we obtained in the benchmark framework are robust to a uniform mismeasurement of total
cost of capital across firms: Specifically, assuming that the total cost of capital is systematically
larger (or smaller) than what we captured in the benchmark framework for all firms does not alter
the key findings that capital distortions are relatively negligible, whereas primarily technique and
then output distortions are key drivers of TFP efficiency losses.


7.5   Cross-Country Comparisons

A final question that we would like to tackle is whether persistent and quantitatively significant
efficiency losses associated with technique distortions are visible in developing-country firm-level
data as well. If so, this would have important development policy implications. In order to address
this point we refer to the Global-database of Compustat for publicly-traded firm-level data from
China and India. We choose the Compustat Global-data for the cross-country analysis in order to
work with data-sets that are by nature comparable to the U.S. Benchmark: working with Compustat
Global allows to compare publicly traded firms in the U.S. with the publicly traded firms in the
context of developing countries.
   Publicly traded firms in developing countries are expected to be large firms as well (as for the
case of the U.S.) to not face heavy distortionary taxes when financing capital inputs. Such publicly
traded firms are expected not to be subject of heavy financial market imperfections, which loom large
in developing countries. If at all, they might be even on the beneficiary-side of financial frictions.
However, technique distortions could also be important for the efficiency losses of publicly traded
firms in developing countries.
   Tables 15a and 15b present descriptive statistics of firm-level variables for the country-cases of
India and China using data from Compustat Global Fundamentals Annual for the years between
1995-2014. When compared against what we have presented in Table 5 (for the U.S. Benchmark), the
distributional properties in Tables 15a-15b exhibit firm-size distributions that are skewed towards
larger scale establishments in both China and India.
   We then back-out distortions and technology frontiers at firm-level – using the benchmark U.S.
parameters, and then conduct the TFP counterfactual analyses: we shut down each source of distor-
tion one-at-a-time and present the ratio between the resulting counterfactual TFP and the bench-
mark TFP in Tables 16a-16b (17a-17b) for India (for China). Because of the limited availability
of manufacturing data observations in the year of 1995 for India and China we report results only


                                                 36
for the years of 2005 and 2014. Furthermore, for the case of China in 2005 manufacturing data for
Food-Tobacco and Paper industry clusters are not available.
    Tables 16a and 17a exhibit that for Indian and Chinese manufacturing industries reducing the
capital distortions as a whole do not stimulate the aggregate TFPs any more than they would for
U.S. manufacturing industries. And, in some industry clusters reducing capital distortions lower
industry TFPs. This quantitative result we explain by the “relatively large” firms that we get to
study when using Compustat Global data.
    Moving onto output distortions, for both China and India we observe that in both 2005 and
2014 shutting down ηY = 0 increases TFP by quantitatively significant proportions, for most of
the manufacturing industries. This is a similar pattern that we had also obtained for the U.S.
benchmark.
    Importantly, removing technique distortions results in substantial TFP gains in both China and
India: In both years of the analysis, technique distortions generate substantial efficiency losses
for the aggregate industry-TFPs – with larger TFP gains from correcting technique distortions in
industries with low production flexibility. Also, when compared against the efficiency effects of
technique distortions in the U.S., in China and India the effects of technique distortions are not
any lower than those of in the U.S. benchmark. This quantitative result suggests that technique
distortions should be regarded as an important issue for developing countries as well.


8    Concluding Remarks

We have developed a generalized production framework, embedding a deep flexibility concept, where
firms decide on their factor inputs as well as production techniques that determine the efficient use
of factors under currently operating technologies. We have characterized factor demands, techniques
choice and the unit cost of production. By allowing firms to differ in technology frontiers, capital
finance frictions, techniques and output distortions, we have developed an aggregated measure of
industry TFP. We have then examined the consequences of capital, output and technique distortions
for the aggregate productivity as well as the interplay of the TFP effects of distortions with industry-
level production flexibility, by also providing an empirical justification for our theoretical structure.
    The theoretical results indicate that while both capital finance and technique distortions raise the
unit cost of production, substitutability between technique augmented factors reduces the efficiency
losses borne by technique distortions: The detrimental effects of capital financing distortions are
independent of the extent of industry-level production flexibility, but the detrimental effects of
technique capability distortions are amplified by industry’s production flexibility.
    We have undertaken a number of quantitative exercises by calibrating the model to fit the
observations from firm-level data in U.S. manufacturing industries. Our quantitative results can be



                                                   37
summarized as the following:

  1. For all manufacturing industry-clusters – throughout the years of the analysis – technique dis-
     tortions and output distortions account for substantial efficiency losses at the level of industry
     TFPs.

  2. The impact of technique distortions in generating efficiency losses in the aggregate is larger
     than that of the output distortions for many industry-clusters and over time.

  3. The inefficiency impact of technique distortions get mitigated by the industry-wide flexibility
     of production. This means, TFP gains from removing technique distortions are larger in
     industries where efficient units of capital and labor exhibit strong complementarity.

  4. Capital distortions have a relatively negligible impact on industry-level TFPs – matching the
     findings of past research which have utilized similar datasets.

  5. Our key quantitative finding – that technique distortions are significantly more important than
     capital finance distortions and at least as important as output distortions for industry TFPs –
     is robust to the measurement of firm-level productivity, parameter specifications, outliers and
     the mismeasurement of capital-stock and total cost of capital variables.

  6. We also conduct quantitative experiments for two developing countries, namely for India and
     China. Cross-country comparisons with Chinese and Indian firm-level data show that technique
     distortions are the most substantial source of TFP-efficiency losses in these two developing
     countries as well.

   An important policy implication arising from our analysis is that to achieve greater production
efficiency, mitigating technique distortions should be granted with high priority. Such policy ar-
rangement may include, but not limited to, tax incentives for adjusting production techniques and
subsidies for flexible manufacturing systems, both on equal grounds for all firms in the same industry.
   There are several extensions that can build upon the analysis of this paper, such as the inves-
tigation of the interplay between technique flexibility and industry flexibility on extensive margin
misallocation, the analysis of different market structures in driving the importance of technique
distortions for the aggregate productivity and endogenizing technique distortions. These extensions
we leave to future work.




                                                  38
References
 [1] Acemoglu, D., 2003. Labor-and-capital-augmenting technical change. Journal of the European
     Economic Association, 1, 1-37.

 [2] Adler, P., Goldoftas, B., and Levine, D.I., 1999. Flexibility Versus Efficiency? A Case Study of
     Model Changeovers in the Toyota Production System. Organization Science, 10, 43-68.

 [3] Aral, S., Brynjolfsson, E., Wu, L., 2012. Testing three-way complementarities: performance
     pay, monitoring and information technology. Management Science, 58(5): 913-931.

 [4] Asker, J., .Collard-Wexler, A., de Loecker, J., 2014. Dynamic inputs and resource (mis) alloca-
     tion, Journal of Political Economy, 122, 1013-1063.

 [5] Banerjee, A.V., Duflo, E., 2005. Growth theory through the lens of development economics.
     Handbook of Economic Growth, 1, 473-552.

 [6] Banerjee, A., Moll, B., 2010. Why Does Misallocation Persist? American Economic Journal:
     Macroeconomics, 2, 189-206.

 [7] Bartelsman, E., Haltiwanger, J., Scarpetta, S., 2013. Cross-country differences in productivity:
     The role of allocation and selection. American Economic Review, 103, 305-334.

 [8] Beach, R., Muhlemann, A. P., Price, D. H. R., Paterson, A., and Sharp, J. A., 2000. A review
     of manufacturing flexibility. European Journal of Operational Research, 122(1), 41-57.

 [9] Berry, W.L., Cooper, M.C., 1999. Manufacturing flexibility: methods for measuring the impact
     of product variety on performance in process industries. Journal of Operations Management,
     17, 163-178.

[10] Bils, M., Klenow, P., Ruane, C., 2017. Misallocation or Mismeasurement? Working Paper,
     Stanford University.

[11] Bresnahan, T. F., Brynjolfsson, E., Hitt, L. M., 2002. Information Technology, Workplace
     Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, 117, 339-376.

[12] Brynjolfsson, E., Milgrom, P. 2013. Complementarity in organizations. In: R, Gibbons and J.
     Roberts (eds.), The Handbook of Organizational Economics, Princeton University Press (chapter
     1).

[13] Buera, F.J., Shin, Y., 2013. Financial Frictions and the Persistence of History: A Quantitative
     Exploration. Journal of Political Economy, 121, 221-272.

[14] Caselli, F., 1999. Technological Revolutions. American Economic Review, 89, 78-102.

[15] Caselli, F., Coleman, J., 2006. The World Technology Frontier. American Economic Review,
     499-522.

[16] Chang, P. L., Tsai, C. T., 2002. Finding the niche position: competition strategy of Taiwan’s
     IC design industry. Technovation, 22(2), 101-111.



                                                 39
[17] Cusumano, M. A., Fine, C. H., Suarez, F. F., 1996. An Empirical Study of Flexibility in Printed
     Circuit Board Assembly. Operations Research, 44, 223-240.

[18] Eaton, B. C., Schmitt, N., 1994. Flexible Manufacturing and Market Structure. American
     Economic Review, 84, 875-888.

[19] De Meyer, A., J. Nakane, J. G. Miller, and K. Ferdows, 1989. Flexibility: The Next Competitive
     Battle. Strategic Management Journal, 10, 135-144.

[20] Fiegenbaum, Avi, and Aneel Karnani, 1991. Output Flexibility: A Competitive Advantage for
     Small Firms. Strategic Management Journal, 12, 101-114.

[21] Fine, C. H., Freund, R. M., 1990. Optimal investment in product-flexible manufacturing capac-
     ity. Management Science, 36(4), 449-466.

[22] Fine, C., 1993. Developments in manufacturing technology and economic evaluation models.
     In: A.H.G. Rinnooy Kan and P.H. Zipkin (eds.), Handbook in OR and MS, S.C. Graves, Vol.
     4, North-Holland.

[23] Gerwin, D., 1993. Manufacturing Flexibility: A Strategic Perspective. Management Science, 39,
     395-410.

[24] Ghemawat, P., Levinthal, D. A., 2008. Choice structures and business strategy. Management
     Science, 54(9): 1638-1651.

[25] Gilchrist, S., Sim, J. W., and Zakrajsek, E., 2013. Misallocation and financial market frictions:
     Some direct evidence from the dispersion in borrowing costs. Review of Economic Dynamics,
     16(1), 159-176.

[26] Hopenhayn, H. A, 2014. Firms, misallocation, and aggregate productivity: A review. Annual
     Review of Economics, 6, 735-770.

[27] Houthakker, H.S., 1955-1956. The Pareto Distribution and the Cobb-Douglas Production Func-
     tion in Activity Analysis. Review of Economic Studies, 23, 27-31.

[28] Hsieh, C., Klenow, P, 2009. Misallocation and Manufacturing TFP in China and India. Quarterly
     Journal of Economics, 124, 1403-1448.

[29] Ichniowski, C., Shaw, K., Prennushi, G., 1997. The effects of human resource management
     practices on productivity: A study of steel finishing lines. The American Economic Review,
     291-313.

[30] Jaikumar, R., 1986. Postindustrial manufacturing. Harvard Business Review, 64, 69-76.

[31] Jeffers, P.I., Muhamma, W.A., Nault, B.R., 2008. Information Technology and Process Per-
     formance: An Empirical Investigation of the Interaction Between IT and Non-IT Resources.
     Decision Sciences, 39(4): 703-735.

[32] Jones, C., 2005. The shape of production functions and the direction of technical change. Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 120, 517-549.




                                                 40
[33] Jones C. I., 2013. Misallocation, input-output economics, and economic growth. In: D. Ace-
     moglu, M. Arellano and E. Dekel (eds.), Advances in Economics and Econometrics. Tenth World
     Congress. Volume II. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

[34] Jones, R. A., Ostroy, J. M., 1984. Flexibility and Uncertainty. Review of Economic Studies, 51,
     13-32.

[35] Jovanovic, B., 2014. Misallocation and Growth. American Economic Review, 104, 1149-1171.

[36] Kortum, S. S., 1997. Research, patenting, and technological change. Econometrica, 1389-1419.

[37] Ling-yee, L., Ogunmokun, G. O., 2008. An empirical study of manufacturing flexibility of
     exporting firms in China: how do strategic and organizational contexts matter? Industrial
     Marketing Management, 37(6), 738-751.

[38] MacDuffie, J. P., 1995. Human resource bundles and manufacturing performance: Organiza-
     tional logic and flexible production systems in the world auto industry. ILR Review, 48(2),
     197-221.

[39] Midrigan, V., Xu, D., 2013. Finance and Misallocation: Evidence from Plant-Level Data. Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 104, 422-458.

[40] Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1990. The Economics of Modern Manufacturing: Technology, Strategy,
     and Organization. American Economic Review, 80, 511-528.

[41] Milgrom, P., Roberts, J., 1995. Complementarities and fit Strategy, structure, and organiza-
     tional change in manufacturing, Journal of Accounting and Economics, 19, 179-208.

[42] Moll, B., 2014. Productivity Losses from Financial Frictions: Can Self-financing Undo Capital
     Misallocation? American Economic Review, 104(10), 3186-3221.

[43] Netessine, S., Dobson, G., and Shumsky, R. A., 2002. Flexible service capacity: Optimal invest-
     ment and the impact of demand correlation. Operations Research, 50(2), 375-388.

[44] Oberfield, E., Raval, D., 2014. Micro Data and Macro Technology. Working Paper, Princeton
     University.

[45] Pailles, N., Yannou, B., Bocquet, J.-C., 1996. Manufacturing Flexibility: A New Evaluation.
     In: P. Chedmail, J.-C. Bocquet, and D. Davidson (eds.), Integrated Design and Manufacturing
     in Mechanical Engineering, Springer.

[46] Powell, T.C., Dent-Micallef, A., 1997. Information Technology as a Competitive Advantage:
     The Role of Human, Business, and Technology Resources. Strategic Management Journal, 18(5),
     375-405.

[47] Prescott, E. C., 1998. Lawrence R. Klein lecture 1997: Needed: A theory of total factor pro-
     ductivity. International economic review, 525-551.

[48] Raval, D., 2015. The Micro Elasticity of Substitution and Non-Neutral Technology. Working
     Paper.

[49] Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2008. Policy Distortions and Aggregate Productivity with Hetero-
     geneous Establishments. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11, 707-720.

                                                41
[50] Restuccia, D., Rogerson, R., 2013. Misallocation and Productivity. Review of Economic Dy-
     namics, 16, 1-10.

[51] Rivkin, J. W., Siggelkow, N., 2003. Balancing Search and Stability: Interdependencies Among
     Elements of Organizational Design. Management Science, 49(3), 290-311.

[52] Roller, L. H., Tombak, M. M., 1991. Strategic aspects of flexible production technologies: theory
     and evidence. International Journal of Production Economics, 23, 197-204.

[53] Roller, L., Tombak, M.M., 1993. Competition and Investment in Flexible Technologies. Man-
     agement Science, 39, 107-114.

[54] Shah, R., Ward, P. T., 2007. Defining and developing measures of lean production. Journal of
     Operations Management, 25, 785-805.

[55] Song, Z., Wu, G., 2015. Identifying Capital Misallocation. Working Paper, Nanyang Technolog-
     ical University.

[56] Siggelkow, N., 2002. Misperceiving interactions among complements and substitutes: Organi-
     zational consequences. Management Science, 48(7), 900-916.

[57] Stigler, G., 1939. Production and Distribution in the Short Run. Journal of Political Economy,
     47, 305-328.

[58] Tombak, M., 1990. A Strategic Analysis of Investment in Flexible Manufacturing Systems,
     European Journal of Operational Research, 47, 225-238.

[59] Tombak, M., de Meyer, A., 1988. Flexibility and FMS: An Empirical Analysis, IEEE Transac-
     tions on Engineering Management, 35, 101-107.

[60] Wang, P., Wong, T., and Yip, C.K., 2014. Technology Assimilation and Development Account-
     ing. Working Paper, Washington University in St. Louis.

[61] Womack, J. P., Jones, D. T., Roos, D., 1990. The Machine That Changed the World. Free Press.




                                                 42
                      Table 1. Classification of Manufacturing Industries


               Industry Cluster                                   4-digit SIC Classification


               Food-Tobacco                                                2000-2199
               Paper-Printing                                              2600-2799
               Chemichal-Petrol-Rubber/Plastic                             2800-3099
               Primary/Fabricated Metal                                    3300-3499
               Machinery (Industrial+Commercial+Computer)                  3500-3599
               Electrical Equipment                                        3600-3699
               Transportation Equipment                                    3700-3799




                                  Table 2. Structural Parameters


                              Industry Cluster                      α       ρ




                              Food-Tobacco                         0.22   -0.15
                              Paper-Printing                       0.25   -1.5
                              Chemichal-Petrol-Rubber/Plastic      0.39   -1.08
                              Primary/Fabricated Metal             0.42   -2.92
                              Machinery                            0.12   -0.92
                              Electrical Equipment                 0.14   -0.96
                              Transportation Equipment             0.23   -0.3



    Table Notes. Share of capital in technology menu, α, is from NBER Productivity Database. Industry-
level production flexibility, ρ, is from Oberfield and Raval (2014) and Raval (2015), who estimate flexibility
of production parameters for a variety of manufacturing industries using Census data from the time period
1987-2007.




                                                     43
                         Table 3a. Distributional Properties of τK


        Industry Cluster                    Mean         Std. Dev.    Min       Max      # Obs.




        Food-Tobacco                         -0.89         0.37       -0.99     4.04      434
        Paper-Printing                       -0.87         0.35       -0.99     8.07      815
        Chemichal-Petrol-Rubber/Plastic      -0.70         2.16        -1       49.59    2,077
        Primary/Fabricated Metal             -0.80         0.55       -0.99     3.29      452
        Machinery                            -0.71         0.49       -0.99     5.33      425
        Electrical Equipment                 -0.12         3.63       -0.99     45.63     672
        Transportation Equipment             -0.83         0.30       -0.99     2.14      593



Table Notes. τK is identified using the structural equation (28).




                         Table 3b. Distributional Properties of τY


       Industry Cluster                    Mean         Std. Dev.      Min        Max     # Obs.




       Food-Tobacco                         0.20          5.16        -85.37      0.99     434
       Paper-Printing                       0.22          6.56       -181.49      0.99     815
       Chemichal-Petrol-Rubber/Plastic     -7.34         156.68      -6683.07     0.99    2,077
       Primary/Fabricated Metal             0.49          0.32        -1.59       0.97     452
       Machinery                           -1.67          28.12      -557.86      0.99     425
       Electrical Equipment                -2.85          34.28      -784.81      0.99     672
       Transportation Equipment             0.29          4.39       -103.67      0.97     593



Table Notes. τY is identified using the structural equation (29).




                                                   44
                     Table 4. τY and τK : Regression with τY on the LHS


                                  τK                             -3.71∗∗∗
                                                                  (1.44)


                         R&D per Employee                        -0.071
                                                                  (0.12)
                        Assets per Employee                      -0.0028
                                                                (0.0026)
                     Intangible Assets per Emp                    0.015
                                                                 (0.013)
                       Earnings Ret. per Emp                    -0.00054
                                                                (0.0010)
                     Long-Term Debt per Emp                      -0.011
                                                                 (0.014)
                           Profits per Emp                      0.055∗∗∗
                                                                 (0.014)


                             Industry FE                           Yes
                               Year FE                             Yes


                            Observations                          2,334


                                 R-sq                            0.0246

    Table Notes. Firm-level variables are from Compustat North America Fundamentals Annual for the
years between 1995-2014. Structural distortions τK and τY are identified using equations (28) and (29)
respectively. The regressions use firm-level information for the years between 1995-2014 from manufacturing
industry clusters listed in Table 1. We trim outliers by imposing τY < 1 and τK < 50.




                                                    45
                    Table 5. Distributional Properties of Firm-Variables


                  Variable Name                Mean        Std. Dev.       Min    Max      # Obs.




                  ln(Labor)                        6.47         2.41          0   13.52     50805
                  ln(Capital)                   17.29           3.01      6.90    26.54     56077
                  ln(Total Labor Cost)          18.02           3.40      9.10    25.59     5116
                  ln(Total Capital Cost)        17.32           3.09      6.90    26.65     55955
                  ln(Total Revenue)             18.62           2.96      6.90    26.88     54476



    Table Notes. Firm-level averages are from Compustat North America Fundamentals Annual for the
years between 1995-2014 – from firms operational in manufacturing industry-clusters presented in Table 1.
Labor is in units of employees whereas the other firm-level variables are in dollar values.




                                Table 6. Industry-level Relative TFPs


                                       1995                       2005                    2014

               Industry       TFPQ1      TFPQ2            TFPQ1        TFPQ2      TFPQ1      TFPQ2




               Food-To.         34.79      37.08          36.85        57.04        1             1
               Paper            10.89      17.56          14.00        18.96      10.29       14.15
               Chem             52.34      67.07          64.87        63.82       7.61          7.75
               Metal            3.08          5.08         2.85          8.04      4.01          4.37
               Mach.             1             1           9.45          9.20      9.86       11.12
               Elect            3.13          3.15          1             1        2.79          2.83
               Trans.Eq         54.12      53.56          11.65        14.90      36.96       36.96



    Table Notes. TFP is computed using equation (43). In every year the industry with the lowest TFP is
chosen as the base-industry and assigned with a value of T F P = 1. For the remaining industries we report
industry TFPs relative to this base industry.


                                                           46
                                Table 7a. Distribution of lnTFPQ1


                       1995                           2005                          2014

 Industry    Mean      S. Dev    # Obs     Mean      S. Dev   # Obs      Mean      S. Dev    # Obs




 Food-To.    23.84      1.86       23       24.44     1.51       15       23.70     2.00       36
 Paper       20.28      1.23       32       21.03     1.07       18       20.89     1.01       29
 Chem        20.53      2.22       64       20.82     2.49       64       19.73     3.44       103
 Metal       19.27      0.864      14       19.19     1.71       13       19.65     1.59       23
 Mach.       19.40      3.21       10       19.47     2.23       22       20.68     1.55       25
 Elect       18.77      2.17       24       18.52     2.97       22       19.09     1.56       34
 Trans.Eq    22.90      2.15       13       21.21     3.24       20       22.05     2.10       25



   Table Notes. Physical-productivity measure TFPQ1 is computed using equation (38). Industry Mean
and Standard Deviations (S. Dev) are cross-sectional statistics for every industry in a given year.



                                Table 7b. Distribution of lnTFPR1


                       1995                           2005                          2014

 Industry    Mean      S. Dev    # Obs     Mean      S. Dev   # Obs      Mean      S. Dev    # Obs




 Food-To.    12.83      0.787      23       12.68     0.686      15       12.81     1.05       36
 Paper        9.98      0.561      32       10.51     0.606      18       10.47     0.548      29
 Chem        10.24      0.652      64       10.48     1.20       64       10.34     1.59       103
 Metal        8.59      0.431      14       8.43      0.856      13       8.86      0.897      23
 Mach.        9.99      1.37       10       10.33     0.768      22       10.92     0.710      25
 Elect        9.10      0.758      24       8.93      1.46       22       9.23      0.769      34
 Trans.Eq    11.45      0.565      13       10.89     1.25       20       11.26     0.791      25




                                                47
  Table Notes. Revenue-productivity measure TFPR1 is computed using equation (39).



                              Table 7c. Distribution of lnTFPR2


                      1995                          2005                             2014

Industry    Mean     S. Dev    # Obs      Mean     S. Dev    # Obs      Mean     S. Dev      # Obs




Food-To.    13.30     0.772      23       13.15     0.686       15      13.26        1.03     36
Paper       11.33     0.528      32       11.55     0.645       18      11.48        0.628    29
Chem        11.77     0.966      64       11.96      1.23       64      11.50        1.83     103
Metal        9.41     0.313      14        9.86     0.675       13      10.03        0.551    23
Mach.       10.61      1.47      10       11.26     0.795       22      11.87        0.450    25
Elect        9.74     0.909      24        9.76      1.38       22       9.79        0.567    34
Trans.Eq    12.20     0.700      13       11.78      1.35       20      12.16        0.820    25



  Table Notes. Revenue-productivity measure TFPR2 is computed using equation (41).




                                              48
                                  Table 8a. Distribution of ηK


                       1995                            2005                        2014

Industry    Mean      S. Dev    # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs     Mean     S. Dev   # Obs




Food-To.    -0.103     0.390       24       0.355      1.19        17     0.110    0.153     37
Paper       -0.032     0.177       34       0.081      0.158       19     0.097    0.144     29
Chem        -0.015     0.264       75       0.065      0.195       75     0.066    0.532     147
Metal        0.046     0.131       14       0.050      0.292       14     0.061    0.283     27
Mach.       -0.190     0.397       16       0.184      0.398       22     0.059    0.267     36
Elect       -0.087     0.349       31       0.117      0.390       26     0.044    0.276     44
Trans.Eq    -0.220     0.448       13       0.645      2.57        20     0.111    0.253     27



  Table Notes. Capital distortion ηK is backed out using equation (34).


                                  Table 8b. Distribution of ηY


                       1995                            2005                        2014

Industry    Mean      S. Dev    # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs     Mean     S. Dev   # Obs




Food-To.    -0.030      1.48       24       -0.128     0.541       17     -0.438    1.92     37
Paper       -0.590      1.21       34       -0.305     0.623       19     -0.458   0.851     29
Chem        -0.969      2.51       72       -1.44      5.37        70     -30.27   204.00    115
Metal       -0.695     0.696       14       -0.459     0.745       15     -0.356   0.795     27
Mach.        -8.82     33.53       14       -0.537     1.31        22     -0.455    2.34     35
Elect       -0.513      3.38       31       -2.63      11.68       25     -0.203   0.737     39
Trans.Eq     0.096     0.468       13       -3.20      11.71       20     0.004    0.650     28



  Table Notes. Output distortion ηY is backed out using equation (31).

                                                 49
                                    Table 8c. Distribution of φ


                       1995                             2005                            2014

Industry    Mean      S. Dev     # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs




Food-To.    -0.954     0.208        24      -0.999      0.000       17       -0.210     4.79        37
Paper       -0.956     0.162        34      -0.927      0.160       19       -0.922     0.138       29
Chem        -0.932     0.289        76      -0.480      3.55        76        1.45      7.20       150
Metal       -0.915     0.099        14      -0.971      0.020       15       -0.640     1.30        27
Mach.        1.63       7.83        16      -0.201      3.60        22       -.847      0.564       36
Elect        0.557      1.11        31       1.15       6.60        27        .723      4.88        44
Trans.Eq     1.84       8.61        13      -0.976      0.081       20       -0.163     4.20        28



  Table Notes. Technique distortion φ is backed out using equation (33).


                            Table 8d. Distribution of ln(ẑ) = T F P Q2


                       1995                             2005                            2014

Industry    Mean      S. Dev     # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs       Mean      S. Dev    # Obs




Food-To.     24.30      1.84        23       24.90      1.51        15       24.15      2.01        36
Paper        21.63      1.16        32       22.07      1.52        18       21.90      1.38        29
Chem         22.07      2.73        64       22.29      2.88        64       20.89      3.98       103
Metal        20.10      1.11        14       20.62      1.84        13       20.81      1.55        23
Mach.        20.02      3.31        10       20.40      2.33        22       21.63      1.48        25
Elect        19.41      2.17        24       19.36      3.07        22       19.65      1.77        34
Trans.Eq     23.65      2.38        13       22.10      3.41        20       22.95      2.32        25



  Table Notes. Augmented technology frontier ẑ is backed out using equation (35), where T F P Q2 ≡ ẑ.


                                                 50
     Table 9a. Setting ηK = 0 with TFPQ1                 Table 9b. Setting ηY = 0 with TFPQ1
                  1995       2005       2014                        1995       2005       2014
     Industry    ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP             Industry   ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP




     Food-To.     1.012      0.979      1.000            Food-To.    1.242     1.109      50.667
     Paper        0.993      1.002      1.007            Paper       1.420     1.002      1.193
     Chem         1.004      1.000      1.005            Chem        1.442     2.611      30.908
     Metal        0.989      0.984      1.016            Metal       1.060     1.128      1.062
     Mach.        1.023      0.996      1.006            Mach.      11.164     1.992      1.754
     Elect        1.032      1.021      1.034            Elect       1.845     8.264      1.473
     Trans.Eq     1.042      0.940      1.004            Trans.Eq    1.014     3.716      1.527



    Table Notes. Tables 9a-b present counterfactual experiments, where ηK = 0 (9a) or ηY = 0 (9b) is set
for all firms and the resulting counterfactual TFPs are computed. The reported ∆ T F P is the ratio between
the counterfactual TFP and the benchmark TFP. ∆T F P > 1 indicates an expansion in the industry-TFP
after the removal of the distortions, whereas ∆T F P < 1 implies a contraction.

      Table 9c. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ1                 Table 9d. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ2
                    1995       2005       2014                      1995       2005       2014
      Industry     ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP           Industry   ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP




      Food-To.      1.626      1.592      1.577          Food-To.   1.486      1.000      1.577
      Paper         5.287      9.730      9.208          Paper      3.193      6.984      6.694
      Chem          9.346      9.362     10.050          Chem       7.105      9.249      9.860
      Metal         3.768     14.044      7.996          Metal      2.229      4.845      7.344
      Mach.         3.089      3.106      3.526          Mach.      3.009      3.102      3.122
      Elect         1.642      2.925      5.747          Elect      1.587      2.843      5.662
      Trans.Eq      2.677      2.817      2.848          Trans.Eq   2.635      2.140      2.847



    Table Notes. Tables 9c-d present counterfactual experiments, where φ = 0 with TFPQ1 (9a) or φ = 0
with TFPQ2 (9b) is set for all firms and the resulting counterfactual TFPs are computed.


                                                    51
                                Table 9e. Setting ηK = 0 with TFPQ1
                                        For ρ = −0.15 in all industries
                                               1995          2005    2014
                                Industry      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




                                Food-To.       1.012         0.979   1.000
                                Paper          0.993         1.001   0.999
                                Chem           1.003         0.997   1.007
                                Metal          0.989         0.987   1.071
                                Mach.          1.032         0.996   1.007
                                Elect          1.033         1.027   1.029
                                Trans.Eq       1.044         0.939   1.005




                                Table 9f. Setting ηY = 0 with TFPQ1
                                        For ρ = −0.15 in all industries
                                               1995          2005     2014
                                Industry      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




                                Food-To.       1.242         0.979   50.667
                                Paper          1.264         1.001    0.787
                                Chem           1.320         0.997   29.130
                                Metal          0.945         0.987    0.839
                                Mach.          11.057        0.996    1.801
                                Elect          1.839         1.027    1.281
                                Trans.Eq       0.985         0.939    1.488



   Table Notes. Tables 9e-f present counterfactual experiments, where in addition to the ηK and ηY
counterfactual ρ gets set equal to 0.15 in each industry, which is the flexibility level of Food-Tobacco industry.


                                                        52
                                Table 9g. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ1
                                    For ρ = −0.15 in all industries
                                    1995                   2005                  2014

                                        Contribution           Contribution          Contribution
                Industry     ∆ TFP       of ρ to    ∆ TFP      of ρ to    ∆ TFP       of ρ to
                                         ∆ TFP                 ∆ TFP                  ∆ TFP

                Food-To.      1.626         -        1.592         -       1.577         -
                Paper         1.559        71%       1.545        84%      1.565        83%
                Chem          1.498        84%       1.478        84%      1.496        85%
                Metal         1.990        47%       1.955        86%      1.988        75%
                Mach.         1.615        48%       1.596        49%      1.563        56%
                Elect         1.985       -21%       1.808        38%      1.915        67%
                Trans.Eq      1.642        39%       1.698        39%      1.705        40%




                                Table 9h. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ1
                                    For ρ = −0.15 in all industries
                                    1995                   2005                  2014

                                        Contribution           Contribution          Contribution
                Industry     ∆ TFP       of ρ to    ∆ TFP      of ρ to    ∆ TFP       of ρ to
                                         ∆ TFP                 ∆ TFP                  ∆ TFP

                Food-To.      1.486         -          1           -       1.577         -
                Paper         1.389        57%       1.308        81%      1.269        81%
                Chem          1.481        79%       1.475        84%      1.470        85%
                Metal         1.029        54%         1          89%      1.987        73%
                Mach.         1.588        47%       1.595        49%      1.563        50%
                Elect         1.976       -25%       1.767        38%      1.848        67%
                Trans.Eq      1.615        39%       1.356        37%      1.704        40%

    Table Notes. Tables 9g-h present counterfactual experiments, where in addition to the φ counterfactual
ρ gets set equal to 0.15 in each industry. In “Contribution of ρ to ∆ T F P ” column, a positive (negative)
percentage illustrates by what percentage the original gains from setting φ = 0 reported in Table 9c would
contract (expand) if the industry’s flexibility equaled 0.15 instead of its original level reported in Table 2.



                                                      53
                  Table 10a. Setting ηK = 0 with Neo-classical Production


                                             1995         2005      2014
                                Industry    ∆ TFP         ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP




                                Food-To.     1.017        0.975     1.000
                                Paper        0.995        1.001     0.994
                                Chem         1.003        0.998     1.006
                                Metal        0.990        0.988     1.118
                                Mach.        1.043        0.996     1.008
                                Elect        1.037        1.049     1.020
                                Trans.Eq     1.048        0.939     1.005




                  Table 10b. Setting ηY = 0 with Neo-classical Production


                                             1995         2005      2014
                                Industry    ∆ TFP         ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP




                                Food-To.     1.807        1.624    71.520
                                Paper        2.724        2.639     3.029
                                Chem         6.889        14.179   175.894
                                Metal        0.389        3.392     0.818
                                Mach.        15.795       2.675     4.040
                                Elect        0.670        1.615     1.026
                                Trans.Eq     2.204        8.624     3.651



   Table Notes. Tables 10a-b present counterfactual experiments, where – instead of the staged-decision
making production with techniques choice – a Neo-classical production framework is used with ẑ ≡ T F P Q.


                                                     54
Table 11a. Misallocation Counterfactuals with σ = 2 (Year 2014)


                     ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP
                     from     from     from     from
                     ηK = 0   ηY = 0   φ=0      φ=0
          Industry                     (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)




          Food-To.   1.000    50.064   1.577    1.577
          Paper      1.007    1.123    7.110    5.169
          Chem       1.005    29.266   9.778    9.592
          Metal      1.016    1.014    5.825    5.350
          Mach.      1.006    1.718    3.271    2.897
          Elect      1.034    1.381    4.011    3.952
          Trans.Eq   1.000    1.563    2.838    2.836




Table 11b. Misallocation Counterfactuals with σ = 4 (Year 2014)


                     ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP
                     from     from     from     from
                     ηK = 0   ηY = 0   φ=0      φ=0
          Industry                     (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)




          Food-To.   1.000    51.854   1.577    1.577
          Paper      1.008    1.254    10.629   7.728
          Chem       1.006    32.231   10.183   9.989
          Metal      1.017    1.124    10.572   9.710
          Mach.      1.006    1.801    3.865    3.423
          Elect      1.035    1.556    7.086    6.981
          Trans.Eq   1.008    1.484    2.853    2.852



                               55
Table 12a. Misallocation Counterfactuals with r = 1.07 (Year 2014)


                      ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP
                      from     from     from     from
                      ηK = 0   ηY = 0   φ=0      φ=0
           Industry                     (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)




           Food-To.   1.000    51.689   1.577    1.577
           Paper      1.007    1.188    9.058    6.661
           Chem       1.005    31.461   10.042   9.847
           Metal      1.016    1.062    7.913    7.280
           Mach.      1.006    1.757    3.431    3.060
           Elect      1.034    1.470    5.706    5.615
           Trans.Eq   1.004    1.545    2.847    2.847




Table 12b. Misallocation Counterfactuals with r = 1.13 (Year 2014)


                      ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP
                      from     from     from     from
                      ηK = 0   ηY = 0   φ=0      φ=0
           Industry                     (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)




           Food-To.   1.000    49.686   1.577    1.575
           Paper      1.007    1.197    9.361    6.729
           Chem       1.006    30.380   10.058   9.871
           Metal      1.017    1.062    8.080    7.409
           Mach.      1.006    1.752    3.620    3.184
           Elect      1.034    1.476    5.790    5.711
           Trans.Eq   1.004    1.510    2.849    2.845



                                56
Table 13a. Misallocation Counterfactuals with constrained TFPR1-dispersion (Year 2014)


                             ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP
                              from       from        from       from     % Bench-Sample

                             ηK = 0      ηY = 0     φ=0         φ=0
                Industry                           (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)

                Food-To.      1.000      50.667     1.577       1.577            83%
                Paper         1.007      1.193      9.208       6.694            89%
                Chem          1.005      30.908     10.050      9.860            90%
                Metal         1.016      1.062      7.996       7.344            91%
                Mach.         1.006      1.754      3.526       3.122            92%
                Elect         1.034      1.4734     5.747       5.662            85%
                Trans.Eq      1.004      1.527      2.848       2.847            92%



Table 13b. Misallocation Counterfactuals with constrained TFPR2-dispersion (Year 2014)


                             ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP
                              from       from        from       from     % Bench-Sample

                             ηK = 0      ηY = 0     φ=0         φ=0
                Industry                           (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)

                Food-To.      1.000      50.667     1.577       1.577            80%
                Paper         1.007      1.193      9.208       6.694            89%
                Chem          1.005      30.908     10.050      9.860            88%
                Metal         1.016      1.062      7.996       7.344            86%
                Mach.         1.006      1.754      3.526       3.122            80%
                Elect         1.034      1.473      5.747       5.662            82%
                Trans.Eq      1.004      1.527      2.848       2.847            88%

    Table Notes. In the quantitative experiments of Table 13a (13b) we leave out any firm whose TFPR1
(TFPR2) is not within 1.5 standard deviation of the mean TFPR1 (TFPR2). The column Bench-Sample
reports the size of the constrained sample relative to the size of the original sample – after leaving out the
outliers.




                                                     57
Table 14a. Misallocation Counterfactuals with 15% larger TC of Capital (Year 2014)


                                      ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP
                                       from      from       from      from
                                      ηK = 0     ηY = 0     φ=0       φ=0
                         Industry                         (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)



                         Food-To.      1.000     45.168     1.577     1.556
                         Paper         1.007     1.212     10.082     6.834
                         Chem          1.006     28.111    10.096     9.942
                         Metal         1.016     1.061      8.507     7.540
                         Mach.         1.006     1.737      4.032     3.411
                         Elect         1.034     1.496      6.051     6.005
                         Trans.Eq      1.004     1.423      2.852     2.822




Table 14b. Misallocation Counterfactuals with 15% smaller TC of Capital (Year 2014)


                                      ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP
                                       from      from       from      from
                                      ηK = 0     ηY = 0     φ=0       φ=0
                         Industry                         (TFPQ1) (TFPQ2)



                         Food-To.      1.000     57.718     1.577     1.577
                         Paper         1.007     1.173      8.386     6.549
                         Chem          1.005     34.599     9.990     9.753
                         Metal         1.016     1.065      7.371     6.999
                         Mach.         1.006     1.776      2.946     2.723
                         Elect         1.034     1.452      5.499     5.347
                         Trans.Eq      1.003     1.662      2.844     2.843


    Table Notes. In the quantitative experiments of Table 14a (14b) we raise (lower) the measured total
cost of capital for all firms in our analysis by 15%.


                                                  58
               Table 15a. India: Distributional Properties of Firm-Variables


               Variable Name            Mean    Std. Dev.    Min    Max        # Obs.




               ln(Labor)                 6.63      6.63       0     11.79       16977
               ln(Capital)              19.92      2.00      8.69   28.42       67828
               ln(Total Labor Cost)     17.44      2.45      6.90   26.27       68561
               ln(Total Capital Cost)   19.75      2.01      7.60   28.47       63520
               ln(Total Revenue)        20.35      2.25      6.90   29.21       69837




              Table 15b. China: Distributional Properties of Firm-Variables


              Variable Name             Mean    Std. Dev.    Min     Max        # Obs.




              ln(Labor)                 7.57      1.50       3.04    13.22       3448
              ln(Capital)               19.68     1.23      13.15    28.29       59039
              ln(Total Labor Cost)      18.51     1.78       8.29    25.51       4576
              ln(Total Capital Cost)    19.80     1.62      10.89    28.43       54759
              ln(Total Revenue)         20.49     1.27       6.90    28.45       64684



    Table Notes. Firm-level averages in Tables 15a-b are from Compustat-Global Fundamentals Annual for
the years between 1995-2014 – from firms operational in manufacturing industry-clusters presented in Table
1.




                                                   59
   Table 16a. India: Setting ηK = 0 and ηY = 0


                       ηK = 0            ηY = 0

                2005        2014     2005      2014
 Industry      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP




 Food-To.       1.043       1.007    6.518     6.103
 Paper          1.020       0.991    4.124     4.890
 Chem           1.016       0.648    7.984     1.561
 Metal          0.989       0.899    2.435     66.260
 Mach.          0.997       1.009    2.895     2.885
 Elect          0.978       0.998    1.702     16.003
 Trans.Eq       1.000       1.016    1.464     4.715




            Table 16b. India: Setting φ = 0


             φ = 0 with T F P Q1    φ = 0 with T F P Q2

               2005        2014      2005      2014
Industry      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP




Food-To.       1.506       1.503     1.497     1.501
Paper         10.497      14.494     2.475     13.399
Chem           9.903      12.978     4.405     8.966
Metal         11.416      26.939     9.705     18.070
Mach.          7.011       6.758     1.940     6.379
Elect          7.675       9.995     4.760     4.976
Trans.Eq       2.608       2.604     1.000     2.061




                            60
  Table 17a. China: Setting ηK = 0 and ηY = 0


                       ηK = 0            ηY = 0

               2005         2014     2005      2014
 Industry     ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP    ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP




 Food-To.       N/A         0.989    N/A       1.469
 Paper          N/A         1.030    N/A       2.585
 Chem          1.003        0.990    2.520     8.607
 Metal         0.976        0.991    2.130     4.008
 Mach.         1.037        0.946    1.724     2.026
 Elect         1.047        1.003    2.117     3.239
 Trans.Eq      1.018        0.993    0.803     1.886




           Table 17b. China: Setting φ = 0


             φ = 0 with T F P Q1    φ = 0 with T F P Q2

              2005         2014      2005      2014
Industry     ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP     ∆ TFP




Food-To.      N/A          1.538     N/A       1.000
Paper         N/A          7.733     N/A       2.081
Chem          8.166        9.921     0.838     3.008
Metal         10.939      16.274     6.044     2.912
Mach.         9.703        4.108     6.793     2.240
Elect         1.436       10.166     1.412     8.027
Trans.Eq      2.681        2.574     1.284     1.727




                            61
                                                     Appendix
     In this Appendix, we provide detailed mathematical derivations and proofs of various Lemmas and Propo-
sitions.


Benchmark Step-2 Solution: The Cost Minimizing K − L

The second-step is the standard neoclassical cost minimization problem presented at (4). Denoting the
Lagrange multiplier associated with constraint by µ1 , solving for µ1 will provide the marginal cost of producing
one extra unit of output. First order conditions with respect to K and L are derived as the following
                                                                                      1−ρ
                                K   :    r = µ1 λaρK K ρ−1 [(aK K)ρ + (aL L)ρ ]        ρ

                                                 1               ρ
                                                      −1    1
                                ⇒        K = µ11−ρ r 1−ρ λ 1−ρ aK
                                                                1−ρ
                                                                    Y;                                              (49)
                                                                                               1−ρ
                                 L :     w = µ1 (1 − λ)aρL Lρ−1 [(aK K)ρ + (aL L)ρ ]            ρ

                                                 1                         ρ
                                                      −1             1
                                ⇒        L = µ11−ρ w 1−ρ (1 − λ) 1−ρ aL1−ρ Y.                                       (50)

Putting (49) and (50) together yields to the K/L ratio at (6). Plugging K and L from (49) and (50) into the
constraint at (4) and solving for µ1 provides the unit cost of production that we presented at (7).


Benchmark Step-1 Solution: The optimized aK -aL

The first-step cost minimization problem is stated at (5). Denoting the lagrange multiplier associated with
the constraint by µ2 , we can derive the first order conditions with respect to aK and aL
                                        "   ρ              ρ−1ρ             # ρ−1
                                                                                   ρ −1
                   ρ     1     − ρ −1     r ρ−1 1−ρ  1        w              1
       aK   :   r ρ−1λ  1−ρ   aK ρ−1             λ      +           (1 − λ) 1−ρ         = µ2 αaα−1   1−α
                                                                                                K aL ,              (51)
                                        aK                   aL
                                          "       ρ
                                                 ρ−1                ρ
                                                                 ρ−1            # ρ−1
                                                                                     ρ −1
                   ρ         1
                                    ρ
                                 − ρ−1 −1     r           1     w              1
                                                                                                        −α
       aL   :   w ρ−1 (1-λ) 1−ρ aL                     λ 1−ρ +          (1-λ) 1−ρ         = µ2 (1-α)aα
                                                                                                     K aL .         (52)
                                             aK                 aL


    Solving (51) and (52) together provide us with the optimized aK /aL ratio at (8). Plugging (8) in (6)
solves for the optimized K/L ratio as a function of model parameters α and λ; and factor prices r and w as
we expressed at (9). In order to determine the levels of aK and aL as functions of z, w/r, α and ρ, we plug
(8) in H(aK , aL ) and obtain the expressions at (10) and (11). Plugging aK and aL in c̃(.) provides
                                                                 "            1−α                 α # ρ−1
                                                                                                           ρ
                            1                     − 1                    α                   1−α
                   c(w, r) = rα w1−α λα (1 − λ)1−α ρ
                                    
                                                                                      +                         .
                            z                                            1−α                   α

Finally, putting the related terms together yields the unit cost expression at (12).


Proof of Proposition 3.1

In order to evaluate the optimality of an interior solution we need to consider two relevant cases, (i) ρ ∈ (−∞, 0)
and (ii) ρ ∈ (0, 1), and check whether the unit cost function function at (12) is indeed minimized for a∗K − a∗L
that we derived at (10) and (11).



                                                            62
    Case-i: ρ ∈ (−∞, 0).

    We perturb the aK − aL choice from a∗K − a∗L we just derived by  – while keeping the firm on the same
technology menu dictated by its technology frontier z – and investigate whether the optimal  that minimizes
the unit cost is  = 0.
    Specifically, suppose that the firm operates with a capital intensity of âK = (1 + )1−α a∗K – with −1 < 
finite – instead of a∗K . Since the firm is bound by the technology frontier z, this implies that âL = (1 + )−α a∗L
so that (âK )α (âL )1−α = z. Given âK − âL , the unit cost of production becomes
                            1 α                  ρ1         !1−α
                      1     α ρ r
                                          
                                              1−α           w                                 ρ
                                                                                                       ρ−1
                                                                                                          ρ
         c(w, r; ) =                                                   (1 + )α 1 + α (1 + ) 1−ρ − 1        .   (53)
                      z     λ   α             1−λ          1−α          |               {z                  }
                                                                                            ≡Ω()



    Then,

 ∂c    c
                                    ρ
                                               ρ−1
                                                  ρ              2ρ−1
                                                                                   ρ
                                                                                            −1
                                                                                              ρ
                                                                                                 
    =       α(1 + )α−1 1 + α (1 + ) 1−ρ − 1        − α(1 + )α+ 1−ρ 1 + α (1 + ) 1−ρ − 1        . (54)
 ∂   Ω()

                   ∂c
    We note that   ∂   = 0 if and only if  = 0. Next we check whether  = 0 constitutes a global minimum or
a global maximum (and if the latter turns out to be the case the optimal aK − aL choice would be given by
a corner solution and not by (10) and (11)). There are two cases to consider:  > 0 and  < 0. We can easily
note that  = 0 constitutes a global minimum for the unit cost function if and only if
                                                                ∂c
                                               for        > 0,    > 0,                                           (55)
                                                                ∂
                                                                ∂c
                                               for        < 0,    < 0.                                           (56)
                                                                ∂


    Using (54), we can see that
                                           ∂c                                  ρ
                             for     > 0,    > 0 if (1 − α) > (1 − α)(1 + ) 1−ρ ,                               (57)
                                           ∂
                                           ∂c                                  ρ
                             for     < 0,    < 0 if (1 − α) < (1 − α)(1 + ) 1−ρ .                               (58)
                                           ∂
Both conditions hold, since 0 < α < 1 and ρ < 0. Hence, choosing aK − aL interiorly as (10) and (11) in the
second-stage minimizes the firm’s unit cost of production as long as ρ < 0.

    Case-ii: ρ ∈ (0, 1).


    Expressions (10)-(12) fully remain for the case of 1 > ρ > 0; and therefore, we do not repeat them. The
optimality conditions (54)-(58) also remain. What changes compared to the case-i is that with ρ > 0 the
conditions of optimality become
                                                                                   ρ
                                     for  > 0, (1 − α) < (1 − α)(1 + ) 1−ρ ,                                    (59)
                                                                                   ρ
                                     for  < 0, (1 − α) > (1 − α)(1 + )          1−ρ   .                         (60)




                                                             63
      Therefore, given (57)-(58), in industries with ρ ∈ (0, 1) the optimal (a∗K , a∗L ) combination is at a corner.
Hence, depending on the parameter constellations of the economy the optimal a∗K and a∗L are given by

                                                   a∗K    = aK ,                                               (61)
                                                                       1
                                                                    −α 1−α
                                                   a∗L    =        zaK                ,                        (62)

or,
                                                                            α1
                                                   a∗K    =        zaα−1
                                                                     L            ,                            (63)
                                                    a∗L   = aL .                                               (64)




Proof of Proposition 3.2

We re-write the unit cost function as
                                                                             ρ1              1−ρ
                                                                                                  ρ

                                       1 α 1−α  α        1−α −1   α
                                                                             1−α 
                           c(w, r) =     r w    λ (1 − λ)        α (1 − α)                                  (65)
                                       z
                                                                                  
                                                |      {z      }    |    {z     }
                                                              Ω1                          Ω2



      The first term inside the square brackets (Ω1 ) is greater than 1 whereas the second term (Ω2 ) is smaller
than 1. Therefore, the impact of more flexibility on cost of production depends on λ and α. Specifically, if

                                             λα (1 − λ)1−α < αα (1 − α)1−α                                     (66)

then more flexibility is desirable. In order to see the parameter conditions for which the (66) holds; note that

                                              arg max λα (1 − λ)1−α = α,
                                                     λ

which implies that the highest value the LHS of (66) could attain equals to αα (1 − α)1−α . Therefore, λα (1 −
λ)1−α ≤ αα (1 − α)1−α for all λ, α ∈ [0, 1].


Derivation of Unit Cost of Production with Distortions

Recursive solution to firm’s staged decision making process is as follows.



             Stage-4.         max (1 − ηY )pY d (p) − c(φ, η)Y d (p) = [(1 − ηY )p − c(φ, η)] Y d (p)
                                p
                                         p −σ
                    s.t.      Y d (p) =         YJ .
                                         P
First-order conditions are

                                (1 − ηY )Y d (p)    = σ [(1 − ηY )p − c(φ, η)] Y d (p)/p,
                                       (1 − ηY )p = σ [(1 − ηY )p − c(φ, η)] ,
                                                       σ      c
                                                p =               ,
                                                    σ − 1 1 − ηY

                                                               64
which provides the pricing function.

                                    Stage-3.               min r(1 + ηK )K + wL
                                                           K,L
                                                                                                                          1
                                             s.t.          Y = [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ .

First-order conditions are
                                                                                             ρ
                                                      λ (aK K)           Y
                     (1 + ηK )r     = MPK = µ
                                              λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ K
                                                   (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ       Y
                             w      = MPL = µ
                                              λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ L
                                                                        ρ
                                                  (1−λ)(aL L)      Y                                                                                 ρ        1−ρ
                                           µ λ(aK K)                                        (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ K
                                                                                                                                           
                         w                          ρ +(1−λ)(a L)ρ L
                                                              L                                                1−λ                              aL          K
                                    =                               ρ                     =            ρ     =
                     (1 + ηK )r           µ λ(aK K)λ(a K K)        Y
                                                    ρ +(1−λ)(a L)ρ K
                                                              L
                                                                                              λ (aK K) L        λ                               aK          L
                                                           ρ
                                            λ (aK K) + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ
        (1 + ηK )rK + wL = µ                                          Y , or, c = µ
                                            λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ

We can express K/L ratio and the unit cost as a function of (aK , aL ) as follows.
                                                                              1
                                                                             1−ρ                   1
                                                                                                   1−ρ                  ρ
                                                                                                                        1−ρ
                                           K                w                              λ                     aK
                                             =
                                           L            (1 + ηK )r                        1−λ                    aL

                                    (1 + ηK )rK + wL
c̃(aK , aL ; r, w)     =                                                    1
                           [λ(aK K)ρ + (1 − λ)(aL L)ρ ] ρ
                                                         1
                                                        1−ρ          1
                                                                     1−ρ   1−ρρ
                                                                           aK
                                  (1 + ηK )r (1+ηwK )r           λ
                                                                1−λ        aL       +w
                       =                                                                        ρ1
                                            1
                                             1−ρ          1
                                                         1−ρ     1−ρ ρ  ρ
                                        w            λ           aK                          ρ
                            λ aK (1+ηK )r           1−λ          aL           + (1 − λ)(aL )
                                                                                   −ρ
                                                                                   1−ρ                                −ρ
                                                                                                                       1−ρ
                                                                                                   1                                        1
                                                                    (1+ηK )r                                     w
                                                                      aK                   (λ) 1−ρ +             aL               (1 − λ) 1−ρ
                       =                                                                                                            ρ1
                                                                                       1           1       ρ ρ
                                   −1                            ρ
                                                   1
                                                                                        1−ρ       1−ρ   1−ρ
                                                                                 w              λ         aK                     ρ
                           (w)    1−ρ
                                        (1 − λ)   1−ρ
                                                        (aL )   1−ρ
                                                                         λ aK (1+ηK )r         1−λ        aL       + (1 − λ)(aL )
                                                                         −ρ
                                                                         1−ρ              1−ρ−ρ
                                                                                    1                       1
                                                         (1+ηK )r
                                                           aK                  (λ) 1−ρ + awL       (1 − λ) 1−ρ
                       =                                                          ρ                                               ρ1
                                         1
                                                                                                     −1
                                          1−ρ      1                          1                                 1         1
                                   1                                                                                            ρ
                            λ   (1+ηK )r       (λ) 1−ρ                  (aK ) 1−ρ     + (1 − λ)((w) 1−ρ (1 − λ) 1−ρ (aL ) 1−ρ )
                           "                  −ρ
                                              1−ρ                                    −ρ
                                                                                      1−ρ                       # 1−ρ
                                                                                                                   −ρ
                                (1 + ηK )r                      1               w                         1
                       =                                (λ)    1−ρ
                                                                        +                    (1 − λ)     1−ρ
                                                                                                                              .
                                   aK                                           aL


    Stage-2. The ex ante unforeseeable distortion (φ) to techniques-choice gets determined, which pushes
the techniques-combination away from the benchmark chosen in Stage-1. Since we assume that the expected
value of φ equals zero under unforeseeable mistakes, in Stage-1 the firm chooses techniques optimally:


                                                                        "                          ρ
                                                                                                  ρ−1                               ρ
                                                                                                                                    ρ−1                    # ρ−1
                                                                                                                                                               ρ
                                                                                (1 + ηK )r                    1               w                        1
           Stage-1.        min c̃(aK , aL ; r, w)              =                                         λ   1−ρ      +                    (1 − λ)    1−ρ
                           aK ,aL                                                  aK                                         aL
                                                                            1−α
                                                    s.t.                aα
                                                                         K aL   = z,

                                                                                     65
yielding ex ante optimal a∗K and a∗L
                                                           (1−α)( 1−ρ
                                                         −(1−α)    ρ )
                                                                                  (1−α)( ρ1 )
                                             w           α                 1−λ
                      a∗K     = z                                                               ,
                                         r(1 + ηK )    1−α                  λ
                                              α      −α( 1−ρ
                                                              ρ )
                                                                        −α( ρ1 )
                                        w            α              1−λ
                      a∗L     = z                                                  ,
                                    r(1 + ηK )      1−α              λ
and the distorted âK and âL as of Stage-2 then take the form of:
                                                   (1−α)( 1−ρ
                                               −(1−α)      ρ )
                                                                          (1−α)( ρ1 )
                                      w          α                 1−λ
               âK    = z                                                               (1 + φ)1−α ,
                                  r(1 + ηK )   1−α                  λ
                                      α      −α( 1−ρ
                                                      ρ )
                                                                −α( ρ1 )
                                w            α              1−λ
               âL    = z                                                  (1 + φ)−α .
                            r(1 + ηK )      1−α              λ
Finally, plugging âK and âL into the unit cost function from Stage-2 yields the final form of unit cost of
production.

                                                         1                1
                                                                                       α( 1−ρ
                                                                                             ρ )
                                      α                            −(1−α) ρ
              ((1 + φ)(1 + ηK )r) w1−α λ−α ρ (1 − λ)                               α
                                                                                  1−α
                                                                                                   
                                                                                                         α
                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                              ρ
                                                                                                                                         ρ−1
                                                                                                                                           ρ
      c =                                                                                                          (1 + φ)   1−ρ   +1
                                                      z                                                 1−α
                                                         1                1         1                    1                   ρ−1
                                      α                            −(1−α) ρ        αρ              (1−α) ρ                    ρ −(1−α)
              ((1 + φ)(1 + ηK )r) w1−α λ−α ρ (1 − λ)                          (α)       (1 − α)              α−α (1 − α)
        =                                                                                                                                  ·
                                                                          z
                                               ρ−1
                    α                 ρ             ρ
                             (1 + φ) 1−ρ + 1             ,
                   1−α
or,
                                                α                         ρ1           !1−α
                 (1 + φ)α
                                 1
                                 α ρ r(1 + ηK )
                                                               
                                                                   1−α             w            h                 ρ
                                                                                                                         i ρ−1
                                                                                                                             ρ
       c(φ; η) =                                                                                    1 + α (1 + φ) 1−ρ − 1       .
                     z           λ       α                         1−λ            1−α



Proof of Proposition 4.1

Let us define Φ ≡ 1 + φ. Suppose that ρ < 0 and φ > 0. First observe that:
                         h      ρ       i 1−ρ
                                            −ρ
                c    ∝ Φα 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1
              ∂C             h      ρ       i 1−ρ
                                                −ρ
                                                        h      ρ        i 1−ρ
                                                                            −ρ −1     ρ
                     = αΦα−1 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1        − Φα 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1          αΦ 1−ρ −1
              ∂Φ
                              h      ρ      i 1−ρ
                                                −ρ −1
                                                      nh        ρ      i       ρ
                                                                                   o
                     = αΦα−1 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1             1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1 − Φ 1−ρ
                              h      ρ      i 1−ρ
                                                −ρ −1
                                                      n                   ρ
                                                                             o
                     = αΦα−1 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1           1 − α − (1 − α) Φ 1−ρ
                                     h      ρ       i −1
                                                        ρ
                                                                   ρ
                                                                      
                     = α (1 − α) Φα−1 1 + α Φ 1−ρ − 1        1 − Φ 1−ρ > 0 for Φ > 1 and ρ < 0




                                                                     66
 And, also observe that:

                   ∂2c         ∂ h                 ρ
                                                       i −1ρ
                                                                          ρ
                                                                              
                            ∝      1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ               1 − Φ 1−ρ
                  ∂Φ∂ρ        ∂ρ
                              h               ρ
                                                  i −1ρ
                                                                     ρ
                                                                          1                         ρ
                                                                                                          
                            = 1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ               1 − Φ 1−ρ           ln   1 −  α    1 −  Φ 1−ρ
                                                                            ρ2
                                     h                           −1
                                   −1                      ρ
                                                               i   ρ  −1         1                       ρ
                                                                                                              
                              +           1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ                  α           2 ln (Φ)    1 −  Φ 1−ρ
                                   ρ                                         (1 − ρ)
                                                         −1
                                 h               ρ
                                                      i  ρ       1
                              − 1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ                         2 ln (Φ)
                                                              (1 − ρ)
                                      ρ
                                           1                          ρ
                                                                            
                            ∝   1 − Φ 1−ρ      ln    1 −  α    1 −  Φ   1−ρ
                                            ρ2
                                                                     i−1                   
                                         −1 h                      ρ                        ρ           1
                              − 1−               1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ               α 1 − Φ 1−ρ                   2 ln (Φ)
                                          ρ                                                          (1 − ρ)
                            < 0 for the case of Φ > 1 and ρ < 0 if
                                                             i−1 
                                        −1 h               ρ               ρ
                                                                              
                                  1>           1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ     α 1 − Φ 1−ρ ,                                            (67)
                                         ρ
or, if
                                                             ρ
                                                                            ρ
                                                     α 1 − Φ 1−ρ <              ,                                           (68)
                                                                            ρ−1
               ρ
                                      ρ
                                           
since 1 − Φ 1−ρ ρ12 ln 1 − α 1 − Φ 1−ρ        < 0 and               1
                                                                 (1−ρ)2
                                                                           ln (Φ) > 0. Note that (68) is a sufficient condition.
    Then we can conclude:
              ρ
    a. if α1 ρ−1  > 1, no further condition needed;
              1 ρ
      b. if   α ρ−1   < 1, we need:
                                                           −ρ
                                                         1−ρ
                                                        1        1 ρ
                                                    1−         <      ,
                                                        Φ        αρ−1
or,
                                                                       1
                                                     Φ<                     ρ−1 ,
                                                                   1 ρ         ρ
                                                             1−    α ρ−1

which is the upper bound 1 + φ̄. The case of ρ < 0 and φ < 0 produces similar “mirror image” results but
no upper bound is needed.




                                                                  67
                    Online Appendix
 Table OA1a. Setting ηK = 0 with TFPQ1 - 1996-2012


                1996        1998         2000        2002        2004
Industry        ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP         ∆ TFP      ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




Food-To.        1.017       1.015        1.006       1.000       1.001
Paper           1.002       1.007        1.001       0.995       0.999
Chem            1.004       0.996        0.997       0.983       0.989
Metal           1.014       1.025        0.804       0.974       0.995
Mach.           1.004       0.891        0.968       0.985       0.998
Elect           1.016       0.902        1.044       1.028       0.973
Trans.Eq        1.017       1.004        1.005       1.036       1.000




                           Table OA1a ctd.


                        2006        2008         2010        2012
        Industry    ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




        Food-To.        1.002       1.003        0.998       0.998
        Paper           1.008       0.997        1.004       1.008
        Chem            0.996       0.986        0.980       1.010
        Metal           0.946       1.014        1.033       1.000
        Mach.           1.004       1.002        1.026       1.011
        Elect           0.932       0.933        1.002       1.075
        Trans.Eq        1.020       1.003        0.987       1.001




                                    68
 Table OA1b. Setting ηY = 0 with TFPQ1 - 1996-2012


                1996         1998          2000         2002         2004
Industry        ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP          ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP




Food-To.        0.921        1.461         5.385        1.696        1.763
Paper           1.158        1.815         2.884        1.046        1.022
Chem            2.230        8.856         38.544       4.709        6.846
Metal           1.077        1.045         3.098        1.798        1.316
Mach.           4.326        8.183         4.085        5.392        37.278
Elect           3.742        1.726           2.78       22.152       3.046
Trans.Eq        0.983        0.985         0.953        1.855        1.409




                           Table OA1b ctd.


                        2006         2008           2010         2012
        Industry    ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP          ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




        Food-To.        1.011        1.130          6.779        9.889
        Paper           0.994        1.099          1.366        1.197
        Chem            3.418        12.163         2.174    106.248
        Metal           1.209        1.075          5.811        1.348
        Mach.           2.556        2.388          1.060        1.733
        Elect           14.217       60.642         4.234       10.724
        Trans.Eq        25.626       1.358          1.217        4.651




                                      69
  Table OA1c. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ1 - 1996-2012


                1996         1998          2000         2002         2004
Industry        ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP          ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP




Food-To.        1.644        1.640         1.636        1.617        1.620
Paper           6.119       16.220         10.816       8.882        9.863
Chem            9.501        9.271         9.399        9.362        9.363
Metal           2.777        3.004         3.381        3.557        14.058
Mach.           2.881        7.178         3.198        3.632        3.042
Elect           1.872        1.641         1.524        12.693       4.469
Trans.Eq        2.709        2.730         2.753        2.811        2.823




                           Table OA1c ctd.


                        2006         2008           2010         2012
        Industry    ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP         ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP




        Food-To.        1.593        1.602          1.571        1.578
        Paper           7.640        9.397          9.263        8.904
        Chem            9.314        9.565          9.626       10.253
        Metal           11.849       11.071        11.579        6.885
        Mach.           2.964        2.734          2.949        3.075
        Elect           2.617        5.576          6.026        5.774
        Trans.Eq        2.829        2.805          2.784        2.832




                                      70
  Table OA1d. Setting φ = 0 with TFPQ2 - 1996-2012


                1996         1998         2000         2002        2004
Industry        ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP         ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP       ∆ TFP




Food-To.        1.403        1.297        1.343        1.000       1.000
Paper           5.156       11.241        7.685        6.030       7.177
Chem            8.454        8.270        9.397        9.360       9.341
Metal           1.727        3.003        3.042        1.269       4.548
Mach.           2.151        7.164        3.165        3.619       2.726
Elect           1.460        1.551        1.465       12.616       4.381
Trans.Eq        2.706        1.551        2.159        2.790       2.567




                           Table OA1d ctd.


                        2006         2008         2010         2012
        Industry    ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP        ∆ TFP




        Food-To.        1.000        1.600        1.564        1.566
        Paper           7.357        7.562        8.224        6.917
        Chem            9.250        9.565        9.626        9.899
        Metal           11.471       5.712        11.450       5.141
        Mach.           2.961        2.712        2.924        2.993
        Elect           2.615        4.851        5.717        5.228
        Trans.Eq        2.374        2.225        2.782        2.788




                                     71
       Figure 1: Interior Optimal Techniques Choice




 1
aK




 1
a K*
                                                                                    1
                                                          H (1 / a K ,1 / a L ) 
                                                                                    z0




                   1         c(1 / a K ,1 / a L )  c 0                                  1
                   *                                                                     aL
               a   L


                        1 1      
                        * , *    : Efficient Interior Solution
                         aL aK    




                                        72
     Figure 2: Techniques Choice Distortion




 1
aK




                                                         1
                                 H (1 / aK ,1 / aL ) 
                                                         z




                                                             1
                                                             aL




                      73
Figure 3: Technique Optimizing Problem: Efficient vs. Distorted Solution




         1
        aK



         1
        a KC



         1
        a *K
                                                                                                    1
                                                                           H (1 / aK ,1 / a L ) =
                                                                                                    z


                                                                 c (1 / a K ,1 / a L ) = c1



                1         1              c (1 / a K ,1 / a L ) = c 0                                    1
               â L       *                                                                             aL
                      a   L


                                 1 1       
                                 * , *     : Efficient Interior Solution
                                  aL aK     

                               1 1 
                               ,          : Distorted Interior Allocation
                                aˆ L aˆ K 




                                                     74
