                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DIGITAL INNOVATION AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF INCOME

                                     Dominique Guellec
                                      Caroline Paunov

                                     Working Paper 23987
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w23987


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2017




Stefano Baruffaldi and Akira Tachibana provided valuable research support. The authors would
like to thank Jonathan Haskel and participants of the NBER CRIW conference on Measuring and
Accounting for Innovation in the 21st Century, the Innovation and Inclusive Growth in Germany
and Disruptive Innovations, Disruptive Times? Technological Innovation, Inequality and
Inclusive Growth workshops of the Bertelsmann Foundation, the Symposium on Technology,
Innovation and Inclusive Growth: Future Perspectives, the Conference on the Economics of
Digital Change, Vienna, Austria (2016), 13th World Conference on Intellectual Capital for
Communities and seminars at the Internet Policy Research Initiative, MIT (2017), the Inter-
American Development Bank (2017), the Washington Centre for Equitable Growth (2017). The
support of the advisory group of the Innovation for Inclusive Growth Project is also gratefully
acknowledged. The findings expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the views of the OECD, its member countries, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Dominique Guellec and Caroline Paunov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Digital Innovation and the Distribution of Income
Dominique Guellec and Caroline Paunov
NBER Working Paper No. 23987
November 2017
JEL No. D24,D31,D40,L10,O30

                                         ABSTRACT

Income inequalities have increased in most OECD countries over the past decades; particularly
the income share of the top 1%. In this paper we argue that the growing importance of digital
innovation – new products and processes based on software code and data – has increased market
rents, which benefit disproportionately the top income groups. In line with Schumpeter’s vision,
digital innovation gives rise to ”winner-take-all” market structures, characterized by higher
market power and risk than was the case in the previous economy of tangible products. The cause
for these new market structures is digital non-rivalry, which allows for massive economies of
scale and reduces costs of innovation. The latter stimulates higher rates of creative destruction,
leading to higher risk as only marginally superior products can take over the entire market, hence
rendering market shares unstable. Instability commands risk premia for investors. Market rents
accrue mainly to investors and top managers and less to the average workers, hence increasing
income inequality. Market rents are needed to incentivize innovation and compensate for its
costs, but beyond a certain level they become detrimental. Public policy may stimulate innovation
by reducing ex ante the market conditions which favor rent extraction from anti-competitive
practices.


Dominique Guellec
OECD/OCDE
2, rue Andre Pascal
75016 Paris France
Dominique.Guellec@oecd.org

Caroline Paunov
OECD
2, rue André Pascal
75 775 Paris Cedex 16
France
caroline.paunov@oecd.org
Introduction

Income inequalities have increased in most OECD countries over the past three decades (OECD, 2015a).
In the United States the income share of the top 1% has soared, rising from earning on average 27 times
more than the bottom 1% in 1980s to 81 times more in 2014. The top 1% income share is now almost
twice as large as the bottom 50% share. There has been close to zero growth for working-age adults in the
bottom 50% of the distribution since 1980 (Piketty et al., 2016).

In this paper we argue that the increasing importance of digital innovation (which are new products and
processes based on or embodied in software code and data, in and beyond IT industries) is magnifying
innovation-based (and possibly bigger) rents that contribute to increasing the income share of the top
income groups. Specifically the paper focuses on inequality coming from market rents accruing to top
executives, key employees and shareholders, but little to the average worker. Figure 1 summarizes the
mechanisms at work in our framework.

          Figure 1: Impacts of digital innovation on market structures and the distribution of income




This issue has received surprisingly little attention in spite of the increase in market rents - the return on
productive resources, notably capital, in excess of what is needed for resources to be deployed in
production - and in spite of the fact that in recent years the evolution of top incomes owes much to
increased returns to capital (CEA, 2016; Piketty et al., 2016). The explanation adds to others that point to
globalization, the financialisation of the economy, unskilled-labor-displacing technologies and the
weakening of trade unions as causes of growing income inequalities. The paper shows that the explanation
provided here needs to be included in accounts of rising top income shares.



                                                      1
Viewed from the perspective of digital innovation, the increase in top income inequality partly results from
the non-rival character of these intangible products, referred to as digital non-rivalry (DNR) in the
remainder of the paper. This, however, does not imply that restraining innovation would improve the
wellbeing of the low- and medium-income categories: innovation is a major driver of economic growth,
and also a source of benefits to all groups in society, including the most disadvantaged. The issue for
public policy is to preserve innovation while limiting its negative impact on income inequalities,
specifically as addressing inequalities can help stimulate innovation-based growth.

The impact of digital innovation on the income distribution is reflective of the well-known effects of
innovation on market structures. It has been recognized since Schumpeter (1911) that innovation requires
and generates market rents. Successful innovation endows innovators with a temporary exclusivity over
their innovation, based on first-mover advantage, intellectual property rights (IPR) protection, brand
reputation, network externalities and entry barriers. This exclusivity allows innovators to set prices above
the marginal cost and gain rents from their innovation. The non-rivalrous nature of knowledge means that
the costs of new ideas comes mainly from their development – typically through R&D, design and market
research – while costs of implementing and diffusing them are much lower or even nil. This gives rise to
large returns to scale; the more an idea is applied the lower is the average cost. Increasing returns to scale
favor concentrated market structures, where in the end only a few companies supply most of the market as
large quantities mean lower unit production cost.

The effects of non-rivalry are magnified by intangible digital products that have constituted an increasing
share of the US economy over the past decades (Corrado et al., 2005, 2009). With wider use of information
technology (IT), software and data – the marginal cost of production is essentially nil and the intangible
component makes most of the value of products. This applies particularly to fully intangible products such
as software as increasing returns to scale are tied essentially to the intangible component of a product. The
tangible components might generate economies of scale, but not to the same extent as the intangible ones,
because their variable costs are not zero (with materials, labor and other input needed to produce additional
units). Effects apply beyond the IT sector because software code and data are increasingly important across
all fields of the economy.

As a consequence of digital non-rivalry, a growing number of industries are subject to "winner-take-all"
dynamics, i.e. markets akin to tournaments in which the best offer wins the race and captures most (if not
all) of the market (Rosen, 1981). Such market concentration allows winners to extract a rent, by raising the
price of output and/or lowering the price of inputs. Moreover, globalization has allowed successful firms to
dominate not only their national market but also the larger global one, hence increasing the size of the
corresponding market rent.

Digital innovation also lowers the costs of innovation raising opportunities for “creative destruction” – the
process by which new products replace current products sometimes involving the exit of incumbent
producers and entry of new producers - as it reduces barriers to entry on many markets. The capital
requirement for programming software, the core of digital innovation, is much lower than for other types
of innovative activities, such as those requiring special facilities to develop innovations (e.g. laboratories
and experimental settings in pharmaceuticals). The intangible nature of knowledge and the opportunities
for rapid scale-up facilitate creative destruction. This is exemplified by the "app economy"; individual
innovators and small companies offer their products on the internet at no direct cost.

Where opportunities for creative destruction and market entry arise, the level of risk is higher than in the
past: while on traditional markets, new, superior products may reduce the market share of incumbents, on a
winner-take-all market, new, (even slightly) superior products can result in new firms taking over the entire
market. Incumbents in such winner-take-all markets have higher market shares than firms in other markets.
However, firms and investors run the risk of losing it all as more creative destruction on winner-take-all
markets generates more instability in market shares, hence in income.
                                                      2
Higher risk leads investors to demand a risk premium in turn increasing the average return to capital. These
dynamics are most visible on the venture capital market but they extend to other types of investment as
well. This increase in risk explains in part why the average return on capital and its dispersion between
firms have increased over the past two decades, as digitalization was progressing (Furman and Orszag,
2015).

From the perspective of innovation dynamics, market entry and creative destruction may reduce market
concentration arising from the scale economies digital innovation allows for. Which of the two opposite
forces dominates depends on the technology, business strategies and, of course, policy (including anti-trust,
entrepreneurship and IPR). In terms of technology, radical changes in the basic technologies (e.g. the PC
replacing the mainframe) reduce the advantage of incumbents and therefore favor newcomers and
competition; by contrast, technology stability favors incumbents and concentrated market structures.1

In terms of business strategies, incumbents can identify and implement new more powerful ways to protect
their market position in the digital economy. First are network effects - the more customers a product has
the more valuable it is to customers - complemented by reduced portability (customers cannot easily
change from one product to a competitor). Another related effect is technical standards: large players
encourage standards which increase entry cost and reduce customer's mobility. Third is blocking
competitors from access to data. In the digital economy data are the primary input for many innovations
and services. This is reinforced in more recent technologies like artificial intelligence. Fourth large firms
can play the role of "integrators" by acquiring start-ups which have been successful in promoting new
products and integrating them into their own offer. This has the twofold advantage of enriching their offer
and pre-empting potential competition.

Empirical evidence provided in this paper shows that the forces tending towards more market
concentration have prevailed over competition-enhancing forces of digital innovation, resulting in winner-
take-all markets that are characterized by higher market concentration and more creative destruction.
Market power and creative destruction are not in contradiction with each other. Competition in digital
innovation is not about prices - in which case the threat of new entry would discipline the incumbents - but
on radical product innovation, as new products are so innovative that they take over the market whatever
the price charged by current incumbents.

How do the rents from digital innovation affect income distribution? They are mainly shared among
shareholders and investors, top executives and key employees of the winning firms, who are already in the
top tier of the income distribution (as they own capital and skills and hold managerial and leading positions
in firms), hence contributing to increased income inequalities. Shareholders have benefitted from a steady
increase in dividends and share prices over the past decades. This has come with an increased dispersion in
profits across firms (that investors accommodate by pursuing portfolio diversification strategies). As a
result the share of capital (vs. labor) in national income has increased in the United States and other OECD
countries, particularly in innovation-intensive economic activities. Top executives have benefitted from
increased compensation, with the expansion of high-powered incentive schemes (like stock options and
bonuses), which are aimed at monitoring their decisions in the riskier environments of winner-take-all
dynamics (Hall and Liebman, 1998).

Labor has not gained as much from rents with the exception of the top categories. Indeed, the wages of top
employees of successful firms have benefitted to a certain extent, as shown by the importance of cross-firm
wage inequality in total income inequality (Song et al., 2015). Average workers, however, have been less
successful in gaining from the rents for a number of reasons. They face more competition in the labor

1
  This is not systematic however, as one can see from the example of artificial intelligence. The main players are the same as with
the Internet, because some of the key competitive factors are the same in both cases (notably access to large amounts of data).


                                                                3
market and are increasingly employed in temporary work arrangements. Workers employed under
alternative work arrangements (such as temporary help agency workers, on-call workers, contract workers
and freelancers), which represent the bulk of job creation in the United States for 2005-2015 (Katz and
Krueger, 2016), are in a weak negotiating position when it comes to sharing rents. These effects of digital
innovation and more broadly intangibles on labor add to the impacts that arise from how different worker
occupations and skills profiles complement or substitute to these new technologies (see e.g. Autor and
Dorn, 2013; Haskel and Westlake, 2017).

Lower entry barriers that facilitate creative destruction also enable increased social mobility, as newcomers
can displace incumbents. Turnover in the top income categories has increased in recent decades, and is
positively related to the intensity of innovation activity (as e.g. across US states in Aghion et al., 2015).

What does this mean for policies? Drawing policy implications requires considering three factors. First,
rents are important for innovation and innovation is necessary to growth. Policies that target innovation-
based rents (and rents that facilitate innovation) may hurt innovation, differently from the rents that do not
come from innovation (e.g. leveraging market power based on regulatory monopolies, anti-competitive
practices, barriers to trade, etc.). Second, many policies shaping innovation were designed for an economy
in which tangible activities were dominant, hence innovation-based rents lower. They may be reviewed to
assess the balance they provide between market rents for innovation and opportunities for innovation by
new entrants. Third, as market power is not inevitable in markets where digital innovation is important,
policy can play an important role in allowing for market competition.

Several policy instruments are important. Tax policy, the instrument of choice for dealing with income
inequalities, has possible drawbacks, as it does not make the distinction between competitive and excess
market rents: it may therefore have detrimental effects on the incentives to innovate. Instead of attempting
to redistribute (ex post) rents, it may be more effective to eliminate them (ex ante) in the first place by
strengthening market competition. Policy instruments that may be mobilized and adapted to this purpose
include IPR(ensuring that they favor access to knowledge), standards, rules of access to and ownership of
data, competition policy, support to innovation (favoring new, small players) and entrepreneurship
(including training).

The remainder of the document is structured as follows: section 1 describes global trends in innovation and
the distribution of income. Section 2 defines DNR and explains why it is increasingly important. Sections 3
and 4 analyze the impacts of digital innovation on economies of scale and market concentration and on the
costs of innovation and creative destruction. Section 5 discusses implications of these changing market
trends on the distribution of income, while sections 6 and 7 present policy implications and lists open
research questions.

1. Digital innovation and the distribution of income: Global trends

Many OECD economies have seen an increase in income inequality. In particular, the top categories of
income distribution increased their share in total income. This trend coincides with the growing importance
of digital innovation. Figure 2 plots Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) applications and the income share of
the top 1% for a group of OECD countries. Both series show an initially modest upward trend, followed by
acceleration in the mid-1990s. Interestingly, ICT patents show the strongest upward trend of all,
highlighting the growing importance of ICT in innovation.




                                                      4
                                                  Figure 2: Top 1% income share and PCT patent applications for selected OECD countries, 1987-2009
                                                  16                                                                                                                        200
  Top 1% income share (before taxes) - OECD GDP




                                                                                                                                                                            180




                                                                                                                                                                                  PCT patent applications per million inhabitants
                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                            160
                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                            140
                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                            120

                                                  8                                                                                                                         100

                                                                                                                                                                            80
                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                            60
                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                            40
                                                  2
                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                  0                                                                                                                         0
                                                       1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009

                                                                   Top 1% income share                                     Total PCT patent applications
                                                                   ICT PCT patent applications                             Mechanical engineering PCT patent applications
                                                                   Chemistry and metal PCT patent applications
Source: The World Top Incomes Database, http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/ (accessed on 15 July 2015) for
the 1% income share data; OECD Patents Statistics for PCT patent applications.
Note: The statistics are based on a GDP-weighted average for the following 13 OECD countries: Australia, Canada, Denmark,
France, Germany, Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States. The
selection is based on data availability over the 1987-2009 data period. The data annex provides further information.


Comparing business R&D spending (as a proxy for digital innovation) with trends in the top 1% income
share gives a more mixed picture (Figure 3). In a group of countries that includes the United States (jointly
with Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia), the share of the top 1% income owners increased more
substantially than the intensity of R&D investments. In another group of countries (including Denmark,
Germany, Japan and Switzerland), strong business R&D investments coincided with positive but modest
increases in the top 1% income shares over the past two decades. These differences may result from
diverse country policy approaches to income inequality, as well as from diverse industry dynamics and
structures. Differences may also be driven by how economies are engaged in digital innovation and
consequently in the degree to which digital innovation activities affect market structures and the
distribution of income.




                                                                                                                 5
Figure 3: Changes in the top 1% income share over 1981-2010 relative to business R&D spending as % of GDP
                                                  in 2010
                                                            1.4



                                                            1.2
                                                                                                                         United States
            Change in the top 1% income share (1981-2010)




                                                             1                                       Australia


                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                            0.8
                                                                                       Norway                                       Sweden

                                                                                                Ireland
                                                            0.6                                                                             Republic of Korea
                                                                                          Canada

                                                                      South Africa
                                                                               Italy
                                                            0.4
                                                                            New Zealand                                 Germany                   Japan
                                                                                                   Singapore                  Switzerland
                                                            0.2                 Malaysia                                      Denmark

                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                                                Spain                     France
                                                             0
                                                                  0   0.5               1                1.5              2                 2.5             3
                                                                                                BERD, % of GDP (2010)

Source: The World Top Incomes Database, http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu (accessed on 15 July2015), for the
1% income share data; OECD Science and Technology Indicators for business expenditure on research and development (BERD) as
% of GDP. The data annex provides further information.
Note: The two lines are exponential trends for the two groups of countries.


2. Digital non-rivalry and its growing importance

Digital non-rivalry

Digital innovation gives to knowledge (design, IPR, software code or data) a more prominent role in the
value share of new products and processes than "traditional" innovation which is only partly intangible as
the knowledge component of tangible products. Digital innovation is fully intangible and consequently
allows for what we refer to here as digital non rivalry (DNR). Hal Varian referred to the key components
of digital innovations as essentially ideas, standards specifications, protocols, programming languages and
software rather than “physical devices”, consequently as innovations without physical constraints (Varian,
2003).

Economists have for long been familiar with the concept of non rivalry when it comes to knowledge: one
piece of knowledge can be used simultaneously by any number of users, at any scale, at low or even zero
marginal cost. For instance, once assembled or designed, inventions can serve any number of users, at no
additional cost. This property contrasts with tangible (or physical) goods: two people can discuss fully the
same idea, but they cannot eat the same apple. NR favours "fluidity" or "ubiquity", ideas spreading
instantaneously and everywhere at a zero marginal cost. By contrast, the cost of producing the intangible
product itself (referred to as “original” in national accounting) is sunk, i.e. it is not incurred again with
every additional use of the product.

                                                                                                      6
The impact of NR on the real world economy has been limited until recently because ideas needed a
physical carrier, they had to be embodied in a tangible good to be stored, disseminated or commercialised:
it could be a book, or a new car (embodying an invention) etc. Physical embodiment means significant
production and transportation costs and favours inertia as it requires time and resources to make the
physical carrier of the idea. To diffuse the idea you need to print and distribute physically the book and to
access the idea which is embodied in the book you need to buy the book. The price of an individual copy
of the book will not reflect the total cost of producing the idea, which (in equilibrium) is shared among all
copies. And this price will also include the cost of producing and diffusing physical copies of the book.
The same holds with a new object, say a car: you need to produce the new car, to distribute it physically
and customers need to go to the shop and buy it. The cost of inventing the new car is split between all
copies sold. Hence when ideas are embodied in physical goods non rivalry is only partial and the real
world economics of ideas is a mix of non rival and traditional physical goods economics.

With computers and the Internet the need for a physical carrier disappears, ideas, once encoded in
electronic bits, can be disseminated instantaneously everywhere, they really become ubiquitous and
accessible at a quasi-zero marginal cost: we move from partial non rivalry to total non rivalry, that we refer
to here as "Digital Non Rivalry" (DNR) in order to differentiate from non-rivarly and stress that its
realisation is tied to digitalisation. With DNR there are no more limits and delays on the diffusion of ideas:
it suffices to access the site where they are presented, possibly to download a file.

The growing importance of DNR

The effects of digital non-rivalry (DNR) have become increasingly important because of the growing
importance of intangible investments over tangibles. In the United States, business investment in
intangibles has risen almost continuously for the past 40 years, starting with electronics revolution of the
1970s and increasing its pace over the past decades (Nakamura, 2001). In the 2000s, intangible
investments have become relatively more important than tangibles (Figure 4). Among intangibles,
computer software, a component of intangible investments, has been among the most dynamic increasing
parts (Corrado et al., 2005, 2009). Until recently, official statistics have not well accounted for the large
changes; Corrado et al. (2009) estimated that the omission of such investments from published
macroeconomic data has consequently led to underestimates of USD 800 billion (as of 2003), excluding
more than USD 3 trillion of business intangible capital stock.

The effects of DNR are also widespread across the economy because digital innovation is increasingly
relevant across many other industries. Branstetter et al. (2015), for instance, show that between 1981 and
2005, IT assets have become increasingly critical in production in “traditional” sectors such as
automobiles, aerospace and defense, medical devices and pharmaceuticals. Spending on software increased
substantially over time and software engineers represent an increasingly important share in employment
not only in telecommunications, software and hardware industries. They also have become more important
in other industries such as finance, business services, machinery manufacturing and other information-
provider services (Figure 5).




                                                      7
Figure 4: Business investment in intangible and tangible capital, United States, 1972-2011 (% of adjusted GDP)
                                           18%


                                           16%
                                                                                                                        Investment in intangibles
          Investment (% of adjusted GDP)




                                           14%


                                           12%


                                           10%
                                                                                                                           Investment in tangibles

                                             8%


                                             6%


                                             4%
                                                   1972    1975   1978   1981   1984     1987    1990   1993        1996     1999        2002       2005        2008       2011

Source: OECD (2013) based on unpublished update on Corrado, C.A. and C.R. Hulten (2010), “How do you Measure a
‘Technological Revolution?”, American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 100 (May 2010): 99–104.
Note: Estimates are for private industries excluding real estate, health and education.


       Figure 5: Share of employment in software-related occupations within industries in the United States,
                                            2002, 2005, 2010 and 2015

                                                                                Panel A: IT-related industries

 40%                                       34.1%                                                                                             2002        2005     2010      2015
 35%                                                      32.0%
 30%
 25%                                                                 24.0%
                                                                                 19.1%
 20%
 15%                                                                                            11.0%                                             8.8%
                                                                                                             9.6%              9.5%                                 8.6%
 10%                                                                                                                                                                                  3.6%
  5%
  0%
       Computer systems Software publishers Data processing, Other information        Other             Satellite           Wired             Wireless      Communications Semiconductor and
       design and related                  hosting, and related  services      telecommunications telecommunications telecommunications telecommunications    equipment     other electronic
            services                             services                                                                  carriers        carriers (except  manufacturing    component
                                                                                                                                              satellite)                     manufacturing




                                                                                                  8
                                                         Panel B: Other industries, 2015
                                                 Monetary authorities - Central Bank                                              14.5%
                         Commercial and service industry machinery manufacturing                                                13.8%
       Professional and commercial equipment and supplies merchant wholesalers                                         8.2%
                                                   Other investment pools and funds                                  7.7%
                                       Scientific research and development services                              6.6%
   Navigational, measuring, electromedical, and control instruments manufacturing                               6.4%
                                         Management of companies and enterprises                               6.2%
                                                Securities and commodity exchanges                            5.9%
                        Manufacturing and reproducing magnetic and optical media                             5.7%
                                                                    Insurance carriers                      5.4%
                           Management, scientific, and technical consulting services                        5.4%
                                           Activities related to credit intermediation                      5.3%
                                          Cable and other subscription programming                       4.5%
                                          Audio and video equipment manufacturing                       4.3%
                          Business schools and computer and management training                        4.0%
                 Securities and commodity contracts intermediation and brokerage                       4.0%
                Lessors of nonfinancial intangible assets (except copyrighted works)                  3.8%
                                                        Office administrative services                3.8%
                                          Electronic shopping and mail-order houses                   3.8%
                        Electronic and precision equipment repair and maintenance                    3.6%
                                                 Other financial investment activities               3.5%
                                        Aerospace product and parts manufacturing                    3.5%
                                                Nondepository credit intermediation                3.1%
                                     Architectural, engineering, and related services              3.1%
                              Newspaper, periodical, book, and directory publishers               2.9%
                                                               Natural gas distribution           2.9%
                                   Advertising, public relations, and related services           2.6%
                                                                                          0.0%        5.0%              10.0%   15.0%     20.0%
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016), Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Survey, Department of Labor.
Note: Panel B reports the share of employment in software for industries in which the share is higher than 2% of total employment.
Industries are provided at the 4-digit NAICS 2012. The data annex describes the occupations included as software-related.



3. Impacts of digital innovation on the economies of scale and market concentration

Implications of digital non rivalry (DNR) for market concentration on global markets

DNR allows for massive economies of scale that favor market concentration because with DNR the
marginal cost of diffusion is also zero for the producers: the more products sold, the lower the average
cost. Once the idea has been produced and formatted, there is no need to print copies or assemble
embodying objects, it is enough to upload the idea on a website and it becomes accessible to all with a
computer and an Internet connection. The marginal cost of delivering it to customers is null, hence the unit
cost declines linearly with the quantity sold. If a digital product succeeds on the market, the production
volume can quickly adapt to demand, and sales can increase while unit costs decrease. Producers will aim
to supply the entire market. Such phenomena have been observed in many industries, under various names
like “blockbusters” (pharmaceuticals, movies, aeronautics) or “superstars” (sports). In such conditions
companies with a large pool of customers have an advantage in cost over competitors, which can result in
natural monopolies.

Mass production in manufacturing as developed in the Fordist model of production lowered marginal cost
compared to specialized production in the previous, craftsmanship-based model. However, the marginal
cost was still positive. By contrast, the marginal cost of producing knowledge-intensive products (beyond
the first unit) is essentially zero. A corollary of this idea is that investments are largely used to produce
"originals", i.e. to innovate, not to produce more copies of the same template. This amounts to the pure
fixed costs and zero marginal costs text book case that is an absolute exception for most production
processes, except for information goods for which it is the baseline case (Varian, 2003).
                                                                             9
On the process side, IT has lowered communication costs, hence raising the efficient size of firms
whatever their industry. It is possible with IT to coordinate highly segmented and dispersed value chains of
very large size. This factor is pushing towards higher market concentration in all industries. Evidence
collected by Mueller et al. (2015) shows that the average size of the largest firms has increased
significantly in fourteen of the fifteen countries they study between the mid-1980s or mid-1990s and 2010.
The average size of the top 50 (100) firms in the US grew by 55.8% (53.0%) between 1986 and 2010.

Hence IT coupled with globalization have transformed both product markets and production processes,
both in the direction of favoring large size and concentration. Brynjolfsson et al. (2008) show evidence of
higher market concentration for more IT intensive industries for 1996-2006 compared to the previous
period of 1987-1995 (Figure 6).

 Figure 6: Growth in market concentration of more and less IT-intensive industries, 1996-2006 and 1987-1995




Source: Brynjolffson et al. (2008) based on Compustat.
Note: HI refers to the Herfindahl index of firms sales.


In markets for digital innovation, economies of scale are reinforced by several factors that foster market
concentration and opportunities for smaller-scale producers to challenge incumbents: first-mover
advantage, reputation effects, IPR, network effects as well as product bundling, whereby different products
are sold jointly as the marginal cost is negligible. There are also opportunities for smaller-scale producers
as discussed in the next section. The expression "scale without mass" (Brynjolfsson et al. 2007) captures a
closely connected idea, that it takes little time and investment for a small company to become a global
behemoth, as digital goods can be reproduced at the cost of a click.




                                                          10
A consequence of such economies of scale is the emergence of winner-take-all market structures, i.e.
markets with highly asymmetric market shares (Rosen, 1983). The market dynamics are akin to
tournaments, in which the best offer wins the race and captures most (if not all) of the market. The
winner’s product may only be marginally better than the alternatives, but a market with no substantial
distribution costs and where up-scaling is nearly instantaneous (for instance, by distributing services on the
Internet) gives the winning innovation the opportunity to gain quickly most of the market. The Economic
Census shows high rates of concentration for some of the markets that are closely associated with the
digital economy and the economies of scale it allows for. For instance, among business-to-business
electronic market providers, the top 4 providers held 34% of the sales 2012 (NAICS code 42511). By
contrast, the average share of the top 4 businesses in the wholesale business (NAICS code 42) was of
5.6%.

Winner-take-all market effects are a well-known phenomenon on innovation-intensive markets. The value
distribution of innovations has been shown to be very skewed. Only a few innovations are of high value
while most provide little gain: this has been measured for instance using the monetary evaluation given by
patent holders to their titles (Harhoff et al.,2003) and in terms of the number of citations and other
measures of patent quality (see e.g. OECD, 2015b). This results from a few firms dominating markets for
those innovations. This tendency is accentuated with digital innovation.

Concurrent with digital innovation, globalization favors market concentration as lower barriers to operating
across borders allow for the emergence of a few global leaders (instead of a multiplicity of national ones)
that benefit from the larger scale offered by global markets. This is illustrated by IT sectors with global
leaders such as Google and Amazon; but also across other more traditional industries in which digital
innovation has become increasingly important (in product or in processes) like pharmaceutical, automobile
or chemicals.

Assessing the market shares of these global actors is challenging as national-level data only capture
resident firms but not all market competitors. As an imperfect proxy, Figure 7 computes the shares of the
top 1 and 5 global companies among the 2 500 top R&D companies across different sectors; the evidence
shows strong levels of concentration in some of the very dynamic sectors that are highly associated with
digital innovation, notably software & computer services, financial services and electronic & electrical
equipment. Figure 8 plots the market shares of software & computer services against those of heavy
industries.




                                                     11
                                                Figure 7: Share of the top 1 and 5 companies in total sales of leading R&D firms in 2015
                                                70%
                                                                                                                                  Top 5    Top 1
                                                60%

                                                50%

                                                40%

                                                30%

                                                20%

                                                10%

                                                0%




Source: EU (2016), EU R&D Scoreboard 2016. The shares are computed as the sales share of the top 1 and 5 firms within the total
number of firms of the 2 500 R&D most intensive firms of the EU R&D Scoreboard. The number of firms included in the total for each
sector is included in brackets.




 Figure 8: Distribution of the 100 largest firms in terms of sales among the top R&D firms within the software
                          and computer services and heavy industries sectors in 2015

                                   100%

                                          90%

                                          80%
    Share in sales of leading R&D firms




                                          70%

                                          60%

                                          50%

                                          40%
                                                                                                   Software & Computer services       Heavy industries
                                          30%

                                          20%

                                          10%

                                          0%
                                                100
                                                 10
                                                 13
                                                 16
                                                 19
                                                 22
                                                 25
                                                 28
                                                 31
                                                 34
                                                 37
                                                 40
                                                 43
                                                 46
                                                 49
                                                 52
                                                 55
                                                 58
                                                 61
                                                 64
                                                 67
                                                 70
                                                 73
                                                 76
                                                 79
                                                 82
                                                 85
                                                 88
                                                 91
                                                 94
                                                 97
                                                  1
                                                  4
                                                  7




                                                                              Number of firms in decreasing order of sales

Source: EU (2016), EU R&D Scoreboard 2016.




                                                                                            12
Rents in global knowledge-intensive markets

Digital innovations increase the rents innovation generates. The fact that successful innovators raise rents
is not new; it was conceptualized in 1911 by Schumpeter. It is a necessary condition for innovation to
occur. What is new is the scale at which this is happening, as reflected in large profit margins in sectors
where digital innovation is important. Health technology, technology services and electronic services were
1st, 3rd and 4th in the Forbes 2015 ranking of most profitable sectors with profit margins of 20.9%, 16.1%
and 13.2% respectively (Finance was in 2nd position with margins of 17.3%) (Forbes, 2015). Aggregate
statistics also show that in the United States the share of corporate profits in income increased (see Figure
13 of section 5).

The evolution of firm profits is also consistent with increasingly winner-take-all market structures: the top
percentiles of firms ranked by the return on invested capital (ROIC) have grown most significantly, from
less than 30% in the early 1990s to 100% in 2014 (Figure 9). The lowest percentiles (25th) had a constant
ROIC and the median increased slightly. Data collected by McKinsey suggest that “two thirds of the non-
financial firms with an average ROIC of 45% or higher between 2010 and 2014 were in either the health
care or the IT sectors" (Furman and Orszag, 2015). Other suggestive evidence of more winner-take-all
dynamics is the rise in the share of nominal GDP of the Fortune 100 biggest American companies from
33% in 1994 to 46% in 2013 (The Economist, 2016). Players closely associated with the digital economy
have gained in importance in this ranking. Those in traditional industries in which digital innovation has
become more importance also rank highly.

         Figure 9: Return on invested capital excluding goodwill, US publicly traded nonfinancial firms




Source: Furman and Orszag (2015) based on Koller et al. (2015)


Several supply- and demand-side characteristics reinforce that winner-take-all markets favor incumbents’
rents. On the supply side, economies of scale from producing knowledge-intensive products feed efficiency
and consequently firms’ market shares. One reason is that it is often not straightforward for followers to
replicate immediately. Also, the advance over competitors allows first movers to hire the most skilled and
creative workers (who in turn benefit from interacting with equally productive peers). Moreover, on
various markets economies of scope strengthen incumbents’ market positions as in the extreme case of
platforms (e.g. Amazon, Apple, Facebook or Google). These are best placed to launch new products or to
profitably scale up existing ones (possibly invented by other firms that platforms will acquire and
integrate), as they have a large consumer base competitors cannot easily match. Owing to standards and

                                                            13
reputation effects, products do not travel easily across platforms and entry for competitors is restrained.
Hence, while technically newcomers might scale at little cost, they may not get the rewards unless they
access leading platforms. These supply side conditions shape the extent to which new entrants can
challenge incumbents.

On the demand side, a firm’s or product’s reputation often influences consumer choice in favor of
incumbents; these constraints reduce entrants’ opportunities to successfully penetrate markets in spite of
the low product scaling costs. The market success of a product frequently stimulates further sales by
incumbent producers, challenging opportunities for new entrants. Also, the technical complexity of certain
knowledge products magnifies incumbents’ advantage because greater complexity increases the
information asymmetry between consumers and producers; consumers prefer to buy from sellers with the
right brand names and reputation as a guarantee the product is of good quality. Moreover, network effects,
i.e. product value increasing with the number of users, matter in some of the most innovative sectors of the
digital economy. Examples include software programs (the number of users of the software and its
interoperability), social networks (the number of friends/colleagues/partners to communicate with), online
auctions (the number of bidders and sellers) and Internet search engines2 Ownership of big data is also an
increasingly important source advantage for incumbents as competitors can only with difficulty obtain the
same quality of data. The advantage of data ownership is increasing as, for instance, machine-learning
algorithms become more intelligent with larger access to data, reinforcing the advantage of incumbents
with access to such data.

Regulatory and policy conditions, including with IPR and standards, are also critical. In allowing firms to
protect their digital innovations, they create barriers for competition. There is, consequently, much scope
for policy to influence market concentration. Standards, which may restrict entry at the same time as they
may enable innovation, also apply more where production processes make intense use of digital
innovations.

Certain factors may limit market concentration. One factor is the diversity of consumers' tastes, which can
lead to fragmented markets and monopolistic competition "à la Chamberlin" instead of large winner-take-
all markets. However, digital innovation may make product differentiation less costly, allowing companies
to extend their control beyond small niche markets by supplying different market segments, chasing
potential competitors from their respective domains. Another and more important factor that limits market
concentration comes from new entry and creative destruction that arises with lower costs of digital
innovation as discussed next.




2
  In the case of Internet search engines the network effects are indirect i.e. one group of users benefits from larger uptake by
another group of users. Internet search engines offer users access to information to attract advertising revenues from firms, which
they use to develop their services to attract the largest possible number of users. Pricing and other strategies are strongly affected
by indirect network effects. For example, profit-maximising prices may entail below-marginal cost pricing to one set of customers
over the long run. In fact, many two-sided platforms charge one side prices that are below cost and sometimes even negative. Thus,
rents are not observed directly as they would be the case for single-client markets.


                                                                 14
4. Impacts of digital innovation on the costs of innovation, market entry and creative destruction

The section discusses how digital innovation’s effect on the costs of innovating may trigger a more rapid
displacement of existing products, increasing risk of firms to loose market revenue. Creative destruction
and market entry may also reduce the market concentration DNR has facilitated.

Lower entry costs for digital innovations allow for more creative destruction

The costs of innovating have been reduced in a number of ways with digital innovation. First, IT has
lowered entry costs compared to many markets, including the costs of producing, managing and
communicating new knowledge (see e.g. Paunov and Rollo, 2016, for evidence of the use of the Internet on
firm innovation in developing countries). For instance, the emergence of “the cloud” has done away with
large upfront investment, giving access to computing power at a low price. Second, the downstream costs
of innovating, i.e. the costs of producing and disseminating digital innovations are reduced or even
disappear with DNR. Using digital means for advertising and distributing a product (e.g. opening a
webpage on Amazon) also allows producers of physical goods to reduce drastically marketing costs; they
can reach the global market without having to incur large, sunk investment in branding etc. This is even
more the case for some of the most dynamic digital knowledge products, such as software and online
services, which can be distributed directly on the Internet (no transportation cost). Third, scaling costs are
also lower for digital innovations as they are immediate scalable and can reach an unlimited number of
customers. Opportunities to “scale without mass” (i.e. the production of goods and services that require
much fewer labor and capital inputs relative to traditional “tangible” products as a large share of the
product is intangible) extend beyond pure digital products (such as software or pure online services).

The lower cost of commercialising innovations allows for more market entry and creative destruction at
more rapid pace, increasing incumbents’ risk to loose most if not all market revenue. Even where products
constitute only minor improvements relative to existing ones, they may be launched and challenge
incumbents. In the traditional industrial economy, even minor changes to a product would mean incurring
significant costs to reach customers (retooling, marketing etc.). With the digital economy the main cost of
introducing a new product is the cost of invention, as production and marketing costs are low or even nil.
Invention costs themselves may also be low in the case of weak differentiation (technical similarity). Yet
businesses facing low downstream production costs may launch them on the market as in winner-take-all
contexts even innovations with only a marginal advantage over competing products, may gain all the
market. This reinforces the impact of the reduction in cost on the incentive to launch new innovations.
Technical change, however, may not be more rapid overall as it depends on total research effort. Annex 1
provides a simple model of the impacts of cost reductions for digital innovations on the sequencing of
innovation.

There is evidence to show that digital innovation has indeed increased risks firms face on markets.
Brynjolfsson et al. (2007) show that “creative destruction” (i.e. changes in firms’ rank of sales in their
respective industries) was more important in more IT-intensive industries following the mid-1990s (Figure
10). Statistics on the volatility of stock market valuations of traded US companies shows similarly an
increase over the 1990s and continued high levels from then onwards (Figure 11).




                                                     15
          Figure 10: Creative destruction in high and low IT-intensive sectors, 1996-2006 and 1987-1995




Source: Brynjolfsson et al. (2008) based on Compustat



                     Figure 11: Stock market volatility of traded US-based companies, 1989-2014

               2.1

               1.9

               1.7

               1.5

               1.3

               1.1

               0.9

               0.7

               0.5



Source: Bas and Paunov (2017) based on Compustat.
Note: The figure plots the median standard deviation of the annual stock market price of US-based traded firms.



Volatility measures of financial investments also point to higher risk in more innovation-intensive sectors:
betas (that estimate investment volatility) are higher than 1 (indicating greater risk compared to the entire
market) in the biotechnology, Internet, computer and electrical equipment industries while less knowledge-
intensive industries, such as food processing and tobacco, display betas lower than 1 (Figure 12). Also,
Faurel et al. (2015) show that US firms registering more new trademarks faced higher volatility of stock
market return and earnings for the 1993-2011 period.




                                                                16
 Figure 12: Estimates of selected sectors’ betas relative to the entire financial market for US firms in 2008-12

                        1.8

                        1.6

                        1.4

                        1.2

                         1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                         0




Source: Aswath Damodaran (2015) based on data from Bloomberg, Morningstar, Capital IQ and Compustat.
Note: The beta of a sector is a measure of the volatility, or systematic risk, of a financial investment in a sector in comparison to the
financial market as a whole. The betas are estimated by regressing weekly returns on stock of companies within a sector against a
benchmark index representative of the financial market which is the NYSE composite index. Regressions are based on data within a
time window of 5 years previous to the reference year. The beta is unlevered by the market value debt to equity ratio for the sector
making use of the following formula: Unlevered Beta = Beta / (1 + (1- tax rate) (Debt/Equity Ratio)). The unlevered beta is the beta
that would be obtained if the investment was on a company without any debt. The risk of an investment is in general higher when the
ratio between debt and equity within a sector is higher. In this way, the focus is on the level of risk, which is only driven by the
characteristics of the sector other than the financial structure of companies within the sector. Further details can be found at:
http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/ .



Impacts of market entry and creative destruction on market concentration

Market concentration and creative destruction are not in contradiction with each other in markets where
competition is based on digital innovation. On such markets, competition is not about prices - in which
case the threat from new entry would discipline the incumbents - but about radical product innovation, as
successful new products fully replace existing ones, taking over the market whatever the price charged by
incumbents. This also means that until the next innovation comes, incumbents keep their market position
and do not have to bother about competition. The massive scale economies combined with business
strategies that allow retaining market power allow winners to reap rents until they are replaced by
successful challengers.

While the evidence shows market concentration has increased with digital innovation i.e. that the current
context is one where market concentration and creative destruction co-exist, the threat of market entry and
creative destruction may also reduce market concentration. The extent to which market concentration is
reduced depends on technology, business strategies and policy. Where technology brings radical change,
newcomers can challenge incumbents more than where incumbents can rely on mastering the technology.
For instance, traditional car manufacturers find themselves confronted with new business models such as
the one implemented by Uber that provides car sharing as an alternative to car ownership. Also, where
incumbents have fewer opportunities to exploit network effects, platform dominance, leading technical



                                                                  17
standards and data access,3 more competitive market conditions may result. The latter critically depends on
policy (including anti-trust, entrepreneurship and IPR).

Creative destruction may be challenged on winner-take-all markets because winning comes with
advantages that allow for business strategies that allow retaining rents for at least a period of time.
Particularly large market players benefit from economies of scale and scope and often from network
economies. These provide them with the capital and networks needed to capitalize on and upscale
innovations. This includes the advantages large incumbents such as Google and Facebook can reap of big
data with better tools to make use of them. These may continue to marginalize small players by a feedback
loop whereby better data allow better services, enhancing further their advantage. Moreover, on
consolidated markets, incumbents have succeeded in establishing their products as essentials (as, for
instance, is the case for different digital platforms) to the extent that barriers to entry block competition. In
this context challengers develop new more radical innovations but do not immediately replace winners nor
change the large levels of market concentration. Anecdotal evidence shows that most of the many new
entrants are quickly pushed out of the market (see e.g. Decker et al., 2014 for evidence on the United
States).

While start-up failure is not surprising in itself – as new business ideas usually have higher failure rates –
the issue is that among the successful ones, most are taken over by incumbents. Examples include
YouTube (acquired by Google) or Instagram and WhatsApp (both acquired by Facebook). This is also the
case in other industries like biotechnology, where most successful start-ups are taken over by big
pharmaceutical firms which increasingly act like platforms, who possess unique marketing and financial
infrastructures and can externalize the most exploratory innovation to start-ups that they acquire when
successful. A joint paper by the French and German competition authorities argues that the “dynamic
competition may be stifled if established undertakings have a proven ability to buy out competitively
significant new entrants with a turnover, asset-base or market share.”4 While these acquisitions reduce
creative destruction, they may contribute to increase the efficiency of industry ecosystems as good radical
innovations developed in small firms can create more value once deployed at larger scale.


5. How do rents generated by higher market concentration and greater risk affect the distribution of
income?
This section discusses how changes in market structures and risk brought by digital innovation have
affected the distribution of income. It describes the mechanisms accounting for higher returns to the top of
the income distribution - as a result higher returns to capital, top executives and top employees but less for
average workers. The mechanisms explain aggregate findings by Forbes (2000) on the correlation between
higher growth across US states and higher levels of income inequality and returns to the top 1% and 10%
and by Aghion et al. (2015) on differences in innovation intensities and higher returns to the top 1%.

Effects of digital innovation on the distribution of income

The impact channel of digital innovation on the distribution of income that has been discussed in the
literature is about how this type of innovation complements or substitutes for different types of labor. The
debate, which dates back to the industrial revolution, has aimed at identifying whether technological
change (rather than globalization) complements skills but substituting for unskilled labor affecting relative
wages of skilled vs. unskilled workers (skill-biased technological change) (see Haskel et al., 2012). More

3
  In the digital economy data are the primary input for many innovations and services. This is reinforced in more recent
technologies like artificial intelligence.
4
  See footnote 4.


                                                          18
related to the digital innovation, several studies have investigated the substitution effects of automation,
specifically with regards to routinized operations that machines can easily execute (see Goos and Manning,
2007; Autor and Dorn, 2013; Michaels et al., 2014). Also, Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017) show a robust
negative effect of the adoption of robots on employment and wages. As to effects on pay of top income
groups, Haskel and Westlake (2017) discuss how the rise of intangibles in the economy – characterized in
large parts by an increase in digital innovation – may also result in superstar pay for managers and other
key workers as a result of strong synergies of superstar skills with intangible assets.

The channel linking digital innovation to the distribution of income we discuss in this paper is different and
stems from digital innovations’ impacts on winner-take-all market structures. It does not relate to how
capital and labor complement or substitute for digital innovation. Winner-take-all market structures affect
the distribution of income in two ways. First, market concentration results in higher market rents. This
affects the distribution of income due to important differences in the negotiation power of different
claimants of these rents, including investors, top executives and different workers. Second, higher market
risk as generated by more creative destruction results in higher risk compensation for risk takers (owners,
investors and executives). The specific implications for different input factors and the evidence are
discussed below.

Higher returns to capital invested in the digital economy

Winner-take-all market conditions have resulted in higher returns to the capital invested in the digital
economy; these profits in turn affect the distribution of income as capital ownership is concentrated among
the highest income groups, hence increasing inequalities (Atkinson, 2015). The returns to capital invested
in the digital innovation increase because the market rents are mainly captured by the residual claimants,
who are the investors and managers, while employees’ wages are largely fixed in the labor market.
"Efficiency wage" mechanisms ensure that some of the rent goes to employees. Rents are not necessarily
“excessive” i.e. higher than required from an incentive/efficiency perspective. Investors require a risk
premium to invest as market risk is higher with more creative destruction.

An indicative piece of evidence of more rents for investors and owners is that over the past decades
corporate profits have increased while interest rates have decreased (Figure 13). If there were no rents, then
corporate profits would follow the path of interest rates as these reflect the returns to capital in the
economy. Barkai (2016) also documents a substantial increase in the profit share of US businesses over the
past 30 years. Recent work by de Loecker and Eeckhout (2017) also shows that markups and market power
increased since the 1980s.

As pointed out by Kornai (2016) anecdotal evidence from the Forbes 400 richest individuals includes a
number of key actors of digital innovation: Bill Gates (Microsoft), Larry Ellison (Oracle), Michael
Bloomberg (Bloomberg terminal), Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook), Larry Page and Sergey Brin (Google)
and Jeffrey Bezos (Amazon).

Higher returns to capital are important to explain the evolution of top income which has been a capital-
driven phenomenon since the late 1990s (Piketty et al., 2016). What is more, data for 2000-2014 show that
growth of average income per adult owed mostly to growth in capital income which grew by 2.2% per
year, while labor income grew at a rate of 0.1% per year.




                                                     19
                     Figure 13: Corporate profits and real interest rates (in percentages) for 1985 - 2015
              14%

              12%

              10%

               8%

               6%

               4%

               2%

               0%
                      1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
              -2%

              -4%

                              Corporate profits with inventory valuation and capital consumption adjustments over GDI
                              1-Year real US treasury rate
Source: Based on data on corporate profits and the GDI from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, Bureau of Labor Statistics published
in May 27, 2016. Data on the 1-year real US treasury rate are taken from the US Treasury (accessed at: http://www.multpl.com/1-
year-treasury-rate/table) using the CPI for the United States from the OECD Main Economic Indicators database.




Investigating the relationship between profits and the top 1%, Figure 14 shows the evolution of median and
average profits of US stock-marketed traded firms for 1992-2013 and pre-tax income for the top 1% and
the middle 40%. Figure 15 shows evidence of a strong positive correlation between the growth rates of the
top 1% income and profit: 0.48 (for the median) and 0.51 (for the average). By contrast, correlation
between the middle 40% income and profits is lower (of 0.12 for the median and of 0.24 for the average).
This suggests that the evolution of profits influences income inequality as it benefits the top 1% but not
others.

Figure 14: The evolution of profits of publicly traded US-based firms and the US pre-tax income of the top 1%
                                          and middle 40%, 1992-2014
                                                    (2003 = 1)
1.70


1.50


1.30


1.10


0.90


0.70
                                                                                                  Mean profit       Median profit        Top 1%         Middle 40%

0.50
       1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002   2003   2004     2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014


Note: Profit data is computed using data for publicly traded firms in all industry and service sectors with the exception of the mining,
quarrying, and oil and gas extraction sector (NAICS 21), excluding in this way the influence of the price of natural resources on the
trend, and NAICS sectors 55-92.
Source: Paunov and Bas (2017) based on Compustat for profits and Piketty et al. (2016) for pre-tax income of the top 1% and middle
40%.

                                                                              20
Figure 15: Correlation of annual growth rates of profits and the average top 1% and middle 40% of the US pre-
                                           tax incomes, 1992-2013

                                                                                               Panel A: Average

                                                                                                       0.10




                                                                                                               Gr. rate top 1% / middle 40%
                                                                                                       0.08

                                                                                                       0.06

                                                                                                       0.04

                                                                                                       0.02

                                                                                                       0.00
  -0.16      -0.14       -0.12     -0.10    -0.08   -0.06                             -0.04    -0.02       0.00                               0.02      0.04     0.06    0.08     0.10     0.12      0.14        0.16
                                                                                                       -0.02                                                                                   Gr. rate of profits

                                                                                                       -0.04

                                                                                                       -0.06

                                                                                                       -0.08
                                                                                                                                                                                  Top 1%      Middle 40%
                                                                                                       -0.10


                                                                                               Panel B: Median

                                                                                   0.10

                                                                                   0.08

                                                                                   0.06

                                                                                   0.04

                                                                                   0.02

                                                                                    0.00
     -0.10           -0.08       -0.06     -0.04    -0.02                               0.00      0.02               0.04                            0.06      0.08     0.10      0.12      0.14          0.16
                                                                                   -0.02
                                                                                                                                                                                    Gr. rate of profits
                                                    Gr. rate top 1% / middle 40%




                                                                                   -0.04

                                                                                   -0.06

                                                                                   -0.08

                                                                                   -0.10
                                                                                                                                                                                Top 1%      Middle 40%
                                                                                   -0.12

Source: Bas and Paunov (2017) based on data on corporate profits from Compustat and Piketty et al. (2016) for pre-tax income of
the top 1% and middle 40%. Growth rates are computed on real income and profits, applying the same deflator as described in
Piketty et al. (2016).




                                                                                                          21
Bas and Paunov (2017) show that winner-take-all markets i.e. markets that are characterized by higher
industry market concentration and market volatility (to proxy for risk) are associated with higher profits
(column 1 of Table 1). Market volatility benefits profit more than wages but less than executive pay
(columns 2 and 3 of Table 1). These results are obtained for the following specification:


Π𝑖𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑓 ∗ 𝑆ℎ_𝑇𝑜𝑝5𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡 ∗ 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗𝑡−1 + Γ ∗ 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑡 + Λ ∗ 𝐽𝑗𝑡 + +𝜏𝑠𝑡 + 𝜆𝑖 + 𝜆𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑗𝑡
                                                                                                                                 (1)

where Π𝑖𝑗𝑡 stands for the log profits as well as the profit-to-wage and profit-to-executive-pay ratios.
Sh_Top5 and Volatility respectively refer to the share of the top 5% of firms and the standard deviation of
firms’ stock market valuations for industry j at time t-1. The specification includes time trends across
industry sectors (𝜏𝑠𝑡 ) to control for sector-specific time trends that may affect executive pay and correlate
with changing market dynamics. The authors also include firm fixed effects (𝜆𝑖 ) and year fixed effects
(𝜆𝑡 ) to isolate any time-invariant unobservable differences in pay across industries, firms and executives
and year-specific shocks to executive pay from our estimates. 𝐽𝑗𝑡 is a vector of industry controls that
includes industry size and capital intensity. 𝑋𝑖𝑗𝑡 is a vector of firm observable characteristics varying over
time that includes firm size, profit margins and revenue.


                                      Table 1: Impacts of market dynamics on profits

                                Dependent variables:           Profits ft   Profit to     Profit to
                                                                               wage      executive
                                                                              ratioft    pay ratioft
                                                                   (1)          (2)           (3)
                                Concentration(s,t-1)            0.181*        0.202        -0.253
                                                                (0.103)      (0.150)      (0.222)
                                Volatility(s,t-1)                0.024      0.118***     -0.102***
                                                                (0.018)      (0.031)      (0.036)
                                Firm controls                     Yes           Yes          Yes
                                Industry controls                 Yes           Yes          Yes
                                Industry-time trend               Yes           Yes          Yes
                                Firm fixed effects                Yes           Yes          Yes
                                Year fixed effects                Yes           Yes          Yes
                                Observations                    44,570       10,039         9,584
                                R-squared                         0.95         0.86          0.76

Source: Bas and Paunov (2017) based on ExecuComp and Compustat for 1992-2013.
Note: Market concentration is measured using the share of the top 5% of firms in total industry sales while market volatility is
measured as the average annual standard deviation of firms’ stock market value at the 6-digit NAICS industry level. See Bas and
Paunov (2017) for a description of the other variables used in this estimation. Robust standards errors corrected for clustering at the
6-digit-industry-year level are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                 22
The declining return to labor

A corollary of higher returns to capital is the decreasing share of labor in value added in many OECD
countries over the past three decades (Figure 16). Official statistics of US Bureau of Labor Statistics show
a decline of the share of labor in the United States from 64% - a value that stayed constant from the
immediate post-Second World War period - to 58% from the mid-1980s onwards (Elsby et al., 2013).5
Official statistics may be an underestimate of the decrease in the labor share because intangibles are not
adequately accounted for in capital. Corrado et al. (2009) show that the USD 1 trillion increase in GDP (in
19999) arising from addition of intangible investment to GDP results in an equal increase in Gross
Domestic Income (GDI), all of which accrued to the owners of capital, consequently decreasing the share
of labor income.

Several pieces of evidence point to a role of digital innovation in accounting for those changes: First,
Figure 17 shows that the labor share in the United States decreased significantly in the more R&D-
intensive sectors but not in the least R&D-intensive sectors. Also, Koh et al. (2015) show that the lowering
of the labor share in the United States over the past three decades stems mainly from an increase in the
income share of knowledge capital, i.e. IPR and software and not physical capital. Related evidence comes
from Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) who find that countries and industries experiencing larger declines
in the relative price of investment, a development mainly due to IT investments, had larger declines in
labor shares.

                Figure 16: Labor share in value added for the OECD-21* in percentages, 1975-2013
       58%


       56%


       54%


       52%


       50%
             1989




             2005




             2012
             1975
             1976
             1977
             1978
             1979
             1980
             1981
             1982
             1983
             1984
             1985
             1986
             1987
             1988

             1990
             1991
             1992
             1993
             1994
             1995
             1996
             1997
             1998
             1999
             2000
             2001
             2002
             2003
             2004

             2006
             2007
             2008
             2009
             2010
             2011

             2013
Source: OECD National Accounts Database.
Note: The figure shows statistics for the following 21 OECD countries with available data: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.




5
  Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) also show that the share of corporate gross value added paid to labor declined by five
percentage points for 59 economies over 1975-2012. Using industry-level data, Alvarez-Cuadrado et al. (2014) find that the
income share from labor has declined in all but 3 of a set of 16 industrialized economies over the same period.


                                                              23
Figure 17: Labor share of industry value added in the United States by sectoral R&D intensity in percentages,
                                                 1971-2011
90%
                                                       High R&D intensity     Medium R&D intensity     Low R&D intensity

80%


70%


60%


50%


40%
      1970
      1971
      1972
      1973
      1974
      1975
      1976
      1977
      1978
      1979
      1980
      1981
      1982
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
      2005
      2006
      2007
      2008
      2009
      2010
      2011
Source: OECD STAN Database.
Note: Labor share of income is measured as labor costs (compensation of employees) over value added. Sectors are assigned to
R&D intensity categories following OECD (2016), OECD Taxonomy of Economic Activities Based on R&D Intensity", OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, No. 2016/04., OECD Publishing, Paris. The “medium R&D intensity sectors” category
combines the medium-high, medium- and medium-low intensity sectors.


Second, Table 2 provides regression results for 27 OECD countries over 1995-2007 that show more direct
evidence on the effects of innovation, following the methodology firstly proposed by Rajan and Zingales
(1998). In our context, we compare the trends in labour share of income, concentration and firms’ mobility,
between industries that are relatively more and less dependent on R&D investments, as a function of
country level innovation, controlling both for industry- and country-year effects. The advantage of the
approach is that it allows avoiding cross countries comparison (which is more subject to endogeneity
concerns deriving from omitted variables biases). The estimated regression is as follows:

 𝑌𝑐𝑗𝑡 = 𝛽0 + 𝛽1 (𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝑃𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑗 ) + 𝛽2 (𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑢𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑠𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝑆𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑗 )
                    + 𝛽3 (𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑖𝑡𝑎𝑙 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑗 ) + 𝛽4 (𝐹𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑗 ) + 𝛽5 (𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑒𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝑇𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑝𝑜𝑟𝑡𝑗 )
                    + 𝛽6 (𝑈𝑛𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝐷𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝐿𝑜𝑤 𝑆𝑘𝑖𝑙𝑙𝑒𝑑 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑗 ) + 𝛽7 (𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑐𝑡 ∗ 𝐾 𝐼𝑛𝑡𝑗 ) + 𝑢𝑐𝑗 + 𝜂𝑐𝑡
                    + 𝜀𝑐𝑗𝑡                                                                                    (2)

where Ycjt is the labor share and 𝛽1 is our coefficient of interest, indicating the effect of innovation –
proxied for by patenting at country level and interacted with industry patent intensity – on the labor share.
We also test for the effects of other factors that may be correlated with innovation and affect the labor
share. This includes controls of the availability of human capital, finance and capital as well as the
importance of labor unions and trade. We also add country GDP as well as country-year and industry-year
fixed effects to account for to control for other country and industry factors and their evolution over the
period analysed. The data annex provides details of the variables we use.

Our findings show a negative relation between labor shares and patenting performance, even as the effects
of finance, skills, capital, labor unions, trade and GDP are controlled for. We also find a negative effect of
a more skilled labor force on the labor share. This may also be related to labor-replacing effects of
technological change. The evidence is coherent with evidence by Bassanini and Manfredi (2012) who find
for industries across 25 OECD countries over the 1980-2007 period, that 80% of intra-industry labor-share
contraction can be attributed to total factor productivity growth and capital deepening.




                                                            24
Third, other evidence that supports our model on the effects of winner-take-all markets on the decrease in
the labor share includes recent evidence by Barkai (2016) and Autor et al. (2017). Barkai (2016) finds that
the decline in the labor share due to an increase in markups, thus confirming the link between the labor
share and rent sharing. Autor et al. (2017) show across different datasets for the United States and other
countries that the fall in the labor market share is strongest in industries with stronger market concentration
and that market concentration is stronger in more technology-intensive industries.

Digital innovation is of course not the only cause behind the decreasing labor share and higher rewards to
capital. Other factors have contributed as well, including the weakening of unions (as also shown in our
results of Table 1). Also, decreasing labor returns do not automatically translate into higher rewards to
capital invested in digital innovation. Some of the gap may be related to higher depreciation rates: modern
forms of capital, such as computers, software and other communication technologies, depreciate much
faster than equipment of the past. Computer R&D has an estimated depreciation rate of 40% (Li and Hall,
2016). Moreover, capital includes aside from intangible assets, real estate, tangible capital and capital
stocks of the government sector. Bonnet et al. (2014), for instance, shows evidence of higher returns to real
estate.

Finally, several measurement issues need to be addressed to adequately measure the labor share, especially
as digital innovation rises in importance. This includes accounting for the contribution of intangibles to
income. The gap between income accounts that take intangibles into account and those that do not widens
(Corrado et al., 2009). In addition, Elsby et al. (2013) show that the methods used to impute the labor and
capital income earned by entrepreneurs, sole proprietors, and unincorporated businesses influenced the
changing labor shares reported by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The downward trend, however,
remains even if self-employment is not taken into account (Karabarbounis and Neiman, 2014). The gross
labor share may also be much higher than the net labor share once tax deductions are taken into account.
Bridgman (2014) finds, however, that adjustments to taxes are modest for most countries, including the
United States.




                                                      25
Table 2: Evidence on the impacts of innovation on the labor share from industry data for 1995-2011 across 27
                                              OECD countries
    Dependent variable                             Industry labor compensation over value added
                                                    (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)
      Patentsct * Patent intensityind             -0.054*       -0.049      -0.049       -0.056*    -0.068** -0.058** -0.064**
                                                  (0.032)      (0.030)     (0.030)       (0.030)     (0.028) (0.028) (0.027)
      Graduatesct * Skill intensityind                         -0.211*     -0.211*       -0.202*     -0.201* -0.183* -0.184*
                                                               (0.115)     (0.116)       (0.115)     (0.116) (0.110) (0.106)
      Capitalct * Capital intensityind                                      0.049         0.038       0.068    0.043    0.009
                                                                           (0.422)       (0.421)     (0.419) (0.423) (0.430)
      Financect * Intangible assetsind                                                  -0.336**    -0.349** -0.336** -0.324**
                                                                                         (0.145)     (0.143) (0.145) (0.145)
      Tradect * Transport equipmentind                                                               0.196*    0.178    0.128
                                                                                                     (0.115) (0.112) (0.113)
      Union Densityct * Low-skill intensityind                                                                0.007*   0.008*
                                                                                                              (0.004) (0.004)
      GDP ct * Capital intensityind                                                                                     0.393
                                                                                                                       (0.317)
      Country-year fixed effects                    Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
      Industry-year fixed effects                   Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes
      Observations                                 4,070        4,070       4,070         4,070       4,070      4,070      4,070
      R-squared                                    0.25         0.26        0.26          0.26        0.26       0.27       0.27
Source: Regressions based on data from the OECD MSTI and STAN databases.
Note: Regressions use data for 16 manufacturing industries in 27 countries and over a period of 17 years between 1995 and 2011.
Both dependent and independent country-level variables are in logarithms. Industry-level exposure variables are normalized. As a
consequence, coefficients are interpretable as difference in the elasticity of the dependent variable, to changes in the country-level
variables, between industries with maximum exposure and industries with minimum exposure. Therefore, the coefficient on Patentsct *
Patent intensityind in column (5) reads as follows: the difference in the elasticity of the labor share to an increase in country-level
innovation (Patents), in industries with the highest patent intensity (1) compared to industries with the lowest patent intensity (0), is -
0.064. For instance, if patenting doubled (increase by 100%), then the labor share in industries with high patent intensity would
decrease by 6.4% more than in industries with low patent intensity. The identification is based on the hypothesis that industries that
use patents more intensively have a lower labor share than industries that rely relatively less on patents. The data annex provides
definition of variables included. Robust standards errors are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.



Higher returns to executives

Growing risk has increased the impact of managers' decisions on profits. Under stable market conditions,
decisions taken by managers make little difference as market shares have some inertia and the quality of
decisions can be averaged over time. In winner-take-all markets, a manager's decision that is just
marginally better or worse than that of competitors can result in large gains or alternatively large losses.
The rewards operate in the same way as described by Rosen (1981) when characterizing the earnings of the
most successful athletes and entertainers ("superstars"), which exceed by far the predictions of
conventional models. Evidence on the rewards of executives relative to firms’ net sales shows striking
differences in rewards for the top 90th percentile in a few key sectors of activity: IT-related services,
innovation-intensive manufacturing as well as IT-related manufacturing (Table 3). Top managers in finance
and insurance and extractive industries also receive high pay; this evidence points to the role of other
factors such as the financialisation of the economy in explaining changes in the distribution of income.




                                                                   26
      Table 3: Share of executive compensation in net sales over 1992-2014, on average and by percentile

                        Sector                                     10th        50th        90th   Average
                        IT-related services                        0.3%        2.0%       16.9%    6.4%
                        Innovation-intensive manufacturing         0.3%        1.7%       13.4%    5.4%
                        Finance and insurance                      0.2%        1.5%        7.7%    3.5%
                        IT-related manufacturing                   0.3%        1.3%        6.7%    2.8%
                        Extractive industries                      0.1%        1.1%        7.6%    2.8%
                        Non-IT-related services                    0.1%        0.5%        2.8%    1.3%
                        Non-innovative manufacturing               0.2%        0.6%        2.3%    1.2%
                        Retail and wholesale trade                 0.1%        0.4%        2.0%    1.0%
                        Transportation                             0.1%        0.4%        1.6%    0.7%
Source: Paunov and Rodriguez (2017) based on ExecuComp and Compustat.
Note: Further detail on the categorization of industries is provided in the data annex.



In addition, top managers' activity is subject to information asymmetry: it is difficult to monitor their actual
capacity and effort especially where only marginal differences might make a big difference in the outcome
and where market risk is high. Competition between firms to attract the best managers has consequently
increased, giving top managers the ability to negotiate favorable compensation packages. For those
reasons, top managers have been able to capture part of the higher rent, and have seen their average pay -
particularly non-wage compensation - rise much faster than other employees who have less influence on
firms' performance. There is the more intensive use of high-powered incentives such as stocks and stock
options that give executives a share in the company’s profits, boosting the pay for the winners and, in
theory, punishing losers (Lerner and Wulf, 2007; Hall and Liebman, 1998; Murphy, 1998). More than
three quarters of executive pay in 2014 were due to non-wage compensations up from slightly more than
half in 1992. It is also these shares rather than the salary per se that explain the higher reward to top deciles
during the period of the DotCom bubble.

Moreover, as is the case for investors, important non-wage compensation means that managers share in the
market risks and consequently may claim higher risk compensation. One piece of evidence on risks for
managers is the turnover rate. Checking the rates across sectors of activity, we find indeed that it is larger
for IT and innovation-intensive activities. Over 2000-2013 top executives in IT-related services have the
highest exit rate with more than 1 in 5 leaving their position (this number may also partly reflect executives
leaving to other firms as part of “poaching of the best”) (Figure 18). IT-related manufacturing is the second
highest. The rate has increased relative to other sectors compared to 1993-1999.

Digital innovation has evolved at the same time as top managers have seen their rewards increase, also in
IT-intensive sectors. In the United States the CEO-to-worker compensation ratio was 29.0-to-1 in 1978,
grew to 122.6-to-1 in 1995, and was 272.9-to-1 in 2012 (Mishel and Sabadish, 2013). An estimated 40% of
the top 0.1% in the United States are managers in non-financial industries (Bakija et al., 2010 as quoted in
CEA, 2016). Top managers in sectors where digital innovation is important receive returns that are higher
than expected from their industries’ share in total sales (Table 4). Executives in the IT-related services
industries represented nearly one in five of the top 1% of executives in 2000-2014, a similar share to
executives in finance and insurance. IT-related manufacturing is in third rank in terms of the share of top
executives, above its rank in industry sales. Other sectors represent higher shares in sales than of top 1%
executives.




                                                                   27
              Figure 18: Annual turnover rate of leading executives by sector of activity, for 1993-2013

             21.8%
    22%
                                                                                                            2000-2013   1992-1999
                          19.9%
    20%
                                        18.5%        18.4%
                                                                  17.8%
    18%           17.4%                                                         17.0%
                                16.9%                                                           16.7%
                                                                                                            16.2%       16.2%
                                             15.9%        15.8%                         15.8%                                15.6%
    16%                                                                 15.1%                                   15.1%
                                                                                                    13.9%
    14%

    12%

    10%




Source: Paunov and Rodriguez (2017) based on ExecuComp.
Note: Further detail on the categorization of industries is provided in the data annex.




                         Table 4: Distribution of the top 1% of executives across sectors of activity
                                                        2000-2014                1992-1999
                                                 Share of Industry share Share of Industry share
                                               the top 1%      in sales  the top 1%     in sales
           Finance and insurance                  24.9%         19.3%       26.5%        13.3%
           IT-related services                    24.1%         11.3%       21.4%         9.8%
           IT-related manufacturing               12.4%          7.6%       9.8%          7.9%
           Retail and wholesale trade             8.9%          13.0%       8.6%         13.7%
           Innovation-intensive manufacturing     8.7%           7.1%       7.5%          7.9%
           Extractive industries                  7.4%          14.5%       3.5%         13.3%
           Non-innovative manufacturing           6.9%           8.9%       9.5%         13.6%
           Non-IT-related services                4.0%           7.9%       7.3%          8.5%
           Transportation                         2.7%          10.4%       5.9%         11.9%
Source: Paunov and Rodriguez (2017) based on ExecuComp and Compustat.
Note: Further detail on the categorization of industries is provided in the data annex.



Bas and Paunov (2017) show that winner-take-all markets i.e. markets that are characterized by higher
industry market concentration and market volatility (to proxy for risk) are associated with higher pay of the
top executive of US-based traded companies. Their evidence is based on the following specification:

𝑃𝑎𝑦𝑖𝑓𝑗𝑡 = 𝛼 + 𝛽ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑓 ∗ 𝑆ℎ_𝑇𝑜𝑝5𝑗𝑡−1 + 𝛽𝑑𝑒𝑠𝑡 ∗ 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑙𝑖𝑡𝑦𝑗𝑡−1 + Γ ∗ 𝑿𝑓𝑗𝑡 + Κ ∗ 𝒁𝑖𝑓𝑗𝑡 + Λ ∗ 𝑱𝑗𝑡 + 𝜏𝑠𝑡 +
          𝜆𝑖𝑓 + 𝜆𝑡 + 𝜀𝑖𝑓𝑗𝑡                                                                     (3)

where Pay stands for executive i’s pay of firm f in industry j at time t. 𝑍𝑒𝑖𝑗𝑡 is a vector of executive-specific
controls and includes the age of the executive, their tenure in the firm and whether they are about to leave
the firm (as pay may differ prior to executives’ departure). Other variables are as specified for equation (1)
described above.
                                                                   28
Columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 shows a positive association between market concentration, volatility and
executive pay both at executive and firm levels. Specifically CEOs - i.e. managers that decide on firms’
strategies (column 3) – receive higher pay on these markets. It is not the fixed wage component but the
share that varies with firm performance that is higher on more concentrated and volatility markets
(columns 4). This finding points to the role of risk compensation in executive pay. The effects of market
concentration on executive pay is also consistent with that of Gabaix and Landier (2014) who show that
CEOs in larger-sized firms get more pay. Although not identical, firm size and market power are
correlated.

The evidence reported associates executive pay to winner-take-all market characteristics of their own
industry. The rent-sharing effects should apply with regards to executives’ own industry because higher
pay arises from the profits generated in executives’ own industry and executives’ ability to negotiate shares
in profits in their company. This would not be affected by market dynamics in other sectors than
executives’ own because rents are not transferable.

However, developments across the economy at large are also relevant to executive pay because executives
may have transferable skills that can be applied in other markets. This means that the market characteristics
in one sector may influence the pay in another. This is well illustrated by the Heckscher-Ohlin model that
can obtain very different outcomes compared to a single-industry model (see Haskel et al., 2012). This
regards executive pay compensation given in winner-take-all markets to skills that complement capital in
the digital innovation economy. These effects are not adequately captured if the focus is only on
developments in executives’ own industry. The role of such effects is consistent with the finding in Bas
and Paunov (2017) of strong significant effects of market dynamics across the larger industry in which
executives operate. However, the effects are no longer significant if industry characteristics are also
included in those regressions, suggesting effects of market dynamics operate at the specific industry level.
Evidence from the 20 year-panel of executives of ExecuComp also shows that few executives switch to
other industries.

Interestingly, during the "DotCom bubble" of 1999-2000, a period during which the stock market value of
IT companies skyrocketed, these companies increased rewards to their executives (Figure 19A). During the
period, the total compensation of the highest paid group increased substantially more than that of other
groups. Other industries did not experience similar trends (Figure 19B).




                                                     29
   Table 5: The impacts of market concentration and volatility on top executive compensation in the United
                                             States, 1992- 2013

             Dependent variables:                               Executive      Executive Executive          Executive
                                                                  payift      pay shareft  payift           wage payift

                                                                                              CEOs vs.
                                                                                               others
                                                                    (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)
             Concentration(s,t-1)                               0.474***       0.006***                        -0.067
                                                                 (0.165)        (0.001)                       (0.099)
             Volatility(s,t-1)                                  0.103***       0.026***                        -0.006
                                                                 (0.021)        (0.007)                       (0.012)
             Concentration(s,t-1) x CEOs                                                      0.650**
                                                                                               (0.262)
             Concentration(s,t-1) x Other executives                                            0.335
                                                                                               (0.255)
             Volatility(s,t-1) x CEOs                                                         0.121***
                                                                                               (0.023)
             Volatility(s,t-1) x Other executives                                             0.091***
                                                                                               (0.022)
             P-Value of the Difference in Coefficients
             for Concentration                                                                   0.00
             P-Value of the Difference in Coefficients
             for Volatility                                                                      0.07
             Firm controls                                         Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
             Executive controls                                    Yes            No            Yes             Yes
             Industry controls                                     Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
             Executive-firm fixed effects                          Yes            No            Yes             Yes
             Firm fixed effects                                     No            Yes            No              No
             Year fixed effects                                    Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes
             Observations                                         42,407         8,608         42,407          42,407
             R-squared                                             0.79          0.47           0.79            0.76
Source: Bas and Paunov (2017) based on ExecuComp and Compustat .
Note: Market concentration is measured using the share of the top 5% of firms in total industry sales while market volatility is
measured as the average annual standard deviation of firms’ stock market value at the 6-digit NAICS industry level. Robust standards
errors corrected for clustering at the 6-digit NAICS-year level are reported in parentheses. See Bas and Paunov (2017) for a
description of the variables used in this estimation. Robust standards errors corrected for clustering at the 6-digit-industry-year level
are reported in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                  30
                             Figure 19: Trends in executive income by income decile for 1992-2014
                                                           (2003 = 1)

                                               Panel A: IT-related services and manufacturing
 2.4
 2.2
   2
 1.8
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
   1
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
        1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

       IT-related services - 90th percentile             IT-related services - median             IT-related services - 10th percentile
       IT-related manufacturing - 90th percentile        IT-related manufacturing - median        IT-related manufacturing - 10th percentile




                            Panel B: Other industries (excluding IT-related manufacturing and services)
 2.4
 2.2
   2
 1.8
 1.6
 1.4
 1.2
   1
 0.8
 0.6
 0.4
        1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
                          Other industries - 90th percentile        Other industries - median   Other industries - 10th percentile

Source: Paunov and Rodriguez (2017) based on Compustat.
Note: Further detail on the categorization of industries is provided in the data annex.




Regarding the relationship between executive pay and the top 1%, the trend in pay over 1992-2013 mimics
closely the evolution of the income of the top 1%, similarly to the evidence shown in Figure 14 for profits.
The correlation between growth rates of the top 1% income and executive pay is high: 0.63 (for the
median) and 0.70 (for the mean). By contrast, the correlation between the growth rates of the middle 40%
and executive pay is lower for both the median (0.47) and the mean (0.60) (Figure 20). This evidence
suggests that executive pay influences income inequality similarly to profits. The stronger correlation of
average compared to median executive pay also suggests that the dispersion of executive pay also related
to income inequality.



                                                                         31
 Figure 20: Correlation of annual growth rates of executive pay and the average top 1% and middle 40% of the
                                        US pre-tax incomes, 1992-2013

                                                                                  Panel A: Average

                                                                                                                      0.12




                                                                                    Gr. rate top 1% / middle 40%
                                                                                                                      0.10

                                                                                                                      0.08

                                                                                                                      0.06

                                                                                                                      0.04

                                                                                                                      0.02

                                                                        0.00
   -0.24 -0.22 -0.20 -0.18 -0.16 -0.14 -0.12 -0.10 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20
                                                                       -0.02
                                                                                                       Gr. rate of executive pay
                                                                                                                      -0.04

                                                                                                                      -0.06

                                                                                                                      -0.08
                                                                                                                              Top 1%      Middle 40%
                                                                                                                      -0.10


                                                                                  Panel B: Median

                                                                                                                   0.10
                                                   Gr. rate top 1% / middle 40%




                                                                                                                   0.08

                                                                                                                   0.06

                                                                                                                   0.04

                                                                                                                   0.02

                                                                     0.00
       -0.22 -0.20 -0.18 -0.16 -0.14 -0.12 -0.10 -0.08 -0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16 0.18 0.20
                                                                    -0.02
                                                                                                      Gr. rate of executive pay
                                                                                                                   -0.04

                                                                                                                   -0.06

                                                                                                                   -0.08         Top 1%     Middle 40%

                                                                                                                   -0.10

Source: Bas and Paunov (2017) based on data on executive pay from ExecuComp and Piketty et al. (2016) for pre-tax income of the
top 1% and middle 40%. Growth rates are computed using deflated income and executive pay, applying the same deflator as
described in Piketty et al. (2016)

Finally, evidence on the wealthiest 400 Americans is also consistent with the “superstar” explanation:
Kaplan and Rauh (2013) find that in 2011 compared to 1982, the richest individuals were less likely to
have grown up wealthy, but had a university education and succeeded in industries – technology, finance
and mass retail – where digital innovation has driven growth. Andersson et al. (2009) show that the firms
                                                                                                                     32
operating in the US software sector with high potential upside gains to innovation pay “star” workers,
notably programmers, more than firms that operate less innovation-intensive industries.

Labor compensation

Digital innovation may also be expected to increases the rewards to those employees that play a critical
role in securing rents of winning firms. An emerging micro evidence shows evidence of rent sharing with
workers. Song et al. (2015), for instance, find that over 1978-2012, inequality in US labor earnings
increased across firms, within industries and US states, which is suggestive of rent sharing with employees.
Evidence for the United Kingdom suggests these rents are shared with more skilled workers; Mueller et al.
(2015) find that in this country, wage differentials between high-skilled and either medium- or low-skilled
jobs increase with firm size; while differentials between medium- or low-skilled jobs are either invariant to
firm size or (if anything) slightly decreasing. They also identify a link between wage inequality and the
average number of employees of the largest firms in Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the
United States, over 1981-2010. Card et al. (2013) also find that increasing heterogeneity across firms
explain over 60% of the growth in wage inequality across occupations and industries in West Germany
over 1985-2009. The increased wage differential between highly-skilled workers and others as reflected in
those studies is not likely to be related to skill-biased technological change, as it depends on the size of the
employer and there is little reason why technical trends would differ across differently sized firms. An
explanation in terms of rent sharing is more plausible as rents may differ across firms.

Evidence on the publicly traded firms in the United States that report on wage payments by Bas and
Paunov (2017) shows no association of firms’ wage pay and average wages in more concentrated and
volatile markets, differently from the findings on effects on executive pay and profits (Tables 1 and 5).

The negotiation power of most workers, however, is weaker. This is for a number of reasons. First, labor
market pressure, which tends to equal the price of similar labor across firms, is stronger for employees than
for managers. It is more difficult to replace managers than a number of workers. Second, another factor
that reduces labor’s share in rents is that information asymmetries regarding capacity and effort that allow
negotiating higher pay are often less prominent for employees than for managers. Third, IT-enabled
outsourcing and more temporary work arrangements weaken workers’ connections to winning firms,
increasing the competitive pressure on employees (Goldschmidt and Schmieder, 2015). From 2005-2015
virtually all job creation in the United States was related to alternative work arrangements defined as
temporary help agency workers, on-call workers, contract workers, and independent contractors or
freelancers (Katz and Krueger, 2016). Goldschmidt and Schmieder (2015) show that reducing rent sharing
was one of the motivations why German firms outsourced non-core activities, such as food, cleaning,
security and logistics services starting in the early 1990s.

Opportunities for social mobility

Inequality indicators capture the relative position of individuals at any point in time; an important question
these indicators do not address is whether individuals in lower income categories have the opportunity to
move upwards (Jones and Kim, 2014). In many countries higher inequalities are, however, associated with
lower upward social mobility (as described by the so-called “Great Gatsby” curve). Chetty et al. (2014), for
instance, find that a child born in the 1980s to parents in the bottom 20% of the income distribution has
only a 7.5% chance of moving to the top 20%.

Social mobility is connected to creative destruction, as this mechanism triggers a change in market winners
(and losers), affecting respective incomes as new winners move up the income distribution (while new


                                                      33
losers move down). With digital innovation’s impacts on the incidence and role of creative destruction,
social mobility may increase in the digital innovation economy.

There is some evidence connecting social mobility and innovation: Anecdotal evidence from the Forbes
400 list of the richest Americans discussed shows that between 1982 and 2001 (as digital innovation was
progressively taking off) the share of individuals who were not wealthy prior to their business success
compared to that of individuals who inherited their wealth (an indicator of cross-generational social
mobility) increased. However, having professional skills is a critical precondition for success: the share of
people with a college education rose in the list from 77% in 1982 to 87% in 2011 (Kaplan and Rauh,
2013). Recent empirical work also suggests social mobility increases with innovation: Aghion et al. (2015)
shows that US states with more innovation-led growth had higher upward social mobility over the 1995-
2010 period.

6. Policy implications

There is a growing consensus that income inequalities in many OECD countries have reached socially
unacceptable levels, and corrective policies are increasingly considered. Aside from direct social policies,
policy instruments that governments may act on include fiscal policies, innovation, IPR, data access, and
competition policies.

Current economic policies and institutions were developed to suit traditional activities like manufacturing,
which implied very different production processes and market structures to those of the currently emerging
ones. Consequently, impacts of current policies and institutions may be different from those intended also
with regards to how they encourage innovation, so as to drive of income growth and welfare improvements
for all, and reduce income inequality.

Fiscal policy

The most direct instrument to reduce income inequalities is fiscal policy, which can be used to redistribute
income from the richer to the poorer. However, tax instruments are of limited effectiveness and might
sometimes be counter-productive when it comes to addressing innovation-related income inequalities:

 1. For households, while progressive income tax has been implemented in all OECD countries, it has not
    had significant impact in increasing inequalities of the primary income distribution. The reductions
    have also become weaker over time in most countries (OECD, 2011).

 2. The intangible nature of many business assets has facilitated their relocation to low (or no) tax
    countries, evading taxes from countries where the revenue is generated, reducing revenues available
    for redistribution. Curbing tax evasion, notably from businesses, could also support income
    redistribution.

 3. Taxation of innovation-based rents might deter investment in innovation. Even if it is efficient to tax
    heavily rents that do not come from productive activities but from undue market power (based on
    regulation, influence, strategies, etc.), distinguishing such rents from those which reflect actual
    productive activities can be difficult. Eliminating the very conditions which allow for those non-
    productive rents, notably barriers to competition may consequently be easier.

Innovation support policies

Innovation policies may be biased in favor of incumbents and affect in this way market concentration.
R&D tax incentives, for instance, tend to benefit mainly large, established companies, which are more

                                                     34
often profit-making than start-ups. Public procurement also often benefit incumbents, as governments are
often risk-adverse and prefer to deal with established suppliers, and as bidding for public contracts is costly
for newcomers. Ways to correct for these biases include special clauses to support start-ups like the
French R&D tax credit, which reimburses in cash the amount that loss-making businesses would have
made thanks to the measure if they had generated profits.. Another example is special conditions for small
firms to access public markets (like the US Small Business Innovation Research, SBIR program).

IPR and standards

While market dominance of winners in digital innovation competition is based on economies of scale and
network effects, its persistence is favored by legal and technical instruments, namely IPR (notably patents
and copyrights) and standards. These instruments can therefore deter entry in such markets, to the
detriment of competition, innovation and inclusive growth. IPR are important in certain cases in order to
secure adequate compensation to innovators, but their strength and scope may have changed with digital
innovation because of the important means digital innovation provides to secure market exclusivity. In
order to improve access to IPR protected knowledge of potential market entrants, the development of
dedicated markets for IPR can facilitate the use of IPR protected inventions by third parties (against
payment of fees). These markets have difficulties emerging by themselves due to high transaction costs
(notably information costs and asymmetries).

Access to personal and public data

In the digital economy personal data, which includes detailed information on individuals’ characteristics,
practices and interests, are essential assets with no substitute on the market. Access to and ownership of
these assets impact directly on market structures and the distribution of monetary benefits from digital
innovation. Personal data are produced when the concerned individuals use the Internet. Such data are
currently the exclusive ownership of the companies providing the infrastructure on which they are
produced (such as search engines, social networks, platforms and online shop), and they are a source of
revenue and of market dominance for these companies. The legal and regulatory framework which
allocates rights on these data with the view to sharing more equally the benefits from exploiting these data
and facilitating competition (while respecting other conditions such as privacy rights) consequently plays a
more important role than in past economic environments. This is all the more important as advantages
provided by data exclusivity build up over time, hence reinforcing market dominance and excluding new
competitors.

Competition policies and platforms

Internet-based platforms are web sites serving as intermediaries or facilitators between users, or between
service suppliers and consumers (such as Facebook, Google, Uber, Amazon and Apple’s iStore). Platforms
have a major influence on market competition. There are concerns regarding market competition between
platforms, due to their direct reliance on digital innovation, which favors winner-take-all market structures.
Competition authorities around the world have dealt with a few cases involving platforms already, but
there is not yet an articulated doctrine on how to deal with them. Recent work by the German and French
competition authorities goes in this direction.6

6
 See footnote 3. This includes, for instance, Bundeskartellamt (2016), Market Power of Platforms and Networks, Working Paper
Ref. B6-113/15, and, Autorité de la concurrence and Bundeskartellamt (2016), Competition Law and Data. Accessed at:
http://www.autoritedelaconcurrence.fr/doc/reportcompetitionlawanddatafinal.pdf




                                                            35
7. An open research agenda

This paper puts forward an understudied mechanism that links digital innovation to changing market
structures and, consequently, impacts on the distribution of income. It provides initial evidence pointing to
the importance of the mechanism. Further evidence is important to understand the nature of impacts better.
The following areas in particular are critical:

First, the changes brought by digital innovation require continued efforts to measure the phenomenon of
software-based innovations and relevant intangible investments. With continued technological progress,
developing the right types of indicators is by nature a moving target that requires continued adaptation.
While a decade ago indicators on computer and Internet access were suitable for analysis, at present such
an indicator is at best of weak interest given widespread adoption and the further development of digital
innovations. It is important to know better about digital innovations across firms, industries and countries
over time to trace systematically the effects of digital innovation on market dynamics. Such evidence is
particularly important to explore the wider impacts of digital innovation beyond the sectors most closely
associated with the digital economy, such as software and hardware producers, search engines and online
portals. Evidence on digital innovation and intangible investments at sector and firm levels are also
important.

Second, the impacts of digital innovations on market dynamics in the United States and other countries
require further attention. An analysis of economic census data would allow testing the extent of changes
and in what contexts they arise. Recent work by Autor et al. (2017) and de Loecker and Eeckhout (2017)
provides first evidence on the evolution of market concentration. Analyses of risk would also be important.
Analyses need to address a number of conceptual challenges, such as accounting for “redefining” the
industry associated with particular businesses is increasingly important as the digital economy changes
markets. For instance, Google’s investments in automated cars points to the company’s role as competitor
in a number of markets. Moreover, the absence of monetary transactions on two-sided markets such as
online search engines, also requires thinking about what measures market concentration to use in addition
to traditional sales-based measures.

Third, there is the large agenda on impacts of winner-take-all markets on the incomes of different groups in
society and on social mobility. Matched employer-employee data allow documenting, beyond executives
and investors, which workers benefit from rent-sharing and which are excluded. Such data also allow
understanding whether and, if so, how digital innovation creates opportunities for social mobility.
Documenting the evidence of countries can allow understanding whether country-specific contexts,
including differences in opportunities provided for social mobility, affect how winner-take-all markets
affect the distribution of income.

Fourth, further analyses aimed at assessing the relative importance of the new channel linking innovation
to the distribution of income outlined in this paper compared to others (financialisation, globalization,
skill-biased technological progress, etc.) would also be an important next step.




                                                     36
                                               References

     Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2016). The race between machine and man: Implications of
technology for growth, factor shares and employment (No. w22252). National Bureau of Economic
Research.
     Aghion, P., Akcigit, U., Bergeaud, A., Blundell, R., & Hémous, D. (2015).), “Innovation and Top
Income Inequality”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 21247.
     Aghion, P., Akcigit, U., Hyytinen, A. and O. Toivanen (2016), Living the “American Dream” in
Finland: The Social Mobility of Inventors, unpublished manuscript.
     Alvarez-Cuadrado, F., Van Long, N. and M. Poschke (2014), “Capital Labor Substitution, Structural
Change, and the Labor Income Share”, CIRANO-Scientific Publications, 2014s-02.
     Andersson, F., Freedman, M., Haltiwanger, J., Lane, J., & Shaw, K. (2009), “Reaching for the stars:
who pays for talent in innovative industries?”, The Economic Journal, 119(538), F308-F332.
     Arora, A., Branstetter, L. G., & Drev, M. (2013). Going soft: How the rise of software-based
innovation led to the decline of Japan's IT industry and the resurgence of Silicon Valley. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 757-775.
     Autor, D. H. (2015), “Why are there still so many jobs? The history and future of workplace
automation.”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(3), 3-30.
     Autor, D., & Dorn, D. (2013). The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of the US
labor market. The American Economic Review, 103(5), 1553-1597.
     Barkai, S. (2016). Declining labor and capital shares. Stigler Center for the Study of the Economy and
the State New Working Paper Series (2), University of Chicago.
     Barth, E., Bryson, A., Davis, J. C., & Freeman, R. (2014), “It’s Where You Work: Increases in
Earnings Dispersion across Establishments and Individuals in the U.S.”, National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper NBER Working Paper, No. 20447, National Bureau of Economic Research.
     Bas, M. and C. Paunov (2017), Market concentration, volatility and executive pay, unpublished
mimeo.
     Bassanini, A. and T. Manfredi (2012), “Capital’s Grabbing Hand? A Cross-Country/Cross-Industry
Analysis of the Decline of the Labor Share”, OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers,
No. 133, OECD Publishing, Paris.
     Bonnet, O., Bono, P. H., Chapelle, G., & Wasmer, E. (2014). Does housing capital contribute to
inequality? A comment on Thomas Piketty’s Capital in the 21st Century. Sciences Po Economics
Discussion Papers, 7, 12.
     Branstetter, L., M. Drev, and N. Kwon (2015), “Get With the Program: Software-Driven Innovation in
Traditional Manufacturing”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper ,No. 21 752.
Bridgman, B. (2014). Is Labor’s Loss Capital’s Gain? Gross versus Net Labor Shares. US Bureau of
     Economic Analysis, unpublished mimeo.
     Brynjolfsson, E., McAfee, A., Sorell, M. and F. Zhu (2007), “Scale without Mass: Business Process
Replication and Industry Dynamics”, Harvard Business School Technology & Operations Mgt. Unit
Research Paper, No. 07-016.
     Card, D., Heining, J. and P. Kline (2013), “Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West German
Wage Inequality”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(3), 967-1015, Oxford University Press.
     Chetty, R. et al. (2014), Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational
Mobility in the United States, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129, 1553-1623, , Oxford University Press.
     Cincera, M., & Veugelers, R. (2013), “Young leading innovators and the EU's R&D intensity
gap”, Economics of Innovation and New Technology, 22(2), 177-198.
     Cochrane, J. H. (2005), “The risk and return of venture capital”, Journal of Financial Economics,
75(1), 3-52.
     Corrado, C., Hulten, C., & Sichel, D. (2009). Intangible capital and US economic growth. Review of
income and wealth, 55(3), 661-685.


                                                    37
      Corrado, Carol, Charles Hulten, and Daniel Sichel. "Measuring capital and technology: an expanded
framework." Measuring capital in the new economy. University of Chicago Press, 2005. 11-46.
      Council of Economic Advisors (CEA) (2016), Economic Report of the President, Transmitted to the
Congress in February 2016.
      Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. and J. Miranda (2014), “The Role of Entrepreneurship in US
Job Creation and Economic Dynamism”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol., 28, No. 3 (Summer
2014), pp. 3-24.
      De Locker, J. and J. Eeckhout (2017), The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic
Implications, unpublished mimeo.
      Elsby, M. W., Hobijn, B. and A. Şahin (2013), “The decline of the US labor share”, Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 2013(2), 1-63.
      Faurel, L., Li, Q., Shanthikumar, D. M. and S. H. Teoh (2015), “CEO Incentives and Product
Development Innovation: Insights from Trademarks”, University of California, Irvine - Paul Merage
School of Business, unpublished mimeo.
      Forbes, K (2000), “A Reassessment of the Relationship between Inequality and Growth”, American
Economic Review, Vol. 90, pp. 869-887.
      Furman, J. (2015), “Structural Challenges and Opportunities in the U.S. Economy”, Lecture Delivered
at the London School of Economics, November 5, 2014
      Furman, J. and P. Orszag (2015), A Firm-Level Perspective on the Role of Rents in the Rise in
Inequality, Presentation at “A Just Society”, Centennial Event in Honor of Joseph Stiglitz, Columbia
University, 15 October 2015.
      Gabaix, X., and A. Landier (2008), "Why has CEO Pay Increased So Much?.", The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 123(1): 49-100, Oxford University Press.
      Gabaix, X., Landier, A., & Sauvagnat, J. (2014), “CEO pay and firm size: an update after the crisis”,
The Economic Journal, 124(574), F40-F59.
      Goldschmidt, D., & Schmieder, J. F. (2015), “The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and the Evolution of
the German Wage Structure “, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 21366
      Goos, M., & Manning, A. (2007). Lousy and lovely jobs: The rising polarization of work in
Britain. The review of economics and statistics, 89(1), 118-133.
      Grossman, G. M., & Helpman, E. (1993)., Innovation and growth in the global economy, MIT Press.
      Hall, B. and J. Liebman (1998), “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 113, 653-691, Oxford University Press.
      Harhoff, D., Scherer, F. M., & Vopel, K. (2003). Exploring the tail of patented invention value
distributions. In Economics, Law and Intellectual Property (pp. 279-309). Springer Publishing.
      Haskel, J., Lawrence, R. Z., Leamer, E. E., & Slaughter, M. J. (2012). Globalization and US wages:
Modifying classic theory to explain recent facts. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 26(2), 119-139.
      Haskel, J. and S. Westlake (2017), Intangibles and the rise of inequality, Ch. 6, in Capitalism without
Capital: The Rise of the Intangible Economy, Princeton University Press.
      Jones, C.I. and J. Kim (2014), “A Schumpeterian Model of Income Inequality”, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper, No. 20637.
      Kaplan, S. and J. Rauh (2013), “It’s the Market: The Broad-based Rise in the Return to Top Talent”,
The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 27(3), pp. 35-55.
      Karabarbounis, L. and B. Neiman (2014), “The Global Decline of the Labor Share”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, Vol. 129(1), pp. 61-103, Oxford University Press.
      Katz, L. and A. Krueger (2016), The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work Arrangements in the
United States, 1995-2015, unpublished mimeo.
      Koh, D., Santaeulàlia-Llopis, R. and Y. Zheng (2015), “Labor Share Decline and Intellectual Property
Products Capital”, unpublished manuscript.
      Koller, T., M. Goedhart, and D. Wessels (2015), Valuation: Measuring and Managing the Value of
Companies, Wiley, New York (1996).


                                                     38
      Kornai, J. (2016), “So What is Capital in the Twenty-First Century? Some Notes on Piketty’s Book”,
Capitalism and Society, Vol. 11(1), Article 2.
Lerner, J., & Wulf, J. (2007). Innovation and incentives: Evidence from corporate R&D. The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 89(4), 634-644.
      Li, W. C., and Hall, B. H. (2016). Depreciation of business R&D capital, National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper, No. 22473.
      Michaels, G., Natraj, A., & Van Reenen, J. (2014). Has ICT polarized skill demand? Evidence from
eleven countries over twenty-five years. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), 60-77.
      Mishel, L. and N. Sabadish (2013), “CEO Pay in 2012 Was Extraordinarily High Relative To Typical
Workers and Other High Earners”, Economic Policy Institute (EPI) Issue Brief , no. 367, June 26, 2013.
      Mueller, H., E. Simintzi and P. Ouimet (2015), “Wage inequality and firm growth”, LIS Working
Paper, No. 632 (March 2015).
      Murphy, K. (1998), “Executive Compensation”, Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, North
Holland.
      Nakamura, Leonard Isamu (2001). What is the US Gross Investment in Intangibles?:(at Least) One
Trillion Dollars a Year!. Economic Research Division, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, 2001.
      OECD (2011), Divided We Stand: Why Inequality Keeps Rising, OECD Publishing.
      OECD (2015a), All on Board: Making Inclusive Growth Happen, OECD Publishing, Paris.
      OECD (2015b), OECD Science, Technology and Industry Scoreboard 2015: Innovation for growth
and society, OECD Publishing, Paris.
      Paunov, Caroline and Valentina Rollo (2016). "Has the Internet fostered inclusive innovation in the
developing world?." World Development 78: 587-609.
      Piketty, T., Saez, E. and G. Zucman (2016), “Distributional national accounts: Methods and estimates
for the United States”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 22945.
      Rochet, J.-C. and J. Tirole (2003), “Platform competition in two-sided markets”, Journal of the
European Economic Association, 1. 990-1029.
    Romer, Paul M. (1994), “The origins of endogenous growth”, The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol 8 (1) (1994): 3-22.
      Rosen, S. (1981), “The economics of superstars”, The American Economic Review, Volume 71(5), pp.
845-858.
      Schumpeter, J. (1911), The Theory of Economic Development, Transaction Publishers.
      Song, J., Price, D. J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N., & von Wachter, T. (2015), “Firming Up Inequality”,
NBER Working Paper, No. 21199, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Varian, H. (2003), The Economics of Information Technology, Revised version of the Raffaele Mattioli
      Lecture, delivered at Bocconi University, Milano, Italy, on November 15-16, 2001 and the Sorbonne
      on March 6, 2003.




                                                   39
Annex 1: The impact of reduced costs of innovation on the sequencing and versioning of innovation

The effects of reduced costs of innovation on the rate of innovation in the context of digital innovations
can be accounted for in a simple two-period framework.

In the basic, one period setting, the total cost of a product is:

C = R + F + d*V

where R is the investment in research (fixed cost), F is the fixed cost for producing and marketing the
product (setting up a factory or retooling, setting up or re-orienting a commercial network etc.), d is the
variable unit cost and V is the volume of sales.

The turnover is:

S = p*V

where p is the unit price.

A firm will decide to engage in the research investment leading to the product if and only if the
(expectancy of) profit is positive, i.e. the (expected) turnover exceeds the (expected) cost:

Condition 1: S > C  V > (R + F)/(p - d) = V°

There is a minimum volume of expected sales V° below which the company will not engage in innovation.

Digital innovation reduces the fixed cost of producing, marketing and distributing the product, and the
variable unit costs approach zero. According to Condition 1, V° is decreasing in F and in d, meaning that
the lower fixed cost of production and marketing, or a lower variable unit cost makes it profitable for a
firm to innovate with a lower expected volume of sales. This implies that digital innovation reduces the
threshold for triggering spending in innovation, resulting in more innovations.

The impact of digital innovation on the cost of innovation also makes it more rewarding for a firm to split
its innovations in smaller parts and market those new products rather than launch more advanced new
products (cumulating several rounds of innovation) at longer time intervals. This can be described by
defining two periods of production.

Assuming that the research, production and sale can be sequenced in two periods if the firm decides so, the
firm can produce and sell a "partial version", or "smaller innovation" version of the final good. Across two
periods, 1 and 2, the costs and turnover equations are as follows:7

C1 = R/2 + F + d*V1
C2 = R/2 + F + d*V2

S1 = p*V1
S2 = p*V2

7
 We ignore discounting of period 2 because i) the difference between the two periods is often a question of months
and because ii) interests rates have been very low for a decade. Introducing discounting would also not provide
additional insights to the main mechanism we illustrate.


                                                        40
The supplementary cost for the firm generated by sequencing its innovation is due to further production
and marketing fixed costs that are incurred every time the firm issues a new product, independently of the
degree of novelty and the volume of sales of the product.

By accessing the market earlier the firm can increase total sales by stealing customers from competitors.
This is reflected in the assumption that V1 + V2 = V + V' > V.

The condition for the firm to divide its innovation in two smaller innovations is that profit should be higher
when it does so (it should also be positive, condition 1):

Condition 2: (S1 + S2) - (C1 + C2) > S - C  F < (p-d)V'

This condition is all the easier to satisfy with low F and d. This is exactly what happens with digital
innovation. F is lower due to digital distribution, and d is even zero for digital products. Therefore digital
innovation tends to accelerate the pace of innovations and increase versioning, by making it beneficial to
split innovations over time into smaller marketable pieces. In addition, in a winner-take-all context small
innovations, with only a marginal advantage over competition, might be enough to gain all the market: this
reinforces the impact of the reduction in cost on the incentive to put rapidly to market innovations of a
small size.




                                                     41
Annex 2: Information on data used

A. Industry categories used in Tables 3 and 4, Figures 18 and 19

The SIC 2-digit industries of all firms in ExecuComp and Compustat are categorized into the following
groups.

  Extractive industries include Metal Mining (10), Coal Mining (12), Oil and Gas Extraction (13),
   Mining and Quarrying of Nonmetallic Minerals (14), Petroleum Refining and Related Industries (29).
  Construction includes Construction - General Contractors & Operative Builders (15), Heavy
   Construction, Except Building Construction, Contractor (16), Construction – Special Trade
   Contractors (17)
  IT-related manufacturing includes Industrial and Commercial Machinery and Computer Equipment
   (35) and Electronic & Other Electrical Equipment & Components (36).
  Innovation-intensive manufacturing includes Chemicals and Allied Products (28) and Measuring,
   Photographic, Medical, & Optical Goods, & Clocks (38).
  Non-innovative manufacturing includes Food and Kindred Products (20), Tobacco Products (21),
   Textile Mills Products (22), Apparel, Finished Products from Fabrics & Similar Materials (23),
   Lumber and Wood Products, Except Furniture (24), Furniture and Fixtures (25), Paper and Allied
   Products (26), Printing, Publishing and Allied Industries (27), Rubber and Miscellaneous Plastic
   Products (30), Leather and Leather Products (31), Stone, Clay, Glass, and Concrete Products (32)
   Primary Metal Industries (33), Fabricated Metal Products (34), Miscellaneous Manufacturing
   Industries (39)
  IT-related services includes Business Services (73), Communication (48) and Engineering,
   Accounting, Research, and Management Services (87)
  Finance and insurance includes Depository Institutions (60), Nondepository Credit Institutions (61),
   Security & Commodity Brokers, Dealers, Exchanges & Services (62), Insurance Carriers (63),
   Insurance Agents, Brokers and Service (64) and Holding and Other Investment Offices (67).
  Retail and wholesale trade includes Wholesale Trade - Durable Goods (50), Wholesale Trade –
   Nondurable Goods (51), Building Materials, Hardware, Garden Supplies & Mobile Homes (52),
   General Merchandise Stores (53), Food Stores (54), Automotive Dealers and Gasoline Service
   Stations (55), Apparel and Accessory Stores (56), Home Furniture, Furnishings and Equipment Stores
   (57), Eating and Drinking Places (58), Miscellaneous Retail (59).
  Transportation includes Railroad Transportation (40), Local & Suburban Transit & Interurban
   Highway Transportation (41), Motor Freight Transportation (42), Water Transportation (44),
   Transportation by Air (45), Transportation Services (47), Transportation Equipment (37)
  Non-IT-related services include Electric, Gas and Sanitary Services (49), Real Estate (65), Hotels,
   Rooming Houses, Camps, and Other Lodging Places (70), Personal Services (72), Automotive Repair,
   Services and Parking (75), Motion Pictures (78), Amusement and Recreation Services (79), Health
   Services (80), Educational Services (82)




                                                  42
B. Executive pay measures used in Tables 3, 4, 5 and Figures 19 and 20

Data on executive pay refer to total executive compensation (including salary, bonuses and other annual
rewards), except for results reported in column (4) of Table 5 that refer to executives’ salary only. Table
A.1. describes the estimating sample used in regressions presented in Table 5. More detail is provided in
Bas and Paunov (2017).

             Table A.1. Characteristics of the estimating sample for regression results of Table 5

                                                                               Number of Percentage
                                                                              observations share
     Number of executives                                                           7,812
     Number of firms                                                                1,106
     Sector of activity
       Oil and gas extraction                                                         3,008           7.1%
       Chemicals and allied products                                                  4,151           9.8%
       Petroleum refining and related industries                                        114           0.3%
       Industrial and commercial machinery and computer equipment                       930           2.2%
       Electronic, other electrical equipment and components                          6,150          14.5%
       Measuring, photographic, medical, optical goods and clocks                     3,297           7.8%
       Furniture and fixtures                                                            73           0.2%
        Industry                                                                    17,723           41.8%
        Communications                                                                 955            2.3%
        Electric, gas and sanitary services                                          2,111            5.0%
        Food stores, eating and drinking places, miscellaneous retail                  757            1.8%
        Depository institutions                                                      5,115           12.1%
        Insurance carriers                                                           3,382            8.0%
        Holding and other investment offices                                         3,194            7.5%
        Business services                                                            9,170           21.6%
        Services                                                                    24,684           58.2%
     Time period
       1992 - 1995                                                                   3,478            8.2%
       1996 - 1999                                                                   5,315           12.5%
       2000 - 2003                                                                   6,154           14.5%
       2004 - 2007                                                                  10,226           24.1%
       2008 - 2011                                                                  11,809           27.8%
       2012 - 2013                                                                   5,425           12.8%




                                                       43
C. Data on the distribution of income in Figures 2 and 3

Data on the top 1% income share (before taxes) are taken from the World Top Incomes Database,
http://topincomes.g-mond.parisschoolofeconomics.eu/ (accessed on 15 July 2015).

The following adjustments are undertaken to deal with missing values:
  For Figure 2 missing values of the top 1% income share (before taxes) have been replaced by the year
   in parenthesis for the indicated year: Germany: 1987(1986); 1988(1989); 1990(1989); 1991(1992);
   1993(1992); 1994(1995); 1996(1995); 1997(1998); 1999(1998); 2000(2001); 2009(2008); Italy:
   1996(1995); 1997(1998); Netherlands: 1987(1985); 1988(1989); Switzerland: 1988(1987);
   1990(1989); 1992(1991); 1994(1993); United Kingdom: 2008(2007). The data series of the top1%
   income share used for each country (and period) are as it follows: Australia: Main series: 1976-2010;
   Canada: Main series: 1986-2000; Longitudinal Administrative Data: 2001-2010; Denmark:
   Adults:1986-2010; France: Main series: 1976-2012; Germany: Main series: 1976-2008; Ireland: Main
   series: 1986-2009; Italy: Main series: 1976-2009; Japan: Main series: -2010; Netherlands: Main
   series: 1986-2012; New Zealand: Adults: 1986-2012; New Zealand: Adults: 1986-2012; Norway:
   Main series: 1986-2011; Sweden: Main series: 1986-2013; Switzerland: Main series: 1986-2010;
   United Kingdom: Married couples & single adults: 1986-1989; Adults: 1990-2012; United States:
   Main series: 1986-2014.
  For Figure 3 missing values of the top 1% income share (before taxes) have been replaced by the year
   in parenthesis for the indicated year: Finland: 2010 (2009); Germany: 1981 (1980); 2010 (2008);
   Indonesia: 1981 (1982); Ireland: 2010 (2009); Italy: 2010 (2009); Malaysia: 1981 (1983). The data
   series on the top 1% income share used for each country (and period) are the following: Australia:
   Main series:1981 and 2010; Canada: Longitudinal Administrative Data:2010; Main series:1981;
   Denmark: Adults:1981 and 2010; France: Main series:1981 and 2010; Germany: Main series:1981
   and 2010; Ireland: Main series:1981 and 2010; Italy: Main series:1981 and 2010; Japan: Main
   series:1981 and 2010; Malaysia: Main series:1981 and 2010; Netherlands: Main series:1981 and
   2010; New Zealand: Adults:1981 and 2010; Norway: Main series:1981 and 2010; Singapore: Main
   series:1981 and 2010; South Africa: Adults:2010; Married couples & single adults:1981; Spain: Main
   series:1981 and 2010; Sweden: Main series:1981 and 2010; Switzerland: Main series:1981 and 2010;
   United Kingdom: Adults:2010; Married couples & single adults:1981; United States: Main
   series:1981 and 2010.

D. Industry and country level data used for labor share regressions reported in Table 2

Regression results reported in Table 2 combine several OECD industry and country data, including the
OECD database for Structural Analysis (STAN) and the Main Science and Technology Indicators (MSTI).
The data is complemented with data from EU KLEMS, the OECD National Accounts database and the
World Bank Enterprise Surveys. The variables are defined in Table A.2. jointly with their sources.
The estimating sample combines data for the following 27 countries: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada,
Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Portugal, Korea, Slovak Republic, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The industries covered include the following 15 industries at 3- and 2-digit ISIC Rev. 4 level as defined in
the OECD STAN database: basic metals, construction, electrical equipment, food products, beverages and
tobacco, motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers, machinery and equipment n.e.c., other non-metallic
mineral products, paper and paper products, printing and reproduction of recorded materials, rubber and
plastic products, textiles, transport equipment, transportation and storage, wholesale and retail trade, wood
and products of wood and cork.

                                                     44
                                   A.2. Industry and country-level data used for results

Variables                  Description                                                      Source
Dependent variable
Labor share                Industry labor compensation over industry value added            OECD STAN

Country-level variables
 GDP                       Gross domestic product                                           OECD National Accounts
 Patents                   Ratio of triadic patent families to GDP                          OECD MSTI
 Graduates                 Ratio of the number of tertiary educated people to GDP           OECD MSTI
 Capital                   GFCF as % of GDP                                                 OECD National Accounts
 Finance                   Share of finance sector in national value added                  OECD STAN
 Trade                     Ratio of industry import and exports to GDP                      OECD National Accounts
 Union density             % of workers members of trade unions                             OECD and J.Visser, ICTWSS database
Industry-level variables
 Patent intensity          Percentage of firms holding at least one patent                    World Bank Enterprise Surveys across
                                                                                              50,013 firm observations from 117 countries
                                                                                              for 2006-2011
Intangible assets          Share of intangible capital over total capital (US period average) EU KLEMS
(Low) skill intensity      Industry share of highly (less) skilled workers (US period         EU KLEMS
Capital intensity          average)
                           Industry ratio of capital stock over value added (US period        OECD STAN
Transport equipment        average)
                           Transport equipment capital as ratio of total capital              EU KLEMS
R&D intensity              Ratio of industry R&D expenditure in value added                   OECD (2016), "OECD Taxonomy of
                                                                                              Economic Activities Based on R&D
                                                                                              Intensity", OECD Science, Technology and
                                                                                              Industry Working Papers, No. 2016/04.




                                                                   45
