                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ISRAEL'S STABILIZATION:
                                A TWO-YEAR REVIEW




                                  Michael Bruno

                                 Sylvia Piterman




                             Working Paper No. 2398




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1987




Paper presented for the Conference on Inflation Stabilization: The Experience
of Israel, Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia and Mexico, June 1987. We wish to express
our gratitude to members of the Bank of Israel's Research Department for many
useful discussions on the topics with which this paper is concerned, and particularly
to Mordechai Fraenkel, Shmuel Amir, Rafi Melnik, Akiva Offenbacher and Zalman
Shiffer, for many helpful comments on an earlier draft. We are also grateful
to Meir Merhav for translating and editing this paper and to Yossi Margoninski
for research assistance. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                  NBER Working Paper #2398
                                                  October 1987




                    Israel's Stabilization: A Two-Year Review




                                    ABSTRACT


        The comprehensive stabilization program that Israel launched
   in July 1985 has brought about a dramatic reduction in inflation
   at no visible unemployment cost while improving the external
   financial position of the country. The program's success lies in
   a drastic cut in the government deficit but was also due to the
   appropriate initial synchronization of the most important nominal
   variables.

        In spite of the continued success of the stabilization
   program over the last two years, many problems remain. Excessive
   wage demands and a private consumption boom, in part the result
   of relative stability, have so far prevented the reduction of
   inflation to OECD rates. The stabilization process has also
   unearthed many structural problems of which an oversize public
   sector stands out in particular.

       Further reduction of inflation depends on a flexible wage
  policy and continued budget balance. A further cut in government
  expenditure and abstention from debt finance are also the key to
  the success of the capital market and tax reforms. These and
  other structural reforms will determine whether the recent
  upsurge in economic activity can be turned into a sustained
  growth process.




Professor Michael Bruno                          Dr. Sylvia Piterman
Governor                                         Maro Livne 2/11
Bank of Israel                                   Ramat Eshkol
P.O. Box 780                                     Jerusalem 97 158
Jersualem, ISRAEL                                ISRAEL
                                      —1—



                              1..   Introduction


After more than a decade of continuously escalating inflation and re—

currentbalance of payment crises which had since 1973 caused the vir-

tual stagnation of economic growth, Israel launched a comprehensive

stabilization program in July 1985. The new policy achieved a drastic

slowdown of inflation together with an improvement in Israel's external

position, without causing a significant rise in unemployment.

  The program's success lies in a dramatic cut in the government

deficit, but it is also due to the appropriate initial credible syn-

chronization of the most important nominal variables. At the same time

it was supported by favorable external circumstances —— improved terms

of trade, depreciation of the dollar, and emergency aid granted by the

U.S.

 Viewed close to its second anniversary, the stabilization program can

be credited with remarkable achievements, but recent developments have

also brought out several problems to which Israel's policy-makers will

have to address themselves.

 The first of these is that inflation continued to run at 20 percent

per annum, and has so far riot declined to the rate prevailing in

Western countries. In part, this may be a by—product of stabilization

itself. In its wake came excessive wage demands on the one hand and

higher private consumption on the other. Also, a sharp fall in private

savings (which may be temporary) and a real appreciation of the sheqel

both showed in a considerable setback to the current account in 1986

and early 1987, while the capital account continued to provide the

surplus in the overall balance of payments. At the same time business
                                 —2—

profits were at their lowest historical level and there was only a

moderate increase of gross domestic product and productivity in 1986,

although a significant improvement made itself visible towards the end

of the year and early 1987.

 In the course of stabilization a series of structural difficulties

have come to the surface in several sectors. While inflation was run-

ning at a high rate, these problems were obscured by various financial

and accounting devices. These problem areas, notably in the agricul-

tural and construction sectors, have required special government inter-

vention in the form of loan conversions and other measures. Finally,

the program has not dealt with the most important long—term structural

problem of Israel's economy, centering on an oversize public sector.

  In order to cope with some of the long—term problems, the government

has recently planned several reforms intended to reduce distortions in

the capital and credit markets and in the tax system. Within this

framework, some preliminary measures were adopted in April 1987.

  At the present juncture a permanent reduction of inflation hinges on a

more flexible wage policy and continued budget balance. The govern—

ment's abstinence from further debt is also a key to the success of the

capital market reform. It still remains to be seen whether the recent

acceleration of economic activity will be sufficiently export-oriented

and investment-inducing to turn the economy to a self—sustaining growth

path. Once started, more rapid growth and more fundamental structural

reforms could then reinforce each other.

  The following sections review various aspects of the stabilization

program. Section 2 describes the background of its adoption in July

1985 and the supplementary policy measures taken in 1986 and in early

1987. Section 3 discusses developments in the real economy in 1986,
                                    —3—

  with special emphasis on the untoward trend of wages and private con-

  sumption. Section 4 deals with monetary developments and with dilemmas

 relating to the objectives of monetary policy and to its management in

 the process of disinflation. Section 5 discusses synchronization, and

 reviews the development of the various nominal variables in relation to

 the exchange rate, and discusses the policy choice between a crawl and

 an exchange rate peg. Some real micro—effects of disinflation are dis-

 cussed in Section 6 and the last section briefly addresses itself to

 the renewal of long-term growth.



   2. The Stabilization Program —— Background,            Implementation

                      and Complementary Policy Measures



 Until the adoption of the stabilization program in July 1985, the

 Israeli economy went through more than a decade of recurrent balance of

 payments crises, each of which escalated inflation to a higher plateau

 as the government tried to solve the crisis by resorting to price

shock—inducing policy measures (big devaluations and sharp increases in

prices of subsidized goods and services) .   Underlying   these developments

were continuous high budget deficits, mounting public debt, and an ac-

commodatirig monetary policy. Not every balance of payments crisis was

caused by an increase in the government deficit, but no countercyclical

policy was conducted with regard to the balance of payments which might

have prevented the deterioration of the foreign payments position to

the point of crisis.' This process severely impaired economic growth:

for more than a decade GDP and productivity virtually stagnated.



 1 For the analysis of the inflationary process in Israel, see Bruno and
Fischer, 1986; Liviatan and Piterman, 1986; Liviatan, 1986, 1987.
                                 —4—

 In the two years preceding the stabilization program, and following a

policy of slowing devaluation (in 1982-83), the Israeli economy ran

into a severe financial crisis. At the end of 1983 the government re-

sorted to a price shock: a large nominal devaluation, accompanied by

raising controlled prices of goods and services so as to reduce outlays

on subsidies. This, together with the decrease in wealth due to the

partial collapse of bank shares, brought about a large increase in

saving and a considerable improvement in the external current account,

but proved inadequate for arresting the financial deterioration. First,

the 'bank share arrangement' of October 1983 ——   in   which the govern-

ment, in order to avoid their total collapse, guaranteed the value of

these shares at a level considerably above their real value —-   greatly
increased the domestic debt and caused apprehension with regard to the

government's ability to meet its obligations. Second, the rate of

inflation jumped to 15 percent a month —— a rate at which the existing

indexation mechanisms could no longer function adequately. Third, the

tax system broke down, particularly with regard to non-wage income; the

breakdown was partly due to the fact that the banks ceased to pay

income tax as their profits turned negative, and partly to the tax

arrears caused by the acceleration of inflation. The decrease in tax

revenue further undermined the public's confidence in the government's

ability to meet its payments on the public debt. This caused specu-

lative purchases of foreign currency to increase in 1984 despite the

improvement in the external current account. Attempts to put a halt to

capital outflow by devaluations and price shocks caused price inflation

to rise to more than 20 percent a month in September—October 1984.

  Between November 1984 and July 1985, when the stabilization program

was adopted, several tripartite agreements (so-called 'package deals')
                                     —5—


were concluded between the government, the trade unions, and the em-

ployers' organizations. The agreements imposed price freezes and stipu-

lated agreed wage increases. The exchange rate was not frozen, and the

sheqel continued to be devalued rapidly. In the transition from one

package deal to the next prices were adjusted, subsidies were cut, and

the 1985-86 budget adopted during this period included a substantial

reduction in the government's deficit.

  The package deals slowed inflation temporarily and resulted in a real

devaluation, in a rise of the relative price of the subsidized goods,

and a substantial improvement in the current account (see Figure 3 and

Appendix Table 1) .   In   this sense they formed a background and provided

some lessons for the subsequent adoption of the stabilization program.

However, towards mid—1985 the continuing acceleration of inflation and

the renewal of speculative acquisitions of foreign currency made it ev-

ident that the package deals were inadequate to bring about a sustain-

able stabilization of the economy. A more drastic and comprehensive

program was therefore called for.2

 The stabilization program launched in July 1985 had the dual objective

of an abrupt reduction of inflation, and a simultaneous significant im-

provement in the balance of payments. This two-pronged attack on both

inflation and the balance of payments problem —— coming after more than

a decade of trying to attack one of these objectives at the expense of

the other —— was also intended to lay the ground for a structural

change in the economy and for the eventual renewal of growth.

 The program's design was the combination of a drastic cut in the

deficit with the synchronized fixing of several nominal anchors (the

exchange rate, wages and bank credit)


 2 For a discussion of the package deals, see Liviatan, 1986, 1987.
                                   —6—


 The cut in the deficit was primarily designed to stabilize the balance

of payments and facilitate a credible pegging of the exchange rate

(after an initial devaluation) . The anchoring of prices to several nom-

inal variables had the purpose of ensuring that inflation (and expecta-

tions) would be brought down rapidly without throwing too much weight

on a single anchor, which might have led to excessive real costs. For

example, if bank credit is set as the only nominal anchor, the cost in

unemployment and growth may become politically intolerable. Similarly,

if the exchange rate is set as a single anchor, the loss of competi-

tiveness and the deterioration in the balance of payments would eventu-

ally bring about the end of the program.

 The time—span foreseen for the implementation of the program as a

whole was originally set at one year, of which the first three months

were declared as an economic emergency period. The principal measures

of the program were as follows:3

 The Budget: For the real part of the program, the original objective

was to put a halt to any further increase of the public debt, both do-

mestic and foreign. This would have implied cutting the government

deficit by $2—2.5 billion, or 10 percent of the GDP, from its level in

the 1984—85 budget (or 5 percent of GDP as compared to the planned

1985—86 budget)

 The deficit reduction actually incorporated in the stabilization pro-

gram was lower, as a result of a compromise on the intended cut in pub-

lic spending, and was put at 6 percent of the GDP by comparison with

the 1984—85 budget. The deficit was to be reduced primarily by cutting


   For a detailed description of the measures, see Bruno, 1986a. See
also Blejer and Liviatan, 1987, Dornbusch and Fischer, 1986, Dornbusch
and Simonsen, 1987, and Helpman and Leiderman, 1987 for a comparison of
different stabilization programs, including that of Israel.
                                  —7


 subsidies and raising taxes. As will be seen below, the cut of the

 deficit eventually turned out to be deeper, both in the 1985—86 budget

 and that planned for 1986—87. By the end of fiscal year 1986 the gov—

 eminent had indeed not increased its domestic and foreign debt over the

 pre—program level.

  Devaluation and the Freezing of the Exchange Rate: With the launching

 of the stabilization program on July 2, the sheqel was devalued by 25

 percent (including some minor adjustments a few days earlier) and its

 exchange rate against the US$ was stabilized at IS1,500 or NIS1.5.4 At

 the same time, effective exchange rates for imports and exports were

partially unified.

  Multiple Nominal Anchors: When the program was launched, the govern-

ment declared its intention to freeze all aggregates denominated in lo-

cal currency; the freeze on the exchange rate was made conditional on

maintaining an appropriate level of nominal wages, which was still to

be negotiated with the Histadrut (the General Federation of Labor) and

the employers' organizations. (These negotiations were concluded only

two weeks later, on July 15 -— see below) . The Bank of Israel undertook

to restrict bank credit, by raising the reserve requirements and the

real interest rates on the discount—window loan to the commercial

banks. In addition, the prices of most goods and services were frozen

and subjected to administrative control.

  The Capital Market: With regard to the capital market, the principle

was adopted that long—term savings were to be safeguarded while the

liquidity of indexed assets was to be reduced. The measures taken in—


   The New Sheqel, which dropped three zeros from the old sheqel
(NIS=$l,000), was introduced only in August 1985; the final replacement
of the old currency by the new took place in January 1986. This was no
more than a belated change of the numeraire.
                                 —8—


cluded a ban on converting sheqels into residents' foreign—currency de-

mand deposits. Existing deposits of this type, which since 1978 had

provided an indexed money substitute, became a one—way street: they

could be converted into sheqels, but their acquisition for periods of

less than a year was prohibited. Another decision provided for grad-

ually making government bonds tradable in order to create a basis for a

more effective management of monetary policy in the future.

 Wage Policy:    The tripartite wage agreement between the government,

the Histadrut and the employers' organizations was signed, as said ear-

lier, two weeks after the official launching of the stabilization pro-

gram came at the end of some strikes and demonstrations. The agreement

provided for a temporary suspension (until October 1) of the existing

cost—of—living allowance agreement, which stipulated an 80 percent com-

pensation for price increases. From October 1, the threshold for pay-

ment of the cost-of—living allowance was set at 4 percent of the

cumulative price increases in the preceding period,5 (or after three

months, if less than 4 percent) instead of 12 percent under the previ-

ous agreement. An initial compensation of 14 percent was paid with July

wages for the 28 percent price rise that month; in addition, it was

agreed in advanpe that in December, January and February wage increases

would be paid of 4. 4 and 3.5 percent, respectively.

  There was some concern about the implications of the subsequent in-

crease in indexation and the nominal consecutive monthly adjustment be-

ginning in December. However, this was the insurance price that had to



    The cumulative price rise in October and November 1985 in fact
exceeded 4 percent, as a result of seasonal factors, and payment of the
COL allowance was renewed on December 1. In the new wage agreements
signed in April 1986 by the Flistadrut and the employers' organizations,
the threshold was raised to a cumulative price rise of 7 percent.
                                  —9—

be paid in the bargain with a partner (the Histadrut) that was facing a

sharp immediate drop in real wages with no guarantee that the govern-

ment, given its poor previous track record, could deliver on promised

price stability.



                                  *   **


  Even in its first few months, the program achieved considerable suc-

cess.6 Inflation, which had run at an average monthly rate of 15 per-

cent before the program, fell to 3-4 percent a month in the first three

months and then declined to about 1.5 percent a month —— a rate which

has continued until recently. (see Figure 1)

 The main improvement in the balance of payments showed in the coun-

try's liquidity. The favorable turn in the terms of trade (the fall in

prices of oil and other raw materials), and the U.S. emergency aid of

$1.5 billion payable over two years, supported the amelioration of the

balance of payments position, but it is noteworthy that during this pe-

riod the country's foreign currency reserves increased cumulatively by

an amount approximately equal to the U.S.- emergency grant. The main

contribution which this special aid thus made was in providing a safety

cushion for the stabilization of the exchange rate. There is also no

doubt that the confidence which the public accorded the program (as

well as high domestic interest rates -— see Section 4), played a role

in the repatriation of considerable amounts of foreign currency which

had earlier leaked abroad.




 6 For the implementation of the various components of the program and
its results in the first six months, see Bruno, 1986a.
                                — 10 —




 The substantial and continuous contraction of the domestic budget

deficit is in the background of these developments. The deficit de-

creased from 12—15 percent of GDP in the decade before the program to

no more than 2—3 percent of GDP. As can be seen from Figure 2, the dra-

matic decrease in the deficit was mainly due to the increase in taxes,

but also to some reduction of expenditures. These results are partly

due to the disinflation process itself (see Section 6 below)

 Finally, we also wish to emphasize the minimal (and only temporary)

rise in unemployment. Economic activity nevertheless rose above the

pre—program level only by the second half of 1986. These developments,

and those of relative prices (primarily real wages, the real exchange

rate, and real interest) will be discussed in greater detail in the

following sections. For the moment, it remains to mention only a series

of supplementary corrective and supportive measures taken during the

last two years. These may be regarded as part of the program's contin-

ued implementation.

 We have already mentioned that the 1986-87 budget which became opera-

tive from April 1986 reflected the continuation of the fiscal restraint

that preceded it. A highly restrictive fiscal policy permitted a degree

of easing up on monetary restraint. However, in the wake of successive

cuts of the free market interest rate (from 880 and 560 percent p.a. in

July and August 1985 respectively, to 53 percent p.a. in April 1986),

bank credit expanded rapidly. Further cuts in the interest rate were

therefore halted, and the level of real interest remained high. In the

second half of 1986 there was a substantial rise in demand, mainly for

private consumption, which in turn led to a still more rapid expansion

of credit. In order to counter these trends, the prime rate was raised

again, by 3 percent p.a. in October 1986 and by 12 percent p.a. in
                                 — 11 —




 February 1987.The interest rate was lowered gradually from February un-
 til July 1987. There has been a large gap between the marginal domestic

 and the foreign interest rates, which has been maintained by restric-

tions on capital imports. The gap was reduced lately, in July 1987, by

the imposition of a 3 percent tax on capital imports.

  Until August 1986 the policy was to keep the exchange rate stable

against the U.S. dollar; in August,. this was substituted by pegging the

sheqel to a five-currency basket, with the main foreign currencies

weighted according to their share in Israel's foreign trade. During the

period of high inflation that preceded the program, the U.S. dollar had

been widely accepted as a stable yardstick; the continued peg of the

sheqel to the dollar therefore reinforced the perception that the sta-

bilization program was successful. The European currencies, however,

continued in this period to appreciate against the dollar, with the re-

sult that from July 1985 until August 1986 the sheqel effectively

depreciated against the currency basket at a monthly rate of about one

percent. This partially compensated for the excessive wage rise in the

business sector in early 1986 (see below, and Appendix Table 1), which

had impaired the competitiveness of exports. However, the continuous

depreciation at the same time pushed up import prices. This may at

least in part help to explain why inflation failed to drop further dur-

ing 1986 —— a point to be taken up again in Section 5.

 Wage costs in the business sector continued to remain high throughout

1986. Employers were partially compensated for this by cuts in wage—

taxes and National Insurance contributions. A corrective devaluation of

10 percent against the currency basket in January 1987 further helped

to restore the level of profitability of exports to its average 1986

level. The January devaluation was accompanied by a fresh tripartite
                                 — 12 —




agreement between the government, the Histadrut and the employers' or-
ganizations, which provided for a partial waiver of the cost—of—living

allowance.

 Finally, it should be mentioned that the detailed price control system

imposed with the start of the program, was relaxed considerably. Since

March 1986 price controls have remained in force for 40 percent of all

goods and services (as against 25 percent in normal times, and 90 per-

cent at the beginning of the program). It seems that price controls

were at no stage in the program's implementation effective in the sense

of repressed inflation; their main role was to create a favorable atmo-

sphere for the program and to enlist the support and agreement of the

social partners in the overall process of stabilizing expectations.

 A follow—up economic program was adopted by the government in early

1987, when the 1987—88 budget was drafted. This program, directed at

continuing stabilization and revival of growth, comprises several par-

tial reforms affecting the capital and credit markets and the tax sys-

tem. These will be reviewed at the end of the present paper.
                                            — 13 —




                      3. Real Wage Overshooting and the
                           Private Savings Squeeze of 1986



The measures taken with the implementation of the program brought about

a squeeze in demand and a considerable expansion in supply. This out—

come was very important for the success of the program since it sup-

ported the rapid disinflation and enabled the price freeze to function

immediately without pressures (see Blejer and Liviatan, 1987) .               Never-
theless, this downward pressure on domestic prices did not last long.

Already at the end of 1985 --           during   the second quarter of the program
—— demand and supply started to return to their former levels, and then

overshot in 1986.

 Several events immediately spring to the eye when reviewing the econ—

omy' performance in 1986: a) a substantial rise of real wages,7 much

in excess of the increments foreseen in the wage agreement; b) a fall

in real interest rates; and c) a real appreciation of the currency.

These developments are clearly revealed in Figure 3, which also shows

the sharp rise in private consumption. As can be seen from Table 2 be-

low, the increase in private consumption outweighed the decline in

other components of domestic demand (public consumption and investment)

and the rise in exports. Despite this expansion of demand, there was

only a slight rise in real GDP ——             mainly    towards the end of the year.

The import surplus grew significantly, although its absolute level is

still low by comparison with 1982 or 1983 (see Fig. 3)




 7 Labor costs—wages deflated by producer prices—increased even rnore
sharply.
                                 — 14 —




 These developments are obviously interrelated, but the question re-

mains whether some of them can be regarded as leading the others, or

whether they have another cause. The explanation presented here looks

at both supply side factors and those on the demand side. The excessive

rise of gross wages in early 1986 resulted in diminished profitability

and curbed GDP growth. At the same time, the massive increase of net

wage earnings (including transfer payments), combined with the increase

in wealth (see below), with the decline in interest rates and the ex-

pansion of credit (see Section 4) resulted in a huge increase in demand

for private consumption goods and services. The upswing of private con-

sumption supported the real appreciation of the currency and the in-

crease in the import surplus, and was consistent, ex post ,    with   the

real wage increases at the beginning of the year.

  The first question that arises is therefore what caused this high wage

rise. It seems to have its explanation in a combination of factors.

First, there seems to have been a widespread feeling that the state of

the economy had improved, particularly with regard to the balance of

payments, so that continued austerity was no longer justified. This may

have reinforced wage demands which came on top of the wage increases

agreed with the Histadrut (see Section 2) .   This interpretation finds
support in the wage increases in industries which remained depressed in

1986 (construction and agriculture); in these sectors, wages had fallen

sharply in previous years but rose in 1986 despite the continuing fall

in employment.

  Second, firms and workers apparently did not expect price stability to

last; in early 1986 firms therefore agreed to sign expansionary wage

contracts. Both firms and workers, in other words, expected devaluation
                                 — 15 —




 and a renewal of inflation, and therefore set nominal wage increases at

excessively high levels.

  Finally, increases in various wage components which had been agreed

before the stabilization program were postponed until the first op-

portune moment. Moreover, the cost—of—living compensation for fringe

benefits was not included in the cost—of—living allowance agreement,

and fringe benefits were therefore not nominally fixed. This, together

with the higher wage demands mentioned above, led to full compensation

for the abrupt price rise at the start of the program and fringe benef-

its increased considerably in real terms.

  The wage increases found support in an expansionary monetary policy,

manifested in cuts of interest rates and an expansion of bank credit.

Since prices were at the same time frozen, firms could not promptly

shift wage increases on to higher prices. The 'comfortable' liquidity

situation, however, enabled them to finance the wage hike and to wait

until the devaluation which was firmly expected to come.

  Even though the government might initially have had no intention to

devalue, it could reasonably be assumed —— on the basis of more than a

decade of experience in this regard ——      that   the government would not

for long be able to resist the pressure of exporters and of potential

unemployment for devaluation. There was therefore little risk in

yielding to wage deiands. Nor should it be overlooked that the program

never committed itself to keep the exchange rate absolutely stable un-

der all circumstances. In fact, official policy always made the

stability of the exchange rate conditional upon wage stability. The

stance of official policy itself was therefore not rigidly anti—infla-

tionary.
                                   — 16 —




 The currency was in effect devalued only much later ——       in   January

1987, but the relative appreciation of the European currencies during

1986 meant that the sheqel gradually depreciated against the currency

basket (until August 1986, when the sheqel was pegged to the basket

instead of to the dollar) .    This depreciation, together with tax re-
ductions for employers, partially compensated for the erosion of export

profitability due to the large wage increases. (For a further

discussion, see Section 5)

 The explanation that the excessive rise in business sector wages was

due to labor pressure and errors in expectations may have been valid at

a point in time,     the beginning of the year, but not for the whole

year, during which employers had the opportunity to adjust their wage

costs, for example by slowing the wage drift. The employment statis-

tics lend support to this argument: they show that in the first half of

1986 the unemployment rate rose in tandem with the wage increase. In

the second half of the year, by contrast, real wages rose while the

unemployment rate declined (see Figure 3) . The data on wages by sectors

(Table 1) show that the exceptional wage hikes were concentrated in

sectors in which price rises were high and where employment increased.

Moreover, in sectors producing a large proportion of tradables, such as

manufacturing industry, wages rose at the rate that was in fact planned

for 1986. As against this, in sectors having       a lower proportion of

tradables ——   various   services, for example —— wages rose steeply. The

only exceptions are construction and agriculture, both of which are de-

pressed sectors. As said before, the wage increases in these two sec-

tors reflect the demands of workers whose wages had in earlier years

been eroded much more sharply than in the rest of the economy. These

two sectors account for less than 10 percent of total employment, so
                                 — 17 —




that   they did not lead wage developments in 1986. Nevertheless, the

wage increases in these two sectors may indicate that in depressed in-

dustries money wages are inflexible downwards, particularly when the

general state of the economy is improving and therefore changes in

relative wages have to take place through a rise of money wages in sec-

tors with rising activity and demand for labor.

 To conclude: the wage increases of early 1986 seem to have been au-

tonomous, but the maintenance of a high level of real wages throughout

1986 seems to be a combination of a pull of aggregate demand for labor

and downward inflexibility of wages in depressed sectors. This raises

the question which factors caused the increase in aggregate demand in

the course of the year. For an explanation we must look at what led the

substantial expansion of private consumption.

 First of all, the wage rise made itself felt in the increase in con-

sumption. Taking into account a built—in curb in taxes and an increase

in government transfer payments, the increase in real disposable income

of wage earners is estimated at 11 percent per capita, while private

consumption rose by 12 percent. Wage income (including wages imputed to

the self—employed) accounts for some 80 percent of total disposable in-

come, and no doubt has an even larger share in the increase of private

consumption, particularly in the short run.

 Secondly, the fall in the real interest rate certainly had a direct

effect in raising private consumption mainly by bolstering the acquisi-

tion of durables (which the statistics record as private consumption)

However, current consumption was apparently also affected by the

greater availability of consumers' credit. This will be taken up again

in Section 6.
                                 — 18 —




 Thirdly,   the rise of private consumption may in fact be a symptom of

the very success of the stabilization program. It seems that the im-

provement in the economy's financial position —— overcoming of the

financial difficulties in the balance of payments, rehabilitation of

the tax system, and putting a halt to inflation —— brought about an

increase in the public's perceived wealth, and hence a rise in private

consumption.

  Finally, it may be observed that the increase in private consumption

may have been boosted by the continued price freeze (including on im-

ported goods) and the gradual relaxation of price controls in the

course of 1986, which fanned expectations of price rises.8

 The very large increase in private consumption leads to the question

of how this affected GDP and demand for labor, but before going into

this matter something should be said about the other components of ag-

gregate demand and about possible changes in the composition of demand

as between imports and domestic output.

 As profitability declined in line with the rise in wage costs, and as

GDP started to grow only at the end of 1986, no revival came in sight

of investment in equipment and structures, nor was there, as population


 8 An additional argument relying on Deaton, 1977 (see comments in
Chapter II of the Bank of Israel's annual report for 1986) refers to
the individual's lack of discrimination at times of change in the
inflation rate, between changes in relative prices and changes in the
general price level. When inflation accelerates, this causes the rate
of savings to be higher than normal; and conversely—when inflation
decelerates, to lower rates of saving. In the reality of Israel's
economy the test of this hypothesis is exceedingly difficult because in
years of accelerated inflation, such as 1980 and 1984, when the savings
rate rose, there is an explanation for the phenomenon in the changes in
disposable income and private wealth. If the savings rate rises with
continuing stability, this may lend support to the validity of the
argument.
                                 — 19 —




growth ceased, any increase in residential construction. At the same
time, there was a substantial increase in stocks of imported final

products and raw materials which were being replenished as interest

rates fell. Civilian public consumption contracted between 1984 and

1986 byone percent of GDP and defence consumption by 3 percent of GDP.

The cut in defence expenditure was mainly achieved by the reduction of

procurement from defence-related industries, which shifted increasingly

to producing for export. Therefore, a substantial part of the 15 per-

cent rise in exports of manufactures is accounted for by industries

normally producing for the defence ministry (exports of industrial

products, other than those of the highly defence-oriented industries

of electric and electronic equipment and transport goods, increased in

these two years by a mere 5 percent) .   Total   use of resources rose by 7

percent over 1985 and 1984, with most of the increase due to the rise

in private consumption.

  Private consumption generally has a higher component of domestic prod-

uct than exports or investment in equipment and machinery. In 1986 the

composition of demand nevertheless tilted towards imports, as a result

of the massive increase in purchases of durable consumer goods and of

the substantial increase in stocks mentioned earlier. When the real in-

crease in GDP, imports and other uses is estimated without these two

components, we still obtain a higher rise of imports than of the GDP,

although its increase amounts to only 5 percent. The increase in the

acquisition of consumer durables and of stocks therefore explain the

lion's share of the rise in imports of goods and services by comparison

with their level in 1985 or even 1984. By comparison with 1984, imports

increased by 1]. percent while the business sector product rose by 8

percent. The change in 1986 as compared with 1985 is remarkable -—
                                   — 20 —




imports rose by 15 percent while the business sector product rise for
1986 amounted to only 4 percent.

 The upshot of the foregoing analysis is that when purchases of

durables and increases in stocks are excluded, demand did not expand

signifiçantly and exhibited only a moderate preference for imports.

Moreover, there was a decline in stocks of domestic products (see Ap-

pendix Table 2), which apparently reflects an unplanned liquidation of

stocks. This may help to explain the pressures on the domestic price

level which led to an appreciation of the currency in the second half

of the year, and is consistent with the revival of economic activity

towards the end of the year.

 This, however, does not yet explain the discrepancy between the expan-

sion of resource uses and the sluggish increase of the GDP in 1986, un-

less we turn to factors that affected aggregate supply. The sharp fall

in inflation, which raises productivity, and the improvement in the

terms of trade augmented aggregate supply in 1986 even if the fall in

oil prices was only partially passed on to firms and households, as the

government effectively increased the indirect taxation of fuel by re-

ducing its price by less than the fall in its import price. As against

this, there were factors that curbed aggregate supply. First of all,

and perhaps the most important factor on the supply side, were the wage

increases mentioned above, which reflect the downward inflexibility of

wages in sectors confronted with declining demand, and still higher

real wage rises in sectors where demand expanded. Second, there are

institutional and occupational barriers to labor mobility that prevent

a shift of labor from declining industries to those in which demand

expanded. This too has a contractionary effect on the aggregate supply
                                 — 21 —




schedule or causes it to be steeper than it would otherwise be.9
Finally, aggregate supply decreased as indirect taxes were raised

sharply, mainly by the cut in subsidies but also as a result of the

disinflation process itself, which eliminated the gain from tax ar-

rears.

  To sum up this discussion we present Figure 4, which combines the

hypothetical shifts of the aggregate demand and supply curves during

the period under review. The figure shows the position of the economy

in the period 1983—86, where one axis measures the business sector

product and the other measures the domestic price level relative to

prices of tradable goods.10   We have further plotted aggregate demand

curves, deriving their hypothetical position from data on the econ-

omy's resource use.

 Points A83, A84, and A85 show an increase of business sector product to-

gether with a real devaluation, while the transition from A85 to A86

shows a very modest rise in business sector product together with a

real appreciation. The diagram's interpretation of these developments

is that the shift between 1983 and 1985 is due to a decrease in demand

and to a substantial expansion of aggregate supply coming from the ero-

sion of real wages in 1984 and 1985 and the decrease in prices of

imported raw materials and energy in 1985. The transition from 1985 to



  Formally, the derivation of the upward sloping commodity supply
schedule (Fig. 4) in this case consists of profit maximization by firms
subject to both a real wage and a minimum labor input constraint with
only raw materials being a truly variable factor.
 10 The index of wholesale prices of industrial products for domestic
uses (excluding food, mining and quarrying), divided by the exchange
rate of the sheqel against the currency basket and the wholesale price
index abroad. For the use of this diagram for the analysis of economic
developments from 1965 to 1982, see Bruno, 1986b.
                                — 22 —




1986 representS the combination of supply contraction together with a
demand expansion.11 This interpretation is also consistent with the im-

provement in the import surplus from 1983 to 1985 and with its worsen-

ing from 1985 to 1986.

 By looking at developments during 1985 and 1986 one may further artic-

ulate this interpretation of events. More detailed data indicate that a

large increase in aggregate supply was achieved in the second half of

1985, but GDP remained low because demand had contracted dramatically.

These developments were associated with the initial stage of the stabi-

lization program. In the first half of 1986 both aggregate supply and

demand returned close to the level of the first half of 1985 ——   before
the stabilization program. As stated before, the rise in real wages in

the first half of 1986 was offset on the supply side by improved terms

of trade and the gain from disinflation. In the second half of 1986

aggregate supply declined further (real wages continued to rise), but

the prominent change was the substantial increase in aggregate demand

and caused a rise in GDP, a decline in unemployment, a real apprecia-

tion and a rising import surplus. In both periods there was a real

appreciation of the currency, but according to the argument presented

here, its source differed as between the first and the second half of

the year —— stemming from wage increases in the first half, and from

the upsurge of domestic demand in the second.



                                  *   **

    However, as can be seen in the diagram, the aggregate supply curve
in 1986 lies to the right of the 1983 curve, in spite of the higher
real wages in 1986. This is due to the terms of trade improvement and
perhaps also to the sharp decrease in inflation which raises pro-
ductivity (see Section 6)
                                  — 23 —




  The change in the import surplus may be considered by examining the

respective changes in imports and exports, but for our purposes it is

also useful to review it from the perspective of the investment-savings

balance, particularly because of the important role played in this pe-

riod by public savings. Table 3 shows that in 1985 the increase in pub-

lic savings more than made up for the fall in private savings, but the

latter fell in 1986 so drastically as to affect the current account ad-

versely despite the continued decline in the domestic deficit.

  However, as shown in columns 4 and 5 of Table 3, the import surplus

was still at a much lower level than that of 1983 and was similar to

that of 1984. The country's other foreign currency receipts make it

possible to sustain it at this level, but the present trend is of a

rise in the import surplus, which has continued even after the January

1987 devaluation. However, most of the recent increase in imports is

accounted for by intermediate production inputs, together with the be-

ginnings of higher imports of capital goods. This may reflect an incip-

ient upswing of economic activity and an expansion of capacity.

 This increase in the import surplus has nevertheless not recreated the

country's foreign payments difficulties, due to the increase in the

foreign currency reserves and the stability of the exchange rate which

resulted from the public's confidence in the success of the program,

and also from the gap between domestic interest rates and the expected

returns on foreign currency. These factors, in addition to the special

U.S. grants-in-aid, led to capital inflows. The improvement in the

country's external liquidity can be seen in Fig. 5, and represents the

financial facet of the real appreciation discussed above and to which

we shall return again in the following sections.
                                  — 24 —




                                  * **

 If   it is concluded that a rise in wages and in private consumption and

a real appreciation of the currency are partly the endogenous result of

successful stabilization programs, then the corollary is that they con-

tain a built-in mechanism which partially offsets the success of the

program.

 This has several reasons. First, such programs are devised in the

wake of a period of crisis; even if the real exchange rate appreciation

reflects a change in the composition of resource uses ——      for   example,

from tradable to nontradable goods -—      the authorities hesitate to take
the risk of a significant fall of the real exchange rate.Such a fall

may impair the balance of payments position, so that the authorities

are inclined to carry out nominal devaluations in order to correct the

path of the real exchange rate. These devaluations, on the other hand,

upset the price stability that has been achieved.

 Second, if the authorities take a firm stance on the nominal side and,

regarding the balance of payments as still solid, allow the real appre-

ciation of the currency, the real exchange rate will generally overre-

act, Possible external shocks to the economy will then require an

abrupt climb-down from a tall ladder —- which may have disastrous re-

sults. Developments in Chile in the early 1980's are an         outstanding

example of such a situation.

 Even in the absence of external shocks an overreaction of the exchange

rate makes it necessary to return to a more reasonable exchange rate.

Only if prices are flexible downwards is it possible to achieve the

real devaluation required for this purpose. When prices are inflexible
                                 — 25 —




downwards, such a process will entail high unemployment and loss of

product unless the authorities carry Out nominal devaluations which, in

turn, have the inflationary effect noted above.

  Finally, the increase in private consumption can be curbed by mon-

etary restraint —— a major component of policy which operates through

effects on both wealth and liquidity. However, when there are strong

pressures for cutting interest rates, and policy has the aim of pro-

moting the renewal of economic growth, a restrictive monetary policy is

difficult to maintain for a protracted period.

  Stabilization programs are therefore a very problematic policy in-

strument. They require that fiscal restraint and an incomes policy be

upheld for a long time, within the framework of recurrent 'package

deals.' It is obviously difficult to persuade the trade unions to waive

wage demands when the economic situation looks favorable, but the fail-

ure to achieve wage restraint imposes the need for periodic nominal

adjustments of the exchange rate ——   with   the consequence that the econ-

omy will be condemned to an inflation rate higher than in the Western

countries.
                                 — 26 —




     4.   Stabilization and the Problem of Monetary Control



Among the outstanding events on the money and capital markets was the

rapid rise, since the adoption of the stabilization program, in the

real balances of sheqel-denominated assets at the expense of indexed

assets. Bank credit to the public also expanded rapidly, especially

from mid—1986, and average real interest rates fell substantially com-

pared with their level in 1985. Nonetheless, interest on nondirected

credit in local currency remained at a relatively high level (in addi-

tion to this category of credit there is bank credit in foreign cur-

rency, the volume of which is restricted by ceilings, and directed

credit for exports; interest rates on these types of credit are close

to international rates)

 As can be seen from Table 4, until the end of 1986 M1 and M2 have in-

creased in real terms about 2.5 times, while a broader aggregate, H4,

which is composed of H2 plus residents' foreign—currency deposits and

negotiable bonds held by the public, has increased only by 3 percent.12

This portfolio change of course reflects the decline in inflationary

expectations. The adjustment process has been fairly slow,13 and is ap-

parently not yet concluded. As time goes on, the public is also becom-

ing more disposed to hold sheqel assets for longer terms. Thus, the

share of local—currency deposits for more than a month, which in June



 12 The rapid expansion of M4 in the first half of 1987 is related to
the linkage differentials of foreign currency deposits after the
devaluation of January 1987 and to the large capital inflow in this
period. We refer to this phenomenon in the next section.
 13 As was actually expected from econometric estimations; see Bank of
Israel, Economic Review, 1985.
                                  — 27 —




1986 had accounted for 10 percent of total sheqel assets, had by March

1987 increased to 26 percent.

 Behind the real expansion of monetary aggregates mentioned above there

is an even larger nominal expansion since inflation, as said before,

was not brought down completely. This, together with the fall in real

interest rates, shows that monetary policy in 1986 has been expansion-

ary. However, for a better understanding of that policy, consideration

must be given to the targets assigned in the program to the Bank of

Israel, the policy instruments, and the fact that in 1986 the marginal

interest rate remained very high by international standards (see Table

5)


 A program that succeeds in stabilizing price inflation cannot possibly

keep the quantity of money unchanged, since lower inflation generates a

higher demand for money. The authorities in Israel decided to accommo-

date this increase, even though this could be interpreted as an ex-

pansionary policy (see Fischer, 1984) .    It   was, however, possible to re-

strain the expansion of credit, because disinflation as such does not

significantly affect its real interest rate (see Fischer and Fraenkel,

1983, and Fraenkel, Piterman and Sokoler, 1984) .       It   was assumed that

individuals would therefore obtain the quantity of money they demand

by converting foreign currency assets or indexed assets which they held

as near-money before inflation slowed down, and not by an expansion of

bank credit.

 In the program, the role of the central bank was to permit the accom-

modation of bank credit to the price shock of July 1985 less ten per-

centage points and to prevent any further nominal expansion in the sub—

sequent period. This charged the Bank of Israel with a difficult task,

for several reasons. First, because fiscal and incomes policy aimed
                                  — 28 —




chief ly   at a reduction of private disposable income. The public tends

to offset this policy by borrowing, especially if the policy is per-

ceived as temporary. Second, the steep decline in the expected return

on foreign currency was anticipated to lead to higher capital inflows,

which would offset the policy to a considerable extent. Third, a sharp

improvement of bank liquidity was expected as indexed bonds and resi-

dents' foreign—currency demand deposits (on which the reserve require-

ment was 100 percent) were converted into sheqel deposits with lower

reserve requirements.

 In order to prevent credit expansion in spite of these forces, the

Bank of Israel raised the reserve requirements on sheqel deposits and

maintained an extraordinarily high interest rate on its discount window

loans. This was reflected in the real interest rates on overdraft fa-

cilities, which reached more than 320 percent p.a. in August 1985, fol-

lowing the implementation of the program, and an average of 168 percent

p.a. in the whole six-month period following the program (see Table 5)

 The nominal (and real) interest rate was gradually lowered during the

second half of 1985 and until March 1986, even though credit expanded

in excess of the target. The actual fall in interest rates was there-

fore due to heavy political pressure by the government and the various

sectors in the economy.There was also the feeling, in the Bank of

Israel itself, that such a high real interest rate was damaging the

economy, and was paradoxically leading to an increase      in   the credit

balance rather than to a decrease as firms had to finance the enormous

interest payments.

 As the Bank of Israel abandoned the original target, it began to set

its policy by taking into account the performance of the economy: the

inflation rate, the expansion of demand, the external current and capi—
                                   — 29 —



tal   accounts, etc. Nevertheless, it continued its efforts to achieve

some restraint in the expansion of credit, and to this effect halted

the process of declining interest rates in March 1986. In any event, in

the second half of 1986 a boom in demand and a deterioration in the

private sectorts current account, together with a rapid increase in

credit, caused the Bank to raise the prime rate by 3 percent p.a. (see

Section 2) even though its real level was still very high.

 In retrospect, two years later, it seems that the choice of the volume

of bank credit as the target of monetary policy was inappropriate.

First of all, in the context of a fixed exchange rate regime, more at-

tention has to be paid to the total domestic sources of monetary expan-

sion —-   credit   to the government and to the public from the Bank of

Israel and the commercial banks, despite the restriction of bank credit

to the public. This means that nominal targets based on some definition

of net domestic credit rather than bank credit to the public alone

would seem to be more suitable.

 Second, if bank credit is nevertheless set as the nominal target of

monetary policy and therefore the central bank wants to allow accommo-

dation to the rising demand for money without any expansion of credit,

it must supply money by increasing the monetary base and at the same

time raise the reserve ratio so as to prevent any credit expansion.

This would imply very high reserve requirements. If, on the other hand,

the central bank is reluctant to increase the reserve requirements, it

must permit some growth in credit. The higher demand for money, in

other words, must be accommodated partly by growth of the monetary base

and partly by credit expansion.

 As can be seen from Table 6, the actual accommodation in the second

half of 1985, with M2 growing by 17.7 percent of GDP, was due mainly to
                                 — 30 —




the expansion of the money base by 10 percent14 of GDP, while the
expansion of bank credit contributed in this period 8 percent of GDP,

despite the sharp increase in reserve requirements.

 In contrast, during 1986 the increase in local—currency assets was

mainly ted by the expansion of bank credit. Credit expansion in this

period was due to the Bank's policy of trying to reduce the money base

by bond sales and simultaneously lowering reserve requirements. How-

ever, the Bank of Israel was very concerned with the rise in credit,

and in the second quarter of 1986 the decline in interest rates was cut

off. It seems, therefore, that the lack of regard for this point may

have led to interest rates higher than were necessary at this stage of

the program's implementation.



                  5. Exchange Rate Policy and the

                 Synchronization of Nominal Anchors



One of the most important components of the stabilization program was

the establishment of a set of several nominal anchors, with the intent

of stabilizing prices without throwing all the weight on a single an-

chor. These anchors were: the exchange rate, wages, bank credit and the

price freeze imposed on a wide range of goods and services.

 These nominal anchors can only function properly provided they are set

at a sustainable real level at the outset of the program, or, if this

is not done, the stabilization program itself must contain such real


 14 This large increase in the money base, compared with its expansion
in 1981—1984, was mainly due to a decrease in sales of foreign currency
to the private sector and to a decline in net domestic debt, both of
which offset the reduction of the government deficit to a considerable
extent.
                                  — 31 —




 changes in these variables as will allow them to reach a reasonable
 level.

  The program was initiated by a general hike of prices before they were

frozen, a sharp rise in the exchange rate, an erosion of real wages,

and a low level of credit due to unprecedentedly high real interest

rates. Since the nominal exchange rate was frozen while it was clear

that some prices would still rise at the outset of the program, the

real exchange rate was planned to be eroded in the first few months. In

addition, the wage agreement concluded with the Histadrut provided for

a real erosion for some months, and for wage increments to be paid in

several instalments until the first quarter of 1986. The real rate of

interest was also cut gradually and more or less stabilized from the

first quarter of 1986. It was therefore natural that following an ero-

sion at the outset of the program, the real expansion of credit would

parallel the fall in interest rates (for more details, see Section 4

above).

 These real changes, which had to follow, by necessity, from the ex-

ceptional initial level of the nominal anchors, must be taken into ac-

count in evaluating the performance. The nominal changes in wages, im-

port prices and bank credit relative to the consumer price index are

shown in Figure 6., assuming a certain initial real level for each of

these variables (seeS notes to the diagram)

 The intention of the authorities was to fix nominal wages and nominal

bank credit, after their initial adjustment, to support the fixed ex-

change rate regime. As can be seen in Fig. 6, all the nominal variables

actually pushed prices up. The fact that wages and bank credit exceeded

their planned nominal path, has already been discussed in previous

sections, but it is interesting to note that import prices were also
                                 — 32 —




clearly   on an upward trend during 1986, despite the absence of infla-

tion abroad and the adoption of a fixed exchange rate regime, and they

were an additional factor pushing prices up, but more slowly than wages

and credit.

 This leads to the question what drove up import prices and whether in-

flation would have fallen more rapidly if import prices had remained

stable. For a year after the adoption of the stabilization program the

sheqel remained pegged to the U.S. dollar. This peg, at a time when the

dollar depreciated rapidly against the European currencies, effectively

caused the sheqel to depreciate against the currency basket which re-

flects the composition of Israel's foreign trade better than the dol-

lar. Thus, the exchange rate for the export basket15 (excluding dia-

monds) depreciated by 15 percent between the third quarter of 1985 and

the last quarter of 1986. It seems therefore that the continuous price

rise until the third quarter of 1986 was pushed by the depreciation of

the sheqel against the relevant currency baskets, in addition to wages

and credit.

  In August 1986 the sheqel was pegged to a 5—currency basket instead of

the U.S. dollar.'6 If instead of pegging the exchange rate against the

dollar it would have been fixed to the currency basket (at its level in

the third quarter of 1985), and assuming that the resulting lower de-

preciation would have been passed on fully to the CPI, then inflation



 15 The exchange rate for the import basket rose more rapidly, but if
the price fall of raw materials is taken into account, the depreciation
of the import basket is very similar to that of the export basket. We
have therefore taken the latter as an indicator of the sheqe1s de-
preciation.
 16 The basket is made up of the following five currencies (percentage
weights in brackets): the U.S. dollar (60), the DM (20), the £ (10),
the Ffr. (5) and the Yen (5)
                                  — 33 —




in   1986 would have run at only 13 percent per annum (instead of the ac-

tual rate of 20 percent) . However, in this case the dollar exchange

rate and export prices would have fallen nominally. Moreover, for a

slower depreciation to be passed on as a lower rate of inflation, wages

and the domestic prices of the relevant industries would have to fall.

Given the downward inflexibility of money wages, inflation would have

fallen by less, real wages would have risen by more, and the real ex-

change rate would have fallen by more. This would have cut more sharply

into the profitability of exports, with the derived implications for

GDP, employment and the import surplus.

  It would therefore seem that, taking account of the changes in the

cross rates of foreign currencies and international relative prices,

the dollar-peg operated in favor of the economy because it made it less

necessary to reduce prices and wages in some sectors, thereby easing

pressures that might have adversely affected the stabilization program.

Higher inflation was of course the price that was paid for the easing

of these pressures.

 The contraction of public consumption, the subsidy cuts and the very

process of disinflation call for a shift of production factors between

industries, and for changes in wages and relative prices among them.

With prices and wages being inflexible downwards, such structural

changes tend to be inflationary, so that a rigid anti-inflationary pol-

icy may have a very high cost of unemployment and loss of product.

 Does it follow that a crawling peg would to be more appropriate to

stabilization programs than a fixed exchange rate? In the circumstances

of the Israeli economy, a fixed exchange rate and a price freeze make

it easier to reach an accord with the workers, without which the rapid

stabilization that has been achieved would not have been possible.
                                 — 34 —




 Viewed in this light, it is possible that the creeping depreciation

accidentally forced upon Israel as a result of the changes in foreign

cross rates has made it possible for the economy to benefit from the

best of two worlds: on the one hand, the freeze of the exchange rate

bought it stability, while the effective depreciation until August 1986

facilitated the gradual adjustment of relative prices.

 The one—time corrective 10-percent devaluation of January 1987 wa ac-

companied by a fresh agreement between the employers and workers, in

which the latter agreed to waive half of the 5.4 percent cost—of—living

allowance due to them in March 1987 as a result of the devaluation. For

the other half, employers were compensated by a reduction of their Na-

tional Insurance contributions by the same 2.7 percent. In the first

quarter of 1987 prices ——   particularly   those reflected in the CPI ——

actually   rose less than had been expected: the CPI rose at a monthly

average rate of 1.5 percent and 1.3 percent in the first and second

quarter of 1987, respectively, as against 2.3 percent in the last

quarter of 1986. The wholesale index of industrial output rose faster

and reflected the price increases expected to result from the
devaluation: after a slowdown of wholesale price rises to one percent a

month in the second half of 1986 (which may be attributed to the switch

to a currency basket), the rise in this index accelerated to 2.3 per-

cent in the first quarter of 1987 and decreased to 1 percent in the

second quarter of 1987. This is equivalent to a cumulative 5 percent

rise following a 10 percent devaluation. At the time of writing it is

not yet clear what the price indexes will show in the rest of the year.

It is hoped that wage agreements, due to be signed soon, will be

restrained and will make it possible to hold on to a stable exchange
                                  — 35 —



rate.   Inflation may in that case taper off to below the average rate of

1986.

  The devaluation was very successful in increasing export profitabil-

ity, but it upset the equilibrium in the assets market: during the

months following the devaluation, there was a capital inflow of about

$1 billion. This capital inflow, which began as a result of the sharp

decline in the cost of foreign currency credit after the devaluation,

when it became certain that another devaluation was not to be expected

in the near future, might have caused monetary expansion, an additional

increase in demand, pressure on domestic prices and a rapid real appre-

ciation. The policy of absorbing money on the one hand prevented a

rapid choking off of capital imports, but contributed, on the other

hand, to restraining demand and moderating price increases following

the devaluation. Price increases were, as mentioned earlier, lower, and

spread over a longer period, than had been expected. The moderate price

rises immediately following the devaluation were highly valuable in re-

inforcing the public's expectations that price stability would be main-

tained.
                                — 36 —




  6.   Miscellaneous Dividends and Costs of Rapid Disinflation



Inflation is a nominal phenomenon, but it has far-reaching impacts on

the real economy: it determines the real return on money, thereby af-

fecting the payments system, the forms in which assets are held, and

consumption patterns.

 Some of these effects have been dealt with above. The present section

will review some salient events that occurred since the stabilization

program was put into effect and which we have not yet discussed. These

are in part related to the rapid deceleration of inflation, and in part

to the particular manner in which the program was implemented. The spe-

cific effects of each of these factors are difficult to quantify.

 A. Government Revenue and Expenditure: One important effect of the

stabilization process was its impact on real government revenue and ex-

penditure. As long as inflation ran at a high rate, revenues and expen-

ditures could be timed so as to effect substantial real changes. With a

monthly inflation of 15 percent it is evidently possible to increase

real expenditure by 15 percent in excess of the volume planned in the

budget, by concentrating outlays in the beginning of the month.
Equally, by timing tax payments to the end of the month, their real

amount can be reduced by 15 percent. A mere change in the timing of

payments might therefore double the government's deficit. When in-

flation ran at this rate, these possibilities were in time taken into

account and the budget was in many ways adjusted to inflation. However,

its nominal component still left considerable opportunities for maneu-

ver (the disbursement of allocations to government ministries a month

in advance was one example)
                                  — 37 —




   As long as inflation runs at a steady rate, even if that rate is

high, the increase in real expenditure and the decrease in real revenue

is of a constant size. The great changes occur when there is a sharp

acceleration or deceleration of inflation.

  Therefore, the cuts in public spending carried out in the framework of

the stabilization program were two-fold: first, there was a planned

contraction of expenditures, and second, the advantages of timing out-

lays to the beginning of the month were eliminated. This resulted in

larger—than-planned expenditure cuts.

  The substantial increase in real government revenue as a result of

disinflation appears in the literature (the Tanzi effect) . The Israeli

experience confirms this phenomenon even under conditions of a par-

tially indexed tax system. The program, in addition to the changes it

brought about on the expenditure side, also comprised measures to reha-

bilitate the tax system, which came under serious stress in 1984. These

measures, combined with the real effects of disinflation itself, caused

the overall tax level to overshoot its target (see Table 7)

 This effect of disinflation on government expenditure and tax revenue

helped to reduce the deficit and bolstered stability. In certain sec-

tors, however, this led to financial crises, particularly in budget—de-

pendent organizations and enterprises such as the universities, the

Histadrut sick fund, hospitals, and others. In the period of high in-

flation these entities had managed, by a financial management adjusted

to these conditions, to maintain a given level of real activity. The

slowdown of inflation deprived them of the potential financial profits,

and caused them to run into much more severe financial difficulties

than those implied by the budget cuts as such.
                                 — 38 —




B.   The Business Sector: The disinflation process also affected the

functioning of firms. Under high inflation, financial operations domi—

nated their activities. With nominal interest rates at 20 percent a

month, errors in timing are very costly for business firms, so that

considerable resources are allocated to financial operations, to an im-

proved management of debt collection and the timing of payments for

goods and services. With disinflation, real activity again took up a

more important place. Industries in which real activity was depressed,

such as the construction industry, had been able to survive under high

inflation by financial management appropriate to such conditions, but

with disinflation this option disappeared.

 Moreover, the conventional accounting rules made it possible to show

profits even when there were real losses. Financial statements that

seemed to show profits made it possible for the banks to continue ex-

tending credit to these firms. Disinflation exposed their real situa-

tion. Thus, only the slowdown of inflation revealed that Solel Boneh,

Israel's biggest construction firm had been making real losses for many

years. Although the crisis in the construction industry was no doubt

partly worsened by the unprecedented rise in real interest rates at the

start of the stabilization program, it seems that the slowdown of in-

flation itself played a considerable role.

 In agriculture, inparticular, a severe crisis affected its two most

important organizational branches, the kibbutzim (the collective set-

tlement movement) and the moshavim (the cooperative settlements) .   Their
financial crisis was caused by a combination of bad financial invest-

ments made during the period of high inflation, by over-investment in

real assets serving consumption in the time when its financing was

subsidized, and high interest in the early stages of the stabilization
                                  — 39 —




program. Bad financial investments were a particularly aggravating
cause in the difficulties of the kibbutz movement. However, since the

kibbutzim have come to be based increasingly on manufacturing industry,

and since their movement has built-in mechanisms of mutual help, they

have been able to mount a comprehensive recovery program. The govern-

ment and the banks have cooperated in this mainly by debt consoli-

dation. The moshav movement, by contrast, remains in deep crisis, main-

ly because it has no mutual assistance system similar to that of the

kibbutzim, and it is doubtful whether they will be able to extricate

themselves from their difficulties without massive government

assistance.

 A final observation is that the effects of the shift from financial to

real activity as inflation comes down will make its effects felt pri-

marily in the banking system, by the reduction in foreign currency and

securities transactions.

 The banking system has indeed ended 1986 with very small profits,

mainly because of a sharp increase in the provision for bad debts that

were partly due to the extremely high interest rates at the beginning

of the program. There were, against this, a number of factors which in-

creased bank pofits. First among these was the switch of the public

from residents' foreign currency deposits —— on which the banks' margin

is negligible ——   to   local—currency deposits in which the margin is

higher. Second, the financial margins in sheqel operations were

exceptionally high in the early phases of the stabilization program,

when the central bank conducted a highly restrictive monetary policy.

This factor, however, played an important role in the short run. In the

future, the liberalization of the capital market is likely to reduce

the banks' financial margins, so that with low inflation and less
                                 — 40 —




financial   activity in the economy the banks will have to further

shrink their size and scope of activities and to release resources for

productive activities.

 The cutback in the size of the banking system already started with the

bank shares crash in 1983, but the process was slowed down in 1985 and

renewed contraction took place in 1986 (see Table 8) .   Although it is
not clear how much of the 1986 contraction is due to the slowdown of

inflation as such, it probably had some part in it.

C. Consumer Credit: In the first quarter of 1986 a spurt of increased

consumer credit made its appearance in the chainstore networks. These

credit campaigns caused concern to the authorities because they were

regarded as encouraging private consumption and putting pressures on

the price level and the balance of payments.

 One explanation for such an expansion of credit when inflation comes

down is that under high inflation, when it is not worth while to hold

money or even short-term financial instruments which have a negative

real yield, consumers tend to keep a relatively large stock of consumer

goods. When the inflation rate falls, the optimal level of stocks also

declines; the holding of stocks is shifted to the distributors who,

however, pay high real interest rates. These then make efforts to in-

duce the consumers to return to holding larger stocks, by launching

campaigns of discount sales and by extending credit for longer term.

 The extension of credit for a longer term can also be viewed from a

different aspect. The chainstores used to give their customers credit

for a week or two (by the use of credit cards) even before the slowdown

of inflation. Before the stabilization program the cost of credit for

two weeks was some 10 percent, and this cost was of course reflected in

the price level. At the end of the first quarter of 1986, 10 percent
                                  — 41 —



were the cost of credit for two and a ha3f months. For the chainstores

it was therefore optimal to lengthen the term of credit, and it is rea-

sonable to assume that their suppliers also extended the term for which

they granted credit.

  Such an extension of the term of credit means a one-time rise in

credit balances, and this may in part explain the rapid increase of

credit during 1986 even though the real interest rate was still very

high. The gradual fall of nominal interest rates from very high levels

postponed this effect until early 1986, and thereby acted as a stabi-

lizing factor.



                 7. From Stabilization to Growth?



The stabilization program ——   together   with favorable external factors —

- has   been remarkably successful in its two main objectives, of

putting a halt to inflation and improving the country's external po-

sition. However, the goal of reducing inflation to present world levels

has not yet been achieved, and economic policy can not yet be conducted

without a constant close watch over possible new balance of payments

difficulties. We have also seen that the stabilization process has

brought to the surface a number of serious structural problems which

call for solutions. But over and above these issues there hangs a much

more important question mark over the next stage. This has to do with

the prolonged stagnation that has afflicted the economy in consequence

of the crises of the 1970's. The question is whether the conditions

have already been created for a renewal of rapid growth, under

continued relative stability.
                                 — 42 —




 As stated above, economic activity has picked up and unemployment has

come down at the end of 1986 and in early 1987. Data on investments are

not yet available at the time of writing, but imports of capital goods

have recently started to rise again.

 These changes may herald a certain change in the economy's growth

trend —- a change that was expected as a result of disinflation, the

contraction of public spending, the fall in energy prices, the decline

in real interest rates, and the reduced need for public borrowing.

 A stagnant economy in which capacities are underutilized can increase

its product for a short time as demand rises even without additional

investment, if the balance of payments position permits such an expan-

sion of output. In general, however, the process of capital formation

must be renewed for real and sustained growth to be revived. The net

stock of capital in Israelis business sector has almost ceased to grow

as investment fell off rapidly in recent years. A solidly—based revival

of the capital formation process (as distinct from one artificially

nourished by the injection of public funds) depends on two principal

variables: one, the real return to investment for the economy as a

whole and for the individual producer, and the other ——   the real cost
of investment .finance on the capital market. We shall briefly discuss

these two factors.

 Data for the return on new investments are not available. The only

overall indicator at hand to indicate what difficulties lie in the path

of renewing investment is the average gross rate of return on the capi-

tal stock of the business sector, as estimated from the functional dis-

tribution of GDP between wage income and income from capital. Fig. 7

provides a historical series of this statistic and Fig. 8, which is al-

most its mirror image, shows the series of returns to capital. The dia—
                                    — 43 —




 grams bring out clearly what happened to Israel's economy since the end

 of the prosperity period of 1968-75. The share of wages in domestic in-

 come has risen to 75—80 percent of the total, and in 1986 even to 85
percent ——   reflecting   the rise in wage costs in excess of the increase

 in productivity. This development had the consequence that the gross

return to capital in 1986 fell to its lowest level since the 1966 re-

cession.17

  In reality, however, the situation as regards profitability was even

worse in 1985—86. For the individual producer it is the net after—tax

return that counts, and in this respect the success of the stabiliza-

tion program in raising the tax revenue from the business sector at the

same time implied a deterioration in after—tax profitability. A partial

indicator for this is provided by the data on the drastic change in the

distribution of tax revenue from wages and taxes on unearned income:



                                             1980   1984   1985   1986

Share of income tax from wage income         44.8   53.3   43.5   37.4



 This leads to the question by what mechanisms these trends may be cor-

rected. The halting of inflation and the modifications in the function-

ing of the business sector mentioned above may also facilitate a rise

in productivity. There are indications that in manufacturing industry,

for example, output per man—hour began to rise rapidly in the second

half of 1986. The crucial question is what will happen to wage costs



 17 It should, however, be observed that this is the average return on
the capital stock which does not necessarily represent the return to
new investments. The revival of the stock market and of new share
issues in the first half of 1987 may indicate that the expected rates
of return are higher.
                                     — 44 —




when growth is renewed. This brings us back to the structure of the la-

bor market, the ability of the trade unions to dispense with automatic

general wage escalator mechanisms, and their readiness to let the labor

market determine more flexible adjustments of wages in accordance with

the conditions in different industries. Direct and indirect taxes on

wages are another central component of wage costs.

 Israel has one of the highest overall rates of taxation in the world

(see Table 7) .   It   is almost twice as high as during the period of rapid

growth in the 1960s. A major part of the rise in the gross tax rates is

the consequence of the considerable increase in transfer payments, sub-

sidies and a wide range of various tax exemptions. This means that the

rate of net taxation is much lower than the gross tax rates. It calls

for a tax reform that will on the one hand reduce the gross tax rates

in order to increase the motivation to work and invest, and on the

other ——   to   expand the tax base and reduce transfers so as not to

lower the net rate of taxation too much and to enable the government to

finance its other expenditures.

 The marginal individual income tax rate was reduced in April 1987 from

60 to 50 percent, and corporation taxes were reduced at the same time.

The planned redictions of tax exemptions have not yet been negotiated;

these are essential because an income tax cut as the exclusive measure

of the tax reform will increase the deficit —— which may destabilize

the economy again. In the long run, tax cuts within the framework of a

tax reform depend on a continuous reduction of the share of public

expenditure in GDP. Politically this is a very thorny issue.

 As regards the financing of new investment, Israel's capital market

has always been characterized by a high degree of government interven-

tion, as a result of the large financing requirements and because of
                                  — 45 —




the   desire to allocate the remaining savings to preferred purposes. The

recent substantial decline in the need to finance the deficit on the

one hand, and on the other, the lesser administrative intervention,

will enable the private sector to allocate savings more efficiently.18

 The measures adopted in a partial reform of the capital market from

April 1987 go in this direction: a) the share of investment in govern-

ment bonds obligatory as cover for long-term deposits (saving schemes,

provident and pension funds) has been reduced; b) the tax discrimina-

tion in favor of interest on government bonds as against private secu-

rities has been abolished; and c) the requirement of government ap-

proval for private capital issues has been eliminated and such issues

are now only subject to approval by the supervisory authorities of the

Stock Exchange. Issues of bonds by banks, however, are still restricted

in order to prevent them from using their monopolistic power on the

capital market. The restrictions on capital movements with the rest of

the world have also remained in force.

 The real yield of private capital issues, it may be noted, has fallen

substantially towards the end of 1986 and in the beginning of 1987 ——

from 10—11 percent to 7—8 percent per annum. For the long run this is


 18 For a survey of government intervention in the capital market and
outlines for a reform, see Blum and Piterman, 1987.
                                 — 46 —




still   a higher than desirable interest rate, but it may indicate an

improvement in the financing possibilities of private investment. As

with the need to reduce the rate of taxation, future developments in

the private capital market depend on budget balance. If the recent

favorable budgetary trends can be maintained, it may become possible to

reduce the ratio of domestic debt to GDP (which at present stands at

1.4), and thus also the cost of recycling the debt. Continued stability

and the further strengthening of the country's foreign payments

position may also make it possible to raise external funds for

investment at reasonable interest rates. Rising productivity and a

policy of restraint and flexibility of wages may increase the business

sector's profitability.

 The reforms of the tax system and the capital market are still in

their early stages of implementation, and so are the structural changes

required in order to return to rapid growth. Only time will tell if the

third goal of the recovery program, that of reviving economic growth,

will indeed be achieved in significant measure.
                                             — 47 —


                           Table 1. WAGES, EMPLOYMENT AND THE
                                        CONSUMER PRICE INDEX, 1986
                                           (Percent>

                                           Wage rise   Increase in    Average annual change
                                          in excess of number of        in CPI component of
                                          public sector employed         the value of the
                                             wages        persons         currency   basket
Business aector, total                         4.3            2.1               13.0

Agriculture, forestry and fishing              4.8           —1.3               50.2


Industry (manufacturing and mining)            2.2            4.2                6.1

Electricity and water                         —3.1              —             —11.8


Construction                                   7.8           —6.5              —1.3


Transport,   storage and communication         4.3            0.5                6.4

Financing and   business     services          6.1            0.4

Commerce, restaurants and hotels               6.5       1                     36.0
                                                          3.8
Personal and   other   services               12.7       J
  The 8 percent rise in public sector wages was approximately the real wage increase
planned         within the framework of the stabilization program.
          for 1986

 Source:      (1) Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table IV—14.
               (2) Bank of   Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table IV—10.
               (3) Bank of   Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table V—2.
                                             — 48 —



                       Table 2. RESOURCES AND USES, 1973—1986

                             Value at cur—             Real change, percent
                             rent prices     Average
                             in NIS bill.    1973—85    1983   1984   1985    1986     1984—86

Resources

Gross domestic product            41.0        3.2       2.7     1.8    2.8       2.2      5.1

Civilian imports                  21.4        4.0      11.1    —3.6   —3.9      15.1     10.6

Total resources                   62.4        3.4       5.8    —0.3    0.3       6.8      7.1

Uses

Private consumption               26.1        4.3       8.0    —7.3   —0.4      14.0     13.5

Public consumption,
 excl.direct defence imports 11.2             2.5       1.7     1.0   —0.8      —4.8     —5.6

Gross domestic investment          8.0       —1.6      12.0    —7.5   —13.6      8.1     —6.6

 excl.changes in stocks            7.2       —1.0      14.0 —11.7     —9.9     —5.5 —14.9

Domestic use of resources,
 excl.direct defence imports 45.4             2.5       7.2    —5.3   —3.2       7.8      4.4

Exports at local prices           17.0        6.0       2.1    13.9    8.6       4.7     13.7

 Total use of resources,
 excl.direct defence imports 62.4             3.4       5.8    —0.3    0.3       6.8      7.1

Gross domestic product
 of the business sector
 at market price&                 28.4        2.8       3.1     1.8    3.8       3.7      7.6
     Excluding direct defence imports
 b      domestic product excluding product of public services and private non—profit
     Gross
organizations, and excluding housing services.
     Source:   Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table 11—1.
                                              — 49 —




             Table 3. THE IMPORT SURPLUS BY COMPONENTS, 1983—1986
                            (Percent of GDP, annual averages, at constant prices)

                                     Change over previous year        Cumulative change
                                         1984      1985      1986     1983—1986     1984—1986

                                                                      (l)+(2)+(3)    (2)+(3)

                                          (1)          (2)    (3)         (4)         (5)

Decline in investment                    2.3       3.7        —1.2         4.8         2.5

Increase in savings                      6.1       3.0        —4.8         4.3       —1.8

 of which: Private savings              16.3      —6.1       —12.3       —2.1       —18.4


             Public savings'           —10.2       9.1         7.5         6.4       16.6

of which: Increase in net taxes       (—8.2)      (7.8)       (3.6)     (—3.2)       (11.4)


Decline in the import    surplusb       8.4        6.7       —6.0         9.1         0.7

 of which: Exports      (increase)      5.0        2.7         1.2        8.9         3.9


              Imports (decrease)        3.4        4.0       —7.2         0.2        —3.2

  Domestic   surplus less    net expenditures abroad not including defence imports.
b.cluding direct defence imports.

 Source:   Central Bureau of Statistics, National Accounts, 1983—1986.
                                           — 50 —


                Table 4. REAL BALANCES OF MONETARY AGGREGATES                   AND

                              BANK CREDIT TO THE PUBLIC, 1985—86
                                        (NIS billion)
                                                                                Total bank credit
                                              Ml        M2           M4            to the public

Before the stabilization program

1985     June                                510        1,682        8,307             5,962

                                                                Indexes

                                             100          100             100            100


After the stabilization program

 1985        December                        133          181              96             93


 1986        June                            195          192              99            101


             December                        245          260             103            112

1987         June                             247         312             121            130



Ml - Cash and demand deposits
M2 —   Ml plus local—currency time deposits and CDs.
M4 — M2 plus residents'foreign—currenCY deposits, and negotiable indexed bonds.

  Source:   Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Chapter VIII, The Money and Capital Markets.
                                        — 51 —


                  Table 5. REAL ANNUAL COST OF B2NK CREDIT
                                 TO THE PUBLIC, 1984—86
                                                              1985         1986
                                                              2nd    1st      2nd
                                 1984     1985     1986       half   half half

Overdraft facilities             67.0     100.4    31.1       168.3 37.2      25.2


Indexed local—currency credit    21.2      16.8    11.6       88.3 11.6       11.7


Nondirected foreign—currency

  credit (subject to ceilings)   47.3      13.7     9.4        18.8 14.9          4.2


Other foreign—currency credit    27.6      —6.5   —11.6       —5.2 —8.8 —14.2


 Source: Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table VIlI—lO.
                                                 — 52     —




           Table 6. THE GOVERNMENT DEFICIT, ITS SOURCES OF FINANCE,
                           BANK CREDIT TO THE PUBLIC AND UNINDEXED
                           FINANCIAL ASSETS OF THE PUBLIC, 1981—86
                                         (percent of GDP)
                                                                                   1985     1986
                                                                                    2nd  1st 2nd
                                 1981     1982     1983       1984   1985   1986    half half half

1. Government deficit            11.6     10.0     6.0        12.1    9.0   2.6     5.7    2.9     2.3
Financing of the deficit
2.Increase in net
    domestic debt                 8.1      6.2    —1.0         0.8   —1.2   —0.4   —6.1    2.6 —3.4
3. Sales   of foreign currency
    to private sector             1.9      2.6     6.3         8.6    4.8    2.5    2.2    2.4     2.6

4. Change in money base, net 1.6           1.2     0.7         2.7    5.4    0.5    9.6   —2.1     3.1

5. Expansion due to

    banking activity
   (mainly bank credit)
   (6)—(4)     5                  2.7      5.3     5.0         5.7    8.3    7.5    8.1    6.2     8.7
6. Change in M2                    4.3     6.5      5.7        8.4   13.7    8.0   17.7    4.1     11.8


  Source: Bank     of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table VIII—6.
                                 — 53 —




             Table 7. GROSS TAXES AND TRANSFER PAYNTS
                        BY THE PUBLIC, 1980—86
                           (percent of GDP)


                 1980                            45.2

                 1981                            44.3

                 1982                            48.0

                 1983                            48.5

                 1984                            40.0

                 1985    first half              46.5

                         second half             50.5

                 1986                            52.3

Source: Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table V—2.
                                    — 54 —




           Table 8. EMPLOY4ENT PND NUMBER OF BRANCH OFFICES
                       OF THE BANKING INSTITUTIONS, 1984—86
                       (Percent change over previous year)


                             Numb er of         Number of employees
                           branch   offices   in the five large banks

    1984                     —4.3                 —9.8

    1985                     —1.1                 —5.3


    1986                     —2.3                 —6.3


  Change from September 1983 to December 1984.

 Source: Bank of Israel, Examiner of Banks, Annual Banking Statistics,
1.982—86, Table A—I.
                              Appendix    Table    1.    Main conomic Indicators,                 1980—87
                              Mean     1984                1985                            1985                                    1987
                              1980-    (during
                              1984     year)      Jan.-    Aug.-    Oct.- Jan.- April-             July- Oct.- Jan.-                      April—
                                                  July     Sept.    Dec. March June                Sept. Dec. March                       June
      A.   Prices, exchange rates and   wages(monthly percentage change rates)
           1. Consumer prices   8.7     15.2    14.0   3.5    2.1    0.6   2.1                         1.0           2.2        1.5        1.3
           2. Wholesale prices 9.1      15.2    12.4   1.8    2.4    1.2   1.7                         0.9           1.0        2.4        1.1
           3. $ Exchange rate   8.8     15.9    13.6   0.2
           4. 5-currency basket
                                                             —0.1    0.0   0.0                         0.0           0.0        28g       -0.3
               exch. rate       7.5     15.3      15.3     0.7      2.0         1.5        0.5      0.0              0.0        38g       -0.1
           5.  Nominal wage     9.0     16.5      11.0     0.3      4.5         6.4        4.3     -1.7              3.0     0.3            —
      B.   Money and credit (monthly percentage rates)
           1. Total bank       8.6    16.1    13.0   4.8            1.7         2.9        2.4         3.7           3.3
              credit                                                                                                         4.6           3.1
           2.                         15.9    13.0   3.5            1.9         2.3    —1.0            3.2           3.3     4.3           1.5
Lfl           Quasi_money(M3)elO.7
           3. Means  of
               payment (M1)    8.0    13.4    11.8 16.2             6.7     15.7           0.9         7.0           4.2        2.4        0.5
           4. Interest rate
              (end-of-period
               level)                 16.1    21.0 14.1             7.2         4.0        3.5         3.5           4.0     4.9           4.1
      C. Relative price levels (1980=100)
         Real exchange sate
           (new basket)               92                  110      105     103         98          96             93        98            95
         Real wage (gross)    94b
                             108     116           lO3
                                                   116     95       95     108        113         114            117       115
         Real wage
           (after tax)       109b    114                   99      103     117        120         121            124       123
      D. Budget
                                                   1i6
                   deficit(GDP) 102b     15.0              5d       4       3          1           3         ,   0          0              1.7
      E. Unemployment rate(%)    49b               60c      78d      6.6        7.2        7.9         6.8           6.6     5.7
      F. Balance of payments
         basic balance (uncorrected)
           (b.$)             —0.2   —0.3          —O.7°1    0.6      1.2    -0.1           0.0         0.3           1.3
                                                                                                                                      —        —
      a.   Relative wholesale prices of major trading partners (new basket of 5).
      b.   Mean, 1980—83.
      c.   Mean, Jan.—June 1985.
      d.   Mean, .July-Sept. 1985.
      e.   Money and liquid assets, incudes foreign-currency demand deposits.
      f.   Data for Aug.-Sept. On August 1, 1986 a new basket was adopted.
         (The figure for July was 2.0.)
      g. In Jan. the N.I.S. was devalued by 11 percent relative to the 5 currency basket.
                                                — 56    —




      Appendix Table 2. Import Component and Changes in Stocks, 1985—86
                                                                        Change, 1986 over 1985
                                                                            at 1986 prices

1. Total use of resources,
      exci. direct defence imports       and changes        in stocks             2,586
2. Actual direct imports                                                            967

3. Total demand for domestic product ((1)—(2) =              (3)]                 1,619


 4. Imports   of   intermediate goods   at   1985 weights in input-output table 586

 5. Total demand for GDP [(3)—(4)=(5)]                                            1,033


 6. Actual GDP                                                                      782


 7. Change in domestic stocks [(6)—(5) =         (7))                              —251


 8. Total change in stocks                                                          994


 9. Change in stocks of imported intermediate goods [(8)—(7) =            (9)]    1,245


10.   Total imports of intermediate goods,
        mci. services ((4) + (9)     (10)]                                        1,831


11. Total imports     of goods   and services                                     2,798
                                             — 57 —




                       Fig. 1: Consumer Price Index.
30                                     (monthly change, percent)


26



22



18



14



I0



6
                                       Ii

2
                            n          I iuiL
-2                                                             iv vu x i   iv
            1984                      1985                      1986            1987

     Source: Bank of Israel. Annual   Report   1986, Ch. III
                                                        — 58 —




                                    Fig. 2: Real Expenditure, Revenues, and Deficit
                                         of the Public Sector, 1983: I to 1987:11
                                        (millions of NIS: at 1984 prices)


600—
                                                                                          -




400—: —•                    —: —




200—:                               —                                                                           —;




       83:1                  84:1
                                              -      85:1
                                                                        -           -
                                                                                 86:1
                                                                                                 --L     87:1

              Deficit 0 O
       Expenditure JiI

        Revenues                                            SoucE: Bank of Israel, Annual Report 1986, Table VIll—4
                                                                           — 59 —




                                                Fig. 3: Changes in Main Macro-economic Indicators, 19S0—87




        F1. 2(.) Cm.. B.gla S.d.. Pmod.d and                                                           Fig. 2(c): Real Wag19 n the Busiacm Sector
                   p,j,.i. C0.91mptien                                                                                     1911- 110)
                    1911 - 119, a I9lQp...)
10                                                   PL
10                                                                                               II'
                                                                                                 192
                                    C91IUPdOt1/
I—                                                                                               110

                                                                                                 $04
                                              Gr.n. Biiln.
                                         • S.d Prod.d
                                                                                                  $6

                                                                                                  92
 91

                                                                                                  91

                                                                                                  $4
      — 10% fl —          fl   I S 91 ft I • 91              91 I
                                                                                                          10$ tICS P915 5 $ I 91 ft     I SI        ft I
                                                                                                                                                     1917




                                                                                                            Fig 2(t): Unemployment Rate
                                                                                                            Percent ol Civilian Labor Force



                                                                                                 14



                                                                                                 LI



                                                                                                 IS



                                                                                                 4,5



                                                                                                       55 5 9105 9191 5 I S 91 ft I I 91 91 I I
                                                                                                        ,-.-•-, d_        —         9191   5•



Source: Bank ofIsrael. Amual Report 1986, thaters II. IV, VII and VIIL
                                                      — 60       —




                              Fig. 4: Business Sector Product and
                                    Relative Domestic Prices,* 1983—86


  PIE

108




104




100




 84
   96       97       98      99 100         lOt     102    103       104 105       106 107   108   109
                                  Business sector product, 1984 = 100
        * Domestic prices relative to export prices at currency basket exchange rate
                                           — 6].     —




         Fig. 5: Foreign Currency Reserves, Net Current Debt and
                      Private Sector Current Account Deficit,
                               1980—86, US$ billion

            Legend:          — Foreign currency     reserves
                             — Net current debt
                              — private   sector current account deficit




   5

4.5

   4
3.5

   3
2.5

   2
 1.5

   1


0.5

   0
-0.5

  -1

-1.5

  -2
-2.5
       Source: Bank of Israel Annual Report 1986, Ch. VII
                                                   — 62     —




             Fig. 6: Wages, Import Prices,* CPI and Bank Credit,
                          3rd Quarter 1985 to 1986, Indexes
   150


                                                                            Bank credit
   140 -



   130 -




   120   -
                                                                                Import prices

   110   -


   100 -



                             Wages
    90-

                                      * Excluding fuel and diamonds
    80
                111            IV              I                II            ifi           w
                      1985                                           1986
       Source: Bank of Israel Research Department, Main Israeli Economic Data
Note: The base level for the nominal variables was Chosen on the following assumptions: a) that the program Wa
designed to bring real vages in the first quarter of 1986 back to their level in the first half of 1985: b) thu
the adjustment of prices to the July 1985 devaluation had been concluded by the third quarter of 1985: and C]
that the adjustment of the real interest rate came to its conclusion In the first quarter of 1986. as did th
adjustment of the real credit balances.
                                                           — 63     —




 Fig.    7: Gross Returns to Labor, Percent of Total Domestic
             Income of the Business Sector, 1960—86
86

84•

82 -

80 -

78

76

74

72

70

68-
66-

64-

62 -

60—       u    I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I I   I
     1960 1962 1964 1966 1968 1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986
     Source:   Calculations by Yaacov Lavi, Bank of Israel Research Department
                                                    — 64    —




 Fig.        8: Gross Before-Tax Returns per Unit of Capital
                                in Business Sector, 1960—86, percent

17




15




13




11




 9.



 7,


 5    JI        I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I III I I      I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I
      1960   1962 1964 1966 1968             1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986

      Source:   Calculations by Yaacov Lavi, Bank of Israel Research Department
                                  — 65 —




                                 References


Bank of Israel, 1985, Economic Review, no. 60.

Blejer, M. and Liviatan, N., 1987, Stabilization Strategies in Argentina

          and Israel, 1985—86, Working Paper, International Monetary

          Fund, Washington.

Blum, L. and Piterman, S., 1987,Government Intervention in the Israeli

          Capital Market—Survey and Reform Outlines, The Economic

          Ouarter1y no.131 (Hebrew; available also in English)

Bruno, M., 1986a, Sharp Disinflation Strategy: Israel 1985, Economic

          Policy 2: 379—402.

          1986b, External Shocks and Domestic Response: Macroeconomic

          Performance, 1965-1982, in Ben—Porat, Y., ed., The Israeli

          Economy, Maturing through Crises, Harvard University Press,

          1986.

          —- and Fischer, 1986, The Inflationary Process: Shocks and

         Accommodation, in Ben—Porat, Y., op. cit.

Deaton, A., 1977, Involuntary Saving through Unanticipated Inflation,

         American Economic Review, Vol.67.

Dornbusch, R. and Fischer, S., 1986, Stopping Hyperinflation: Past and

         Present, Weltwirtschaftljches Archiv, CXXII.

         —- and Simonsen, M.H., 1987, Inflation Stabilization with Incomes

         Policy Support, published by the Group of Thirty, New York.

Fischer, S, 1984, Real Balances, the Exchange Rate and Indexation: Real

         Variables in Disinflation, National Bureau of Economic Research,

         Working Paper Series.

         -- and Frenkel, Y., 1982, Stabilization Policy for Israel,


         Economic Quarterly, no.114, (Hebrew)
                                       — 66 —




Fraenkel, M., Piterman, S. and Sokoler, M., 1984, Principles for a Plan for
         Rapid Disinflation, Ib. Economic Ouarterly, no.123 (Hebrew)

Helpman, E. and Leiderrnan, L., 1987, Stabilization in High Inflation

         Countries: Analytical Foundations and Recent Experience, Draft,

         Tel Aviv University, March.

Liviatan, N., 1986, Inflation and Stabilization in Israel,

         Conceptual Issues and Interpretation of Developments,

          International Monetary Fund, working Paper (WP186/1Ô)

Liviatan, N., 1987, The Evolution of Disinflationary Policies in Israel

          1980—86, The Economic quarterly, no.131, (Hebrew; available

          also in English)

          —— and Piterman, S., 1986, Accelerating Inflation and Balance-of—

          Payments Crises, 1973—1984, in Ben-Porat, Y., op.cit.

Yariv, D., 1986, An Estimate of Inflationary Expectations in Israel under

          the Disinflation Programs of 1984—1985, Bank of Israel,

          Research Department, Discussion Paper Series 86-11 (Hebrew;

          available also in English)
