NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECB POLICIES INVOLVING GOVERNMENT BOND PURCHASES:
IMPACT AND CHANNELS
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stefan Nagel
Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Working Paper 23985
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23985

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We are grateful for comments from Alex Edmans, Jacob Goldfield, Bob Hall, Ricardo Reis,
Massimo Rostagno, Bernd Schwaab, Paul Soderlind, Frank Smets, an anonymous referee and
seminar and conference participants at the Copenhagen Business School, University of Michigan,
Goldman Sachs, the European Finance Association Meeting, and the American Finance
Association Meeting. This research was supported by a grant from the Global Markets Institute at
Goldman Sachs. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of Goldman Sachs or the
Global Markets Institute. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23985.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

ECB Policies Involving Government Bond Purchases: Impact and Channels
Arvind Krishnamurthy, Stefan Nagel, and Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
NBER Working Paper No. 23985
November 2017
JEL No. E4,F45,G01,G18
ABSTRACT
We evaluate the effects of three ECB policies (the Securities Markets Programme, the Outright
Monetary Transactions, and the Long-Term Refinancing Operations) on government bond yields.
We use a novel Kalman-filter augmented event-study approach and yields on euro-denominated
sovereign bonds, dollar-denominated sovereign bonds, corporate bonds, and corporate CDS rates
to understand the channels through which policies reduced sovereign bond yields. On average
across Italy, Spain and Portugal, considering both the Securities Markets Programme and the
Outright Monetary Transactions, yields fall considerably. Decomposing this fall, default risk
accounts for 37% of the reduction in yields, reduced redenomination risk for 13%, and reduced
market segmentation effects for 50%. Stock price increases in distressed and core countries
suggest that these policies also had beneficial macro-spillovers.
Arvind Krishnamurthy
Stanford Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
akris@stanford.edu
Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu

Annette Vissing-Jorgensen
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
545 Student Services Building, #1900
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
vissing@haas.berkeley.edu

I.

Introduction

During the most intense periods of the European financial crisis, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal
and Spain (the “GIIPS” countries) saw large increases in their government bond yields. Figure 1
graphs 2-year yields for GIIPS government bonds from 2010 onward. Italian and Spanish yields
peak around 7% in the fall of 2011, while Portuguese and Irish bonds peak around 20%. Greek
2-year yields rise above 200% prior to the Greek default in early 2012. In response, the ECB
introduced programs aimed at lowering government bond yields on the presumption that such
a reduction would have beneficial macroeconomic spillovers. The ECB programs included direct
purchases of government debt (the Securities Markets Programme, SMP), conditional
commitments to purchase government debt (the Outright Monetary Transactions, OMT), and 3year loans to banks which banks partly used to buy government debt (the Long-Term
Refinancing Operations, LTROs). The objective of our paper is to assess these programs and
shed light on the economic mechanisms through which the programs may have worked. Did
they succeed in lowering government bond yields and improving the macroeconomic outlook?
What are the channels through which ECB policies worked to reduce bond yields?
As with many unconventional central bank operations in recent years, little is known about the
effects of these policies. The ECB has publicly stated that these policies reduce redenomination
risk, i.e., the risk that the Eurozone might break up and countries redenominate domestic debt
into new domestic currencies, and financial market “dysfunctionality,” i.e., segmentation- and
illiquidity-induced pricing anomalies.1 However, the relative importance of these channels is
unknown and there are likely to be additional channels. Most importantly, the ECB’s policies
may have reduced the default risk component of GIIPS sovereign yields. A reduction in the
default risk component could arise from the perception that the ECB might step in as a lender
of last resort, or from the effects that conditions attached to these programs might have on
GIIPS fiscal policies. If a policy is counter-productive, it could even result in a rise in the default
risk component. Furthermore, traditional monetary policy channels through the default-free
yield curve may play a role, too. In this paper, we provide quantitative estimates of five
components of sovereign bond yields: an expectations hypothesis component, a euro-rate term
premium, a default risk premium, a redenomination risk premium and sovereign bond market
segmentation. We uncover the effects of ECB policies by asking how they impact each of these
components.
1

As examples, see the speeches of ECB’s Executive Board Members Benoît Cœuré (September 3, 2013,
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2013/html/sp130902.en.html ) who emphasizes redenomination risk
when discussing the OMT, and José Manuel González-Páramo (November 4, 2011
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2011/html/sp111104_1.en.html ) who emphasizes financial market
dysfunctionality when discussing the SMP.

2

Disentangling these channels is valuable both for policy-making and academic research. For
assessing policy, our empirical tests are informative about the joint hypothesis that a particular
problem (e.g., redenomination risk concerns) exists, and that a given ECB program had an effect
on this problem. Furthermore, understanding the channels can help to guide better policy. For
example, if the main concern is redenomination risk, then actions to strengthen the Eurozone’s
commitment to the euro as opposed to purchases of sovereign bonds or liquidity injections to
banks are likely to more directly address the risk. Such actions may involve both the monetary
and fiscal authorities. On the other hand, if the main problem is market segmentation and
illiquidity, then bond purchases as well as actions to improve the plumbing of the asset
markets, such as enhancing trading platforms and repo market infrastructure can help address
the problem. Finally, our channel decomposition is valuable for the theoretical literature in
international finance on the determinants of sovereign bond yields (see Aguiar and Amador,
2014). This literature understands sovereign bonds yields almost exclusively through the lens
of the default risk channel. The Euro crisis has brought to fore concerns regarding
redenomination risk. Redenomination has similarities and differences with sovereign default.
Lenders suffer losses in both a default as well redenomination event. But, relative to outright
default, redenomination has a direct impact on private borrowers in the defaulting country, as
it reduces these borrowers’ Euro debt obligations. We provide estimates of redenomination
risk which may be helpful in guiding theory. We also highlight that market segmentation can be
an important factor in sovereign bond yields. While the finance literature has understood that
segmentation can play an important role in many asset markets (see Darrell Duffie’s (2010)
presidential address to the American Finance Association), models of sovereign debt largely set
aside such frictions.
We first document via a standard event-study that the SMP and OMT led to large reductions in
GIIPS sovereign bond yield. The effects are biggest at the 2-year maturity with reductions
around 200 basis points (bp) for Italy and Spain, 500bp for Portugal and Ireland, and more than
1,000bp for Greece. The LTROs had generally small effects on sovereign yields, with the largest
(but still modest) effects of around 50bp seen for Spain. It is important to note that these event
study estimates of yield changes are likely to capture only part of the overall effect of policies
on yields given that the probability of policies being put in place was unlikely to be zero even
before our first event date and may have increased between event dates.
The main contribution of our analysis is then to tease out the channels through which ECB
policies affected interest rates. For data reasons this part of the analysis focuses on Italy, Spain
and Portugal, although we also present some results for Greece around the SMP. We
decompose euro-denominated government bond yields into two components that are common
across all countries using the euro (an expectations hypothesis component and a euro-rate
3

term premium) and three components that are country-specific (a default risk premium, a
redenomination risk premium and sovereign bond market segmentation).
The country-specific components are not directly observable. To overcome this challenge we
use information from a collection of asset prices that are differentially exposed to these
components. Our identification relies on two basic observations. First, foreign-law sovereign
bonds denominated in US dollars cannot be redenominated through domestic law changes and
(after adjusting by the US dollar swap rate of similar duration) should only capture the default
risk premium component of the sovereign bond yield. Second, redenomination into a new
currency should affect all securities issued in a given country under the country’s local law
equally. In other words, the yields of euro-denominated local-law sovereign bonds and eurodenominated local-law corporate bonds (or loans) of the same duration should be affected
equally by the risk of redenomination. Therefore, we can use data for corporations to identify
the redenomination component of sovereign euro-denominated bond yields. The details of the
implementation of these basic ideas differ between Italy on the one hand and Spain and
Portugal on the other due to the fact that credit default swap contracts for G7-countries do not
cover losses from redenomination whereas those for non-G7 countries do.
We estimate the components using a Kalman filter to account for measurement error in the
asset prices used as well as the fact that some of the asset prices we use are based on less
frequently traded assets for which shocks may have delayed effects on prices. The Kalman filter
handles such asynchronous response to shocks by expanding the state vector to include lags of
the latent components.
We then conduct an event-study on the extracted default risk premium, redenomination risk
premium and sovereign bond market segmentation components. Doing an event study on
components extracted using Kalman filtering is to our knowledge novel. Beyond the specifics of
our study, we think that the Kalman-filter augmented event-study methodology can be
fruitfully applied to other questions in finance.
Somewhat surprisingly and in contrast to the work on quantitative easing in the U.S. (see
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen, 2011), we find that changes to the expectations
hypothesis and euro-rate term premium yield component were of little importance for the
policies studies here. Instead, the default risk premium and sovereign bond segmentation effect
appear to have been the dominant channels through which the SMP and the OMT affected
sovereign bond yields of Italy and Spain. Redenomination risk may have been present at times
and it may have been a third policy channel for the SMP and OMT in the case of Spain and
Portugal, but not for Italy. To give a sense of magnitudes, focusing on our first identification
scheme (labeled (i) in Table 6) and the effects working via the country-specific channels, default
risk accounts for 30% of the fall in yields across SMP and OMT for Italy. Segmentation accounts
4

for the other 70%. For Spain, the numbers are 42% (default risk), 15% (redenomination risk)
and 43% (segmentation). For Portugal, the numbers are 40% (default risk), 24%
(redenomination risk) and 36% (segmentation).
For the LTROs, we find that their effect on Spanish bond yields worked almost entirely via the
sovereign segmentation channel. We show that the more substantial impact of the LTROs on
Spanish sovereign yields than on Italian and Portuguese sovereign yields is consistent with
Spanish banks purchasing a larger fraction of outstanding sovereign debt in the months
following the introduction of the LTROs.
To assess whether ECB policies had broader macroeconomic impact than their impacts on
sovereign bond yields, we document how stock returns reacted around the announcements.
We find large positive impacts of the SMP and especially the OMT on stock returns, both for
GIIPS countries and for core euro-zone countries, with the LTROs again having smaller effects.
On average across European Union markets, stock prices rose about 13% in response to the
OMT and 4% in response to the SMP. Importantly, large stock market effects of the OMT and to
a lesser extent the SMP are present even for non-financial stocks (for which gains on sovereign
bond yields are not a potential driver of stock returns), suggesting broad macroeconomic
impacts of these policies. We perform some simple calculations based on the market value
changes of bonds and in stocks to argue that the benefit/cost ratio of the SMP and OMT is likely
to be large, with benefits around €1 trillion and an upper bound of the cost to core country
taxpayers of €275 billion. Our calculation may be conservative because it ignores key benefits
such as market value changes for non-publicly traded firms, along with wage gains via reduced
economic contraction.
Our paper contributes to a recent literature that has started to analyze the effects of ECB
interventions on yields. However, existing research does not comprehensively assess the
channels through which interventions affect bond yields, which is a central element of our
paper.
Eser and Schwaab (2013) find that the SMP lowered yields on periphery bonds. Using internal
ECB data on bond purchases under the SMP, they document large changes in bond yields upon
purchase (i.e. distinct from the announcement effects we focus on here). Szczerbowicz (2015)
use an event study methodology around ECB interventions and find that the SMP and OMT
lowered covered bond spreads and periphery sovereign yields, while the main effects of the 3year LTRO were on money market spreads and covered bond spreads. Falagiarda and Reitz
(2015) study the surprise information content of many ECB communications throughout the
crisis and find that they generally reduced the spread between Italian and German sovereign
yields.
5

Other recent work focuses on the individual components of sovereign yield spreads related to
solvency factors, redenomination risk, and market segmentation, but there is no other work
that aims to disentangle these different factors. Di Cesare et al. (2012) use a model with fiscal
and macroeconomic factors to argue that periphery sovereign bond yields during the height of
the crisis were far above what can be explained by these fundamental factors. Based on several
indicators, including the sovereign bond - CDS basis, they suggest that redenomination risk is
substantial in the fall of 2011 whereas our analysis indicates that redenomination risk in the fall
of 2011 may not have been as large as the sovereign bond-CDS basis suggested. De Pooter et
al. (2012) use bond yields and CDS to study the effects of SMP purchases within a search-model
framework. Their estimates suggest that the SMP affected bond yields primarily through a
(partly temporary) reduction in the illiquidity premium in yields. Corradin and RodriguezMoreno (2013) observe that USD-denominated eurozone sovereign bonds -- including those of
several core countries as well as Spain and Italy -- traded at substantially higher yields than
EUR-denominated bonds of the same issuer during the 2008-12 period and that the SMP and
three-year LTRO programs contributed to a widening of the spread. They attribute the spread
to the collateral and capital requirement benefits of EUR-denominated bonds whereas we also
emphasize the importance of the ECB focusing its purchases on euro-denominated bonds.
Trebesch and Zettelmeyer (2014) back out the ECB's purchases of Greek bonds in the SMP in
2010. They find that the ECB targeted bonds with high yields and the higher the amount
purchased of a particular bond by the ECB, the higher the drop in yields in that instrument,
while bonds that were not purchased by the ECB saw an increase, rather than a decrease in
yields, indicating market segmentation effects.
The most recent papers in this literature have begun to assess the extent to which the 3-year
LTROs affected bank lending to the private sector. Carpinelli and Crosignani (2015) estimate
that the 3-year LTROs increased bank lending to firms in Italy by a modest 2 percent. This effect
is the joint result of the 3-year LTROs and an Italian government scheme which allowed banks
to pay a fee to the government to get a guarantee on part of their assets, thus enabling these
assets to be pledged as collateral with the ECB. The effect on bank lending is small in economic
terms and relative to the amount of Italian bank borrowing in the 3-year LTROs which
amounted to 7.9% of the value of bank assets. Consistent with this, Italian bank holdings of
government bonds increase by between 4% and 9% (across various types of banks) as a percent
of bank assets from November 2011 to March 2012. Garcia-Posada and Marchetti (2016)
document the effect of the 3-year LTROs on bank lending by Spanish banks to the non-financial
private sector. The 3-year LTROs are found to increase annual credit growth by about 1
percentage point. The effect is again small in economic terms and relative to the amount of
Spanish bank borrowing in the 3-year LTROs which was about 9% of the value of bank balance
sheets across banks in their sample. Andrade, Cahn, Fraisse, and Mesonnier (2015) focus on
6

France and find that the EUR 153 billion total LTRO take-up for the banks in their sample let
them to increase credit supply to the private sector by about 15 billion, again suggesting that
only a small fraction of LTRO borrowings were lent out. Focusing on Portugal, Crosignani, Fariae-Castro and Fonseca (2015) show that net borrowing by Portuguese banks from the ECB went
up substantially at the second 3-year LTRO allotment and that there is a strong positive relation
in the cross-section of banks between bank purchases of Portuguese government bonds leading
up to this allotment and the amount borrowed at the allotment. This is evidence that banks
purchased bonds in order to engage in an ECB carry trade via the 3-year LTROs, pledging these
bonds as collateral for ECB loans at lower rates than the expected return on the bonds. The fact
that a large fraction of the 3-year LTRO borrowing was used to purchase government bonds
was counter to the ECB’s stated objective of using these operations to support bank lending.
The ECB’s subsequent LTROs, the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), tie
bank borrowing from the ECB to bank lending to the private sector.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief description of the ECB
programs that we analyze. In Section III, we lay out the yield decomposition that underlies our
empirical approach and discuss our identification strategy. Section IV presents the results.
Section V provides some evidence on the potential macroeconomic impact of the policies. We
conclude in Section VI.

II.

Description of ECB Programs

A. Securities Market Programme
On May 10, 2010, the ECB introduced the Securities Markets Programme (SMP) whereby the
ECB directly purchased government debt of distressed countries.2 ECB announcements did not
indicate planned amounts of purchases. ECB total holdings under the SMP are graphed in Figure
2. Up to July 2011, the purchases resulted in holdings of around EUR 75 billion of securities. It is
our understanding that during this first phase of the program only bonds of Greece, Ireland,
and Portugal were purchased. On August 7, 2011, the ECB expanded the program. The second
round of purchases included Italy and Spain. ECB holdings peaked at EUR 219.5 billion in
February of 2012.3 Table 1 Panel A details the distribution of purchases, by country and
maturity, as of December 2012. Italy and Spain represent the largest amount of purchases.
2

While the program announcement stated that purchases may include private debt securities only government
securities have been purchased.
3
The SMP program was officially terminated on September 6, 2012, with the initiation of the Outright Monetary
Transactions program (OMT).

7

The average maturity of the holdings as of that time was around 4 years. Since purchases were
made from May 2010-February 2012, with Italy and Spain purchases commencing in August
2011, the average maturity at purchase was up to 2.6 years higher for Portugal, Ireland and
Greece and up to 1.4 years higher for Italy and Spain. This implies that the average maturity of
ECB purchases was fairly comparable to the average maturity of debt outstanding (for example,
OECD statistics report that the average term to maturity of government debt in 2010 was 7.2
years for Italy, 6.6 years for Spain, 5.8 year for Portugal, 5.9 years for Ireland, and 7.1 years for
Greece).4
In terms of the ECB’s motivation for the SMP, the ECB’s press release on May 10, 2010 stated
(our emphasis added in italics):
``In view of the current exceptional circumstances prevailing in the market, the
Governing Council decided [….] to conduct interventions in the euro area public and
private debt securities markets (Securities Markets Programme) to ensure depth and
liquidity in those market segments which are dysfunctional. The objective of this
programme is to address the malfunctioning of securities markets and restore an
appropriate monetary policy transmission mechanism.‘’
The Aug 7, 2011 release stated:
``The Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) welcomes the
announcements made by the governments of Italy and Spain concerning new measures
and reforms in the areas of fiscal and structural policies. [….] It is on the basis of the
above assessments that the ECB will actively implement its Securities Markets
Programme. This programme has been designed to help restoring a better transmission
of our monetary policy decisions – taking account of dysfunctional market segments –
and therefore to ensure price stability in the euro area.’’
In both cases, we note the ECB’s reference to dysfunctional and illiquid market segments. We
will study whether the government bond markets of the GIIPS countries were affected by
segmentation/limits-to-arbitrage effects. We focus on May 10, 2010 and August 7, 2011 as the
event dates for the SMP.

B. Outright Monetary Transactions

4

See http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DatasetCode=GOV_DEBT

8

On September 6, 2012, the ECB introduced the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT)
program. The program has two key elements. First, under the OMT, the ECB can purchase
government bonds of a given country, focusing on maturities between 1 and 3 years, and with
no ex-ante quantitative limits. Second, a country has to apply for the OMT in which case it will
also have to undertake a set of fiscal adjustments. That is, the program involved conditionality.
As of today, no bonds have been purchased under the OMT program.
While the program was announced officially on September 6, 2012, there were earlier
indications regarding the likelihood of such a program. On July 26, 2012, ECB President Mario
Draghi stated at a conference that ``within our mandate, the ECB is ready to do whatever it
takes to preserve the euro. And believe me, it will be enough.’’ Furthermore, the introductory
statement of the ECB to the August 2, 2012 press conference stated:
``The Governing Council, within its mandate to maintain price stability over the medium
term and in observance of its independence in determining monetary policy, may
undertake outright open market operations of a size adequate to reach its objective. […]
Furthermore, the Governing Council may consider undertaking further non-standard
monetary policy measures according to what is required to repair monetary policy
transmission. Over the coming weeks, we will design the appropriate modalities for such
policy measures.’’
In our event study of the OMT, we focus on these three dates, i.e. July 26, August 2 and
September 6 of 2012.
The OMT was motivated by perceived redenomination risk associated with the breakup of the
Euro. For example, on December 6, 2012, Draghi stated:
“We said that the main aim of the OMT is to remove tail risk to overcome monetary and
financial fragmentation of the euro area that would stem from a redenomination risk.”
We will study whether redenomination risk was an important factor in the dynamics of the
bond yields of GIIPS countries.

C. 3-Year Long-Term Refinancing Operations
On December 8, 2011, the ECB announced two 3-year Long-Term Refinancing Operations
(LTROs). The operations were an extension of the ECB’s main lending to banks, the main
refinancing operation (MRO), to 3 years. Under the LTROs, like the MRO, banks received loans
against a variety of collateral, subject to a collateral-specific haircut schedule. The loans were
9

at a floating interest rate, tied to the ECB’s policy rate. The lending was full allotment, meaning
that banks did not face quantity limits on their borrowings.
The press release from the ECB stated:
``The Governing Council of the European Central Bank (ECB) has today decided on
additional enhanced credit support measures to support bank lending and liquidity in the
euro area money market. In particular, the Governing Council has decided to conduct
two longer-term refinancing operations (LTROs) with a maturity of 36 months and the
option of early repayment after one year. ‘’
Because the interest rate on the LTROs was floating at the MRO rate, the difference between
the LTROs and the regular MRO was actually quite subtle. Rolling over weekly MRO funding
over 3 years produced the same interest rate cost as a 3-year LTRO loan. One potential
advantage of the LTROs is that they alleviated concerns that the ECB could revert at some point
to a fixed-quantity variable-rate allotment policy that restricts funding quantities. The LTROs
were similar to a firm commitment to provide a certain quantity of funding over a 3-year
period. In any case, the take-up was substantial, and so banks must have perceived some
benefit from taking out LTRO loans compared with rolling over MRO funding. The first
allotment date for the LTROs was December 21, 2011. On this date, EUR 489.2 billion was
borrowed by banks, from the ECB. The second allotment date was February 29, 2012, when
EUR 529.5 billion was borrowed by banks. A substantial share of this borrowing volume was
substitution from other ECB borrowing facilities. Across all ECB MRO, 3-month LTRO, 12-month
LTRO, and 3-year LTRO facilities, the net increase in borrowing was EUR210.0 billion the week
of the first allotment and EUR 310.6 billion in the week of the second allotment.5
News prior to December 8, 2011 suggested the possibility of an action by the ECB. For example,
the Financial Times on November 24, 2011 reported in a headline that the “ECB eyes longerterm loans for banks,” although the article did not point to a specific ECB statement that allows
us to pin down a prior event date. The clearest prior announcement from the ECB was on
December 1, 2011, when Draghi spoke to the European Parliament and said that “we are aware
of the scarcity of eligible collateral” [for banks] and suggested that the “the most important
thing for the ECB is to repair the credit channel.” The Financial Times reported on December 1,
2011 (“Draghi hints at eurozone aid plan”) that markets interpreted the Draghi speech to
indicate an expansion of the SMP or a three-year LTRO.
Since we are interested in the impact of direct ECB government bond purchases or indirect
purchases by banks induced by ECB lending, Table 1 Panel B provides estimates of the amounts
5

https://www.ecb.europa.eu/mopo/pdf/mb201203en_box3.pdf?08c66bbcc045b15e9ae0e7038518274d

10

of sovereign bonds purchased by banks using 3-year LTRO money, see column (2). The table is
based on data from the Bruegel database of sovereign bond holdings. Comparing resident bank
holdings of own-country sovereign bonds at the end of the second quarter of 2012 to holdings
at the end of the third quarter of 2011 (pre-LTRO) shows that resident banks increased their
holdings by EUR 86 billion for Italy, EUR 66 billion for Spain, EUR 5 billion for Portugal, and EUR
4 billion for Ireland, whereas Greek banks reduced their holdings of own-country sovereign
bonds. These increases in resident bank holdings may not all have been induced by LTRO
borrowing, but provide an indication of the magnitudes involved. As a percentage of the
outstanding debt, the resident banks’ purchases of domestic sovereign bonds over the period
from 2011:Q3 to 2012:Q2 were much larger in Spain than in the other countries (about 10
percent of bonds outstanding for Spain, about 5 percent for Italy and Ireland, and about 2
percent for Portugal).
The use of LTRO funds to purchase sovereign debt was not the main objective of the policy
(which as stated was focused on increasing bank lending) but it may have been a secondary
motive. For example, French President Sarkozy stated that the LTRO “means that each state can
turn to its banks, which will have liquidity at their disposal” (Financial Times Alphaville,
December 15, 2011). The quantities stated above indicate that whether intended or not, the
LTROs led to substantial financial sector purchases of sovereign bonds.
In our event study we focus on December 1 and December 8 of 2011 as LTRO event dates.
Conclusions do not change materially if we add the two allotment dates.6

III.

Channels for Policy Impact on Government Yields: Identification

Our main objective is to study the effect of ECB policies on sovereign bond yields, and to
understand the channels through which these effects operate. We first describe how we
decompose the overall yield changes into several economically interpretable components.

A. Channels
Consider the yield on a Euro-denominated government bond issued by country
remaining term to maturity :

with

6

We do not include the LTRO allotment dates since effects on those dates would reflect news about the state of
the banking sector in addition to news about the impact of the LTROs

11

∫

[ ]

(Eq. 1)

We have decomposed this bond yield into several components. The first and second
components (top line) are not dependent on the identity of the country, . Denote by the
overnight interest rate at time on a safe and liquid bond, such as the overnight EONIA rate.
Then the first component is the expectations hypothesis component of bond yields.
Announcements regarding ECB government bond purchases may be taken as a signal of a more
accommodative stance of the ECB and hence a signal reducing the future path of the policy
rate. This effect has been important for the US quantitative easing programs, as explained in
Krishnamurthy and Vissing-Jorgensen (2011). The second component reflects a term (or
duration risk) premium associated with the bond. Since longer term bonds have interest rate
risk, they likely carry a term premium. If the ECB programs affect macroeconomic outcomes
and thus alter macroeconomic risk, they may affect duration risk premia and hence lower
longer term rates (i.e. reduce
in eq. 1). Note that both the signaling and
duration risk channels are broad channels in that they will lower not only GIIPS government
bond yields but also yields on core-country bonds and EONIA interest rate swaps. We do not
separately identify the duration and signaling channels (they appear small in any case), and
instead measure these channels, in sum, by using changes in the Euro swap rate (EONIA OIS
swaps):
∫

[ ]

The next three components (second line) are country specific. The third component,
, reflects the premium for default risk. This premium in bond pricing
models (see Duffie and Singleton, 1999) is driven by the likelihood of default, the loss given
default, and the economic market-price-of risk associated with the default states. Our
empirical approach will not disentangle these pieces separately, and hence we refer to the term
only as a default risk premium. If ECB policies are viewed as signals that in the event of a
sovereign nearing default, fiscal transfers will be made from core countries to the affected
countries, then, the policies lower bond yields because they increase the expected repayments
of bond-holders.
Another way that bond yields may be high is through redenomination risk. If bond holders
worry that rather than (or in addition to) default on obligations, the government will choose to
exit the Euro and redenominate its debt into a local currency at a depreciated exchange rate,
then they will require a redenomination premium. The component,
,
reflects the likelihood of redenomination, the depreciated value of the currency if
12

redenominated, and the economic price-of-risk associated with the redenomination states. We
refer to this term as a redenomination risk premium. For the same reasons that ECB policies
may be perceived to reduce default risk, they could also lower risk that a country abandons the
Euro in an attempt to regain monetary and fiscal flexibility.
The last component of the bond yield arises from segmentation (including illiquidity) frictions. If
investors differ in their valuation of a bond and some investors are constrained from
participating in the market, either because they are not active in the market for that bond or
because they face portfolio constraints, then the market price will reflect the valuation of a
subset of the investor population and bond yields will reflect a segmentation factor compared
with the frictionless case. For example, if local investors are relatively optimistic, or if they see
benefits to holding local bonds above and beyond the bonds' cash-flow -- say if the bonds are
accepted as collateral at the ECB or they receive special regulatory treatment -- then they are
willing to hold bonds at relatively high prices. If other investors, whose valuation is lower,
reduce their holdings to zero, but face constraints in taking a short position, the yield on the
bond will include a component
. Alternatively, if some high-valuation
investors drop out of the market -- say because of funding constraints -- bonds will have to be
held by low valuation investors, leading to
and high bond yields. Note
that the key assumption here is segmentation. If there are no segmentation frictions, then the
bonds will be priced via the usual pricing kernel that applies to all assets, and the particular
demands of some investors are irrelevant. Thus a key restriction for this component to be
present is that there are limits to arbitrage as in Gromb and Vayanos (2002). There is ample
evidence of the presence of segmentation frictions in a variety of asset markets. Mitchell et. al.
(2002) and Lamont and Thaler (2003) present evidence from the equity market that the market
value of a subsidiary can sometimes exceed the market value of a parent company. Greenwood
and Vayanos (2010) describe the effect on long-term UK bonds of a change in regulation that
led to an increased valuation of long-term bonds by UK pension funds. Ivashina et. al. (2015)
describe the effects of a demand for dollar funding by European banks on covered interest
parity. In all of these cases, a segmentation friction prevents a large set of investors from
trading in the relevant market and undoing the demand effects of a subset of investors.
summarizes these demand effects, that because of segmentation frictions,
affect bond yields. If markets are segmented, then ECB purchases of sovereign bonds will
increase the price of these bonds causing
to fall and potentially even
become negative. This occurs, for example, if the purchases are absorbed by a small number of
market participants with limited capital.
These components are not independent. For example, expectations about the future path of
interest rates and inflation may affect solvency, and hence default and redenomination risk.
Rising yields due to redenomination concerns can also raise the risk of default and vice versa. In
13

terms of eq. (1), if any of the other four terms on the right-hand side are reduced, this will
and
Related, the
endogenously lead to a reduction in
default and redenomination risk components have a self-reinforcing element that arises from
the two-way feedback between interest rates and these risks. If lenders place a high probability
on sovereign default or redenomination, they will require high interest rates, which will
adversely affect the sovereigns’ fiscal position and reinforce the default and redenomination
fears. For example, in Cole and Kehoe (2000), the government rolls over short-term debt. If an
investor fear that other investors will not rollover their debt, then they raise the interest rate
they charge on debt, which in turn makes default more likely. We will not separately measure
exogenous and endogenous default and redenomination risks. It is likely that both have played
a part in the effects of ECB interventions.

B. Identification and Estimation of Yield Components using Kalman Filtering
The default risk premium, redenomination risk premium and segmentation components are not
directly observable, posing a challenge for the estimation. The signaling and duration risk
component of yields as directly observable through swap rates. Bond yields, net of Euro swap
rates, are then the sum of the three remaining unobserved components: the default risk
premium, the redenomination risk premium and segmentation. We treat these three
components as latent variables that we uncover through a Kalman filter approach by jointly
using the information in yields on euro-denominated and dollar-denominated government
bonds, along with various corporate bond yields and credit-default swap (CDS) rates within a
state-space model. We implement this approach for the three countries (Italy, Spain, and
Portugal) for which we have sufficient data on dollar-denominated bond yields.
The Kalman filter helps us address another issue. Some of the securities we employ are illiquid,
creating two measurement problems. First, with illiquidity, an observed price is equal to a true
underlying price plus a measurement error (think of the error as capturing the impact of bid-ask
spreads). Second, the prices of infrequently traded securities may only react with a lag to policy
announcements. These two considerations imply that a standard event study could lead to
biased estimates of the relative size of the policy channels.
We first lay out the Kalman filter accounting only for measurement error. In the next section,
we augment the Kalman filter to account for the lagged impact of state variables on
observables.

14

Collect the observed yields and CDS rates in a vector yt with the domestic sovereign (swap-rate
adjusted) bond yield as the first element and denote the state vector of the latent components
as xt. We assume that xt follows a (restricted and heteroscedastic) first-order vector
(Eq. 2)
autoregression
,
where F is a diagonal matrix,
is a vector of mutually uncorrelated standard normal
disturbances, and
, i.e., conditional variances and covariances are proportional to
the domestic bond yield, akin to a square-root process. This captures the tendency of shocks to
sovereign bond yields to have higher volatility when yield spreads over swap rates are higher. 7
The matrix is unrestricted. The observed yields and CDS rates are linear combinations of the
latent components plus heteroscedastic measurement error
,

(Eq. 3)

where H is a known matrix,
is a vector of mutually uncorrelated standard normal
disturbances, and
with diagonal V. The Kalman filter and smoother allows us to
use the observed
to extract the unobserved . We will then analyze how these underlying
components react on policy dates.
Identification is made through the choice of H. In Table 2, Panel A we present the basic idea
behind our identification. The table presents the matrix H with element
corresponding to
observed asset price (an element of the vector ) and latent component (an element of
the vector ). We start from two simple observations. First, foreign-law sovereign bonds
denominated in US dollars cannot be redenominated through domestic law changes and (after
adjusting by the US dollar swap rate of similar duration) should only capture the default risk
premium component of the sovereign bond yield. Second, redenomination into a new currency
should affect all securities issued in a given country under the country’s local law equally. In
other words, the yield of euro-denominated local-law sovereign bonds and euro-denominated
local-law corporate bonds (or loans) of the same duration should be affected equally by the risk
of redenomination. Therefore, we can use data for corporate bonds to identify the
redenomination component of sovereign euro-denominated bond yields. For this to work well,
the corporate bonds should be issued by relatively safe non-financial companies for which
default risk is low and not closely tied to the default risk of the sovereign (as would be the case
7

See, for example, Feldhütter and Lando (2008) for a related approach. While they use the lagged value of the
unobserved components to model the covariance matrix, we use the lagged bond yield. This has the advantage
that we use an observable variable (which is required under the assumptions of the Kalman filter). Also, in our
setting, the segmentation components can be negative, which implies that it would not make sense to assume that
their conditional variances depend on their own component lags.

15

for banks). With the redenomination risk premium component identified from corporate
bonds/loans, and the default risk premium component identified from dollar-denominated
sovereign bonds, we can then identify the segmentation component of the yield on sovereign
euro-denominated bonds as the remaining country-specific component of this yield. The
Kalman filter also takes into account measurement error in the observables (see eq. 3) but the
intuition behind identification does not change when accounting for measurement error, or
lagged price adjustment.
Our identification assumes that domestic law and foreign law sovereign bonds have the same
default risk premium. Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) show that in the post WWII period up to 2010
there is no clear pattern in terms of whether foreign debt or domestic debt holders do better in
terms of incidence of default. More recently, in the Greek default the same loss was imposed
on local and foreign bonds, although some holders of foreign-law debt who did not participate
in the restructuring were paid in full (Zettelmeyer, Trebesch and Gulati, 2013).
A related question is whether it would be better to use sovereign CDS to measure the default
risk premium rather than dollar-denominated bonds. We decide against this for two reasons.
First, it is possible that sovereign CDS rates are an underestimate of default risk to the extent
that market participants believe that the CDS may not be triggered in all “default” events. A
Goldman Sachs note on Nov. 8 2012, Garzarelli (2012), raises this issue stating that ``The extra
compensation embedded in government bond spreads (relative to CDS) could reflect the
possibility of an FX redenomination, and that of a debt restructuring which would not trigger
CDS. Separating these two sources of risk is non-trivial.’’ In the period leading up to the Greek
restructuring, there was considerable uncertainty around whether or not the restructuring
would trigger CDS payouts (it ultimately did in March 2012). For example, on October 27, 2011
the ISDA determined that the European Union’s agreement with banks for a ``voluntary’’ 50
percent write down on their Greek bond holdings would be unlikely to trigger CDS payments.
The news changed CDS rates and bond yields in a manner that is consistent with shifts in the
likelihood of CDS payouts.8 A second problem with using sovereign CDS rates is that the CDS
rates may share a segmentation component with the sovereign bonds, which in particular
reacts to ECB purchases. For example, suppose an ECB announcement made investors think
that the ECB would always intervene to keep the yield spread (to swaps) on 2-year eurodenominated Spanish government debt at two percentage points below what it would be
without intervention. This would affect a rational investor’s willingness to pay for CDS
protection. Even if the true default risk did not change, the fact that the investor could always
sell the bond to the ECB at an inflated price means that the investor faces less effective default
8

The 5-year CDS changes on October 27, 2012 are -50 bps (Italy), -65 bps (Spain), -195 bps (Portugal), and -95 bps
(Ireland). Moreover these changes are larger in magnitude than changes in 5-year bond yields of these countries,
suggesting changes in the likelihood of CDS payouts.

16

risk, and hence is less willing to pay for CDS protection. Sovereign CDS rates will thus be
distorted in the same direction as sovereign bond yields, but it is difficult to assess the relative
magnitudes of the distortions.

Baseline implementation for Italy
We use non-financial corporate bonds and CDS to identify the redenomination risk premium.9
The precise way this is done differs between Italy on the one hand and Spain and Portugal one
the other, due to differences in the way CDS payouts are affected by currency redenomination
in these countries, and due differences in the availability of data on local-law eurodenominated corporate bonds and foreign-law dollar-denominated corporate bonds.
The ISDA Master Agreement that governs CDS contracts explicitly states that for G7 countries
such as Italy, CDS contracts do not cover losses from redenomination risk.10 By contrast, for
Spain and Portugal that are not G7 countries, CDS contracts would be presumed to cover losses
from redenomination. Industry research letters confirm that this is the common perception in
the market. For example, Credit Suisse (2010) states that ``by definition [of being a G-7
member] Italy, …, can re-denominate its government debt out of Euros into a new currency
without triggering a restructuring, whereas Spain cannot (except in the extremely unlikely
event it can keep a AAA rating through the process)’’.
For Italy, since CDS contracts only cover default risk, they can be used in conjunction with
corporate bond yields to identify redenomination risk. We compare the corporate CDS rate to
the yield on a local-law euro-denominated bond issued by the same corporation to identify
redenomination risk: If the (swap-adjusted) euro-denominated bond yield is substantially above
the CDS rate, this would be an indication of high redenomination risk. Our redenomination risk
measure thus is equal to a corporate bond yield minus the swap rate minus the corporate CDS
rate. In finance, this construction is known as the (negative of the) CDS-bond basis. Our
9

The conceptually simplest approach to measuring redenomination risk from corporate bonds would be to use the
yield spread between euro- and dollar-denominated corporate bonds. However, most European corporate bonds
are issued in the Eurobond market, denominated in euros and issued under foreign law (i.e. not the law of the
country of the bond issuing corporation). There are only a small number of non-financial corporate eurodenominated bonds issued under local law and also only a small number of corporate bonds denominated in
dollars or other foreign currencies. Therefore, in our baseline implementation, we combine various corporate bond
yields with information from corporate CDS rates in order to measure the redenomination component of bonds
yields for a given country.
10 CDS contracts must pay if there is ``any change in the currency or composition of any payment of interest or
principal to any currency which is not a Permitted Currency. ``Permitted currency’’ means (1) the legal tender of
any Group of 7 country, or (2) the legal tender of any country which has a local currency long-term debt rating of
either Aaa or higher” [ISDA Master Agreement]

17

baseline implementation for Italy is presented in Table 2 Panel B. This is the same as Table 2
Panel A except for providing detail on exactly how the corporate data are used to identify the
redenomination risk premium.
We use ENI, a large energy company and one of the safest non-financial firms in Italy, as the
corporation for measuring redenomination risk. It is well known that the CDS-bond basis can
deviate from zero even in the absence of redenomination risk, see e.g. Bai and Collin-Dufresne
(2011). They find that during the US financial crisis the CDS-bond basis was substantially
negative, around -200 bps for investment-grade firms and as low as -600 bps for junk-rated
firms. This indicates that even absent redenomination risk, the basis, particularly for less safe
firms, can be substantial. These authors also show that the basis, in the cross-section,
correlates with measures of the transaction costs that impede arbitrage, such as funding costs,
haircuts, and measures of counterparty risk. These findings suggest that any differential
behavior of bond yields and CDS is partially a reflection of market segmentation. By using a
safe non-financial firm such as ENI, we minimize the problem that our redenomination measure
is affected by other components of the CDS-bond basis. Below we will consider an alternative
approach that does not rely on using a CDS-bond basis to identify the redenomination risk
premium.
We assume that the yield of domestic ENI bonds does not load on the domestic sovereign
segmentation component (Table 2 Panel B). ENI’s domestic bond issues are large and fairly
liquid and they should not be much affected by factors that could drive segmentation in the
domestic sovereign bond market, like the preferential treatment of sovereign debt in banks’
risk weighting for regulatory capital requirements. Most importantly, the SMP and OMT focus
on euro-denominated sovereign bonds and thus likely directly affect the segmentation
component for sovereign bonds, but not any segmentation components for corporate bonds.
As for the LTROs, they likely implied purchases of sovereign bonds and financial sector bonds,
but are unlikely to directly have led to substantial purchases of non-financial corporate bonds.11
Hence, we assume that the swap-adjusted yield on ENI debt is affected by an ENI-specific
default component and by redenomination risk (in the event of redenomination through a
change in domestic law, all domestic debt, not only sovereign debt, would redenominate), but
not by the domestic sovereign segmentation component.
To summarize, the baseline identification for Italy works as follows:


The redenomination risk premium component is identified from the difference between
the swap-adjusted corporate EUR bond yield and the corporate CDS rate.

11

Several banks are known to have used ECB money to purchase their own bonds. This is less relevant for nonfinancials who do not have direct access to ECB borrowing.

18




The sovereign default risk premium component is identified from the swap-adjusted
yield on the sovereign dollar-denominated bond.
Given the redenomination risk premium component and the sovereign default risk
premium component the swap-adjusted yield on the sovereign euro-denominated bond
identifies the domestic sovereign segmentation component.

The details on exactly which securities are used are given in Table A.1. In terms of data sources
we use mid-quote data from Bloomberg when available and otherwise data from Datastream.
Bloomberg offers data from different sources. We use the CBBT or BGN data sources. Both of
these sources are based on actual quotes from participating dealers (as opposed to a modelbased valuation). BGN is based on both executable and indicative quotes while CBBT uses
executable quotes only. For each data series we pick between CBBT and BGN data by regressing
the change in the series on five lags of the change in the series and picking the series for which
this regression has the lower R2 indicating faster updating to news (absence of substantial
positive coefficients on the lags) and less issues of measurement error (absence of substantial
negative coefficients on the lags due to bid-ask bounce effects).

Baseline implementation for Spain and Portugal
For Spain and Portugal our baseline implementation shown in Table 2 Panel B is different from
that used for Italy due to the different treatment of currency redenomination in CDS contracts.
Since CDS rates for corporations in Spain and Portugal reflect both the default risk premium and
the redenomination risk premium, as do euro-denominated bond yields, the difference
between euro-denominated bond yields and CDS will not capture redenomination risk as it
does for Italian firms. Instead, we exploit the fact that because CDS contracts for Spain and
Portugal cover redenomination risk, if we compare the CDS rate for a corporation to the yield
on a dollar denominated foreign-law bond of the same firm with a matched maturity, the
difference will capture redenomination risk. Intuitively, the CDS works much like a eurodenominated bond in that it loads on both default and redenomination whereas the dollar
bond only loads on default. We base our computations on the safest non-financial firm for
which we can find data (in this case on CDS and dollar-denominated bonds) in order to
minimize the non-redenomination component of the CDS-bond basis. For Spain we use the firm
Telefonica and for Portugal the firm EDP (an energy company). The identification then works as
follows:


The redenomination risk premium component is identified from the difference between
the corporate CDS rate and the corporate swap-adjusted USD yield.
19




The sovereign default risk premium component is identified from the swap-adjusted
yield on the sovereign dollar-denominated bond.
Given the redenomination risk premium component and the sovereign default risk
premium component the swap-adjusted yield on the sovereign euro-denominated
bond identifies the domestic sovereign segmentation component.

Finally, note that in order for the corporate CDS contracts to measure default and
redenomination risk premia as we assume, the corporations on which the CDS contracts are
written (Telefonica and EDP) must have euro-denominated local debt. Otherwise, the CDS rates
will only reflect default risk premia. We have confirmed using Thomson One and Bloomberg
data that both Telefonica and EDP (and the Spanish firm Endesa which we will use below) have
outstanding local-law euro-denominated debt that is senior unsecured and thus could be
delivered into the CDS contract in case of default or redenomination (the CDS contracts used
are based on senior unsecured claims, meaning that in a credit event one can deliver anything
of this or better seniority).

Alternative implementation not relying on corporate CDS-bond basis
Our baseline identification relies on comparing corporate bond yields and CDS rates to estimate
the redenomination risk premium. We have picked the safest non-financial firms for which we
have data in order to minimize the non-redenomination components of differences between
bond yields and CDS, but this may not fully resolve the issue. If there are non-redenomination
components in the CDS-bond basis, our results will be biased. As noted above, it is well
documented that (swap-adjusted) bond yields were high relative to CDS rates in the US
financial crisis, where there was no redenomination risk. If this is also true in Italy, our
redenomination measure (which is based on Corporate EUR yield-EUR swap-Corporate CDS) will
be upward biased, whereas for Spain and Portugal our redenomination series (which is based
on Corporate CDS-(Corporate USD yield-USD swap)) will be downward biased. If ECB actions
reduce market segmentation in general via increased arbitrage activity, it is likely that on ECB
announcement dates the gap between corporate CDS rates and bond yields also shrinks. For
Italy such a phenomenon will result in Corporate EUR yield-EUR swap-Corporate CDS falling and
thus leading us to overestimate the extent to which ECB policies reduce redenomination risk.
For Spain and Portugal, Corporate CDS-(Corporate USD yield-USD swap)) and Corporate CDS(Corporate GBP yield-GBP swap)) will increase from negative values towards zero and would
lead us to underestimate the impact of ECB policies in reducing redenomination risk premia.
Alternatively, the CDS-bond basis may change on ECB announcement days for reasons
unrelated to ECB announcements and in ways not fully understood. For example, while Bai and
Collin-Dufresne (2011) document clear patterns for average CDS-bond basis over time, there
20

are large idiosyncratic components to the basis across companies and regressions explaining
the basis have modest R2-values. For these reasons we also consider an alternative
implementation which does not rely on identifying redenomination risk premia by comparing
bond yields and CDS rates.
The alternative implementation is shown in Table 2 Panel C for Italy and Spain. For both
countries, the alternative implementation provides an upper bound estimate of the level of the
redenomination risk premium. Correspondingly, it will provide a lower bound estimate of the
level of domestic sovereign bond segmentation. We use the yield on a euro-denominated local
law bond (for Italy) or the CDS rate of a reasonably safe corporation (for Spain) to construct an
upper bound estimate on redenomination risk and changes in redenomination risk on event
dates by assuming that this yield/CDS rate reflects only redenomination risk. Since even the
safest firms with yield/CDS data available have some default risk, this measure overstates the
reduction of redenomination risk premia as a policy channel by implicitly assigning any
reduction in the default risk premium for fairly safe corporations to a reduced redenomination
risk premium.
For Italy we use the yield on the ENI bond used in our baseline implementation. For Spain we
use the CDS rate for Endesa (the largest electric utility company in Spain, a firm with lower CDS
rates than Telefonica) and also consider the yield for a euro-denominated local law bonds
issued by Enagas (an energy company that owns and operates the Spanish national gas grid) or
Abertis (an infrastructure conglomerate). Neither of these companies had enough data to be
used for our baseline method but can be used in this alternative approach. For Portugal we do
not have reliable data for any euro-denominated local-law non-financial bond and we cannot
reliably use a non-financial CDS rate as an (upper-bound) measure of redenomination risk.
While this made sense for Spain (where Endesa has a CDS rate of 2.5 percent or less throughout
the sample), it makes less sense for Portugal were EDP’s CDS reaches almost 10 percent in mid2012 and where EDP’s foreign bonds have equally high yields suggesting that high CDS rates are
mainly due to a default risk premium not a redenomination risk premium.

Robustness check allowing for foreign segmentation in dollar bonds
Our baseline estimation relies heavily on the use of dollar-denominated sovereign bonds. There
are various concerns one may have with these, aside from the issue of whether they have the
same default risk premium as local law euro-denominated bonds which we discussed above.
Perhaps they are more illiquid than domestic bonds. Perhaps they have more measurement
error. Perhaps the dollar-denominated bonds are taxed differently than other bonds, or are
purchased by different investor clientele, which then affects their yields. If these effects lead to
21

a level difference in dollar bond yields, then our inference will not be affected, since it is based
on changes around event dates. If these effects are present as transient measurement error or
illiquidity, then our Kalman filter will account for them. However, if these effects systematically
change across ECB announcement dates, then our inference will be biased. As an example, if
dollar-denominated bonds are less liquid than local bonds, they will carry an illiquidity
discount.12 If ECB actions systematically change the price that investors pay for liquidity, then
the illiquidity discount may change across ECB announcement dates. To address these
unresolved issues, we conduct a robustness check that allows for a separate segmentation
component for dollar-denominated bonds.13
We assume that dollar-denominated bonds carry a foreign segmentation component and that
this component is common to both sovereign and corporate bonds. While this would not make
sense for euro-denominated bonds (due to ECB purchases focusing on sovereign bonds), it is
more reasonable for dollar-denominated bond given that the segmentation component is
intended to capture time-varying liquidity premia, tax or clientele effects and the effect of
whether or not the bond is accepted as collateral by the ECB. We add additional information for
corporations in order to estimate the foreign segmentation component. As before, we use
dollar-denominated sovereign bonds to identify sovereign default, now adjusting our estimates
of sovereign default risk premium for the fact that the dollar-denominated sovereign bonds are
affected by the foreign segmentation component. The specific details again differ across
countries as laid out in Table 2, Panel D.
For Italy, we add the yield on foreign law dollar-denominated bonds issued by ENI. The intuition
for the identification works from the bottom to the top row: As in our baseline identification,
we identify the corporate default component from the ENI CDS rate yield. Given the corporate
default component we then use the dollar-denominated ENI bond yields to identify the foreign
market segmentation component and use the euro-denominated ENI bond to identify
redenomination risk. The sovereign dollar-denominated bond then identifies sovereign default
risk premium leaving the sovereign euro-denominated bond to identify domestic sovereign
segmentation.
12

Foreign-currency bonds were not accepted as collateral by the ECB throughout much of our sample period.
Collateral rules regarding dollar-denominated bonds changed on November 9, 2012, when the ECB resumed
accepting foreign currency denominated collateral (this had also been done earlier in the crisis), subject to some
further eligibility criteria (see https://www.ecb.europa.eu/paym/coll/html/questions2.en.html [retrieved on
August 12, 2013]).
13
Table A.3 in the appendix reports an additional robustness check that probes the illiquidity issue. We use daily
changes in the yield spread between German government bonds (Bunds) and German agency bonds (KfW) as a
liquidity risk factor as in Schwarz (2010). We then estimate liquidity-risk related yield movements in the event
windows as the liquidity betas multiplied by the change in the KfW-Bund spread on the event days. We find that
the liquidity-risk related yield changes are too small to explain much of the yield movements during the event
windows. Moreover, the liquidity-risk related movements are quite similar for domestic and foreign-law bonds.

22

For Spain we combine corporate information from Telefonica and Endesa. The intuition for the
identification again works from the bottom to the top row of the table shown in Table 2, Panel
D. We identify redenomination from the Endesa CDS by setting its corporate default premium
component to zero as in the alternative implementation above. We then identify the corporate
default premium for Telefonica from the Telefonica CDS. Given that, we can use the Telefonica
dollar-denominated bond to identify foreign market segmentation. The sovereign dollar
denominated bond then identifies the sovereign default premium leaving the sovereign eurodenominated bond to identify domestic sovereign segmentation.
For the data reasons discussed above, we cannot implement the robustness check allowing for
foreign segmentation for Portugal.

C. Non-synchronicity
From a cursory look at the data (e.g., simple regressions) it is apparent that the securities we
use as observables sometimes react to news in a delayed fashion. The foreign-currency
denominated bonds, especially, tend to lag the other instruments in reaction to news. This
could be due to stale prices of these bonds stemming from their low liquidity. We modify the
state-space model to take this delayed reaction into account. The state vector is expanded to
include q lags of the latent components in addition to the k unobservable components that we
are interested in extracting:

(

)

(

)

(

)(

)

(

),

(Eq. 4)

where F is a diagonal matrix, as before. All this modification does is to expand the state vector
with lags of , but without any further change to the state-vector dynamics compared with eq.
(2). The observation equation is now specified as

(

)(

)

,

(Eq. 5)

where the Li are row vectors, (1, gi, sgn(gi)|gi|2,… , sgn(gi)|gi|q), that contain geometrically
decaying weights, truncated after lag q, which are then rescaled so that the elements sum to a
total weight of one. The Hi vectors are the rows of H. This approach allows the observed yields
and CDS rates to react to up to q lags of the latent factors. For example, the first element of y
now no longer equals just H1xt, but instead only a weight < 1 times H1xt plus several lags of H1xt23

for j = 1,2, … , q, geometrically weighted. Thus, the degree of reaction delay is the same for
each unobserved component, but it is allowed to differ across assets. This seems plausible. For
example, when an asset does not react to news on a given day due to thin trading, it does not
react to any news, whether it is news about, say, the default risk premium or the
redenomination risk premium.

j,

When we apply an event study analysis to the extracted latent components, having q > 0
implies that we infer their reaction on day t not only from asset price movements on day t, but
also from movements on future days, up to day t+q, geometrically weighted. In other words,
allowing for these lags allows us to effectively adjust the event window to a greater width
depending on the degree to which an asset is prone to delayed reaction.

D. Estimation
We estimate the parameters of the state-space model {a, F, V, Q, g), where g contains the
stacked gi weighting parameters, with maximum likelihood using the Kalman filter algorithm.
We choose the lag length q to maximize the likelihood. Based on the estimated parameters, we
then perform an additional Kalman smoothing step to obtain, at each point in time, the optimal
estimates of the latent components based on the full sample of data from 2010 to 2012. Akin to
a conventional event study with an extended event window, the Kalman smoother uses data
from days before and after to average out noise in the estimation of the reaction of the latent
components to the event. But unlike in a conventional event study, the effective window size
and weights are chosen optimally depending on the statistical properties of the measurement
error and the latent factors. For our main objective of analyzing the reaction of yield
components ex-post, the smoothed estimates are the object of interest. To apply these
methods for real-time monitoring of risks, one would omit the smoothing step.

IV.

Channels for Policy Impact on Government Yields: Evidence

We evaluate the effects of the ECB policies using an event-study approach. We construct 2-day
changes, from the end of the day prior to the event to the end of the day after the event, (1) in
observed asset prices around a set of event dates; and (2) in the extracted latent yield
components around these event dates. Our event-study approach works only to the extent
that we can be sure that market movements are largely due to ECB policy news. The dates we
24

believe satisfy this criterion come from discussion of the programs in the previous section. As
noted above, for the SMP, we use May 10, 2010 and August 7, 2011.14 For the OMT, we use
July 26, 2012, August 2, 2012, and September 6, 2012. For the LTRO, we use December 1, 2011
and December 8, 2011.
There is a great deal of non-LTRO economic news over the LTRO period that complicates
inference. In Italy, Mario Monti unveils a fiscal plan of austerity on December 5, 2011 that
appears to significantly impact asset prices. In Spain, Mariano Rajoy introduces a fiscal plan on
December 19, 2011 that appears significant. There is further news regarding these plans and
whether or not they will be passed that arrives over this period that likely have important
effects on asset prices.
The measured changes around the event dates should be thought of as asset price reactions to
changes in the probability of a given ECB program, rather than measures of the full magnitude
of the effect of the ECB program. To the extent that we focus on only a few dates for each
event which we are sure are program-relevant dates, it is likely that our measured magnitudes
severely understate the impact of the program. The issue is likely most important for the LTRO
where it is clear that news arrives continuously over a long interval, and we focus only on two
dates. It is also important to keep in mind that the measured price changes reflect financial
markets’ initial assessment of these programs, which is not necessarily equal to the eventual
impact of the program. ECB announcements about the SMP and OMT did not contain
information about the likely magnitude, nor the distribution across countries or maturities, of
intended purchases. Furthermore, banks’ use of LTRO funds was also uncertain. Given this, our
event study evidence should be interpreted as being driven by the market’s perception about
the likely outcome of the programs.

A. Effects on Bond Yields
We start by examining the impact of the ECB policies on government bond yields. We consider
government bond yields from 6 months to 10 years, obtained from Bloomberg along with
overall country level government bond index yields from Barclays obtained from Datastream.
For some of the dates, we do not have data for some yield series (indicated as “ND” (no data) in
the tables below).
Table 3 reports 2-day changes in government bond yields around the SMP, OMT, and LTRO
event dates. Bond yields fall dramatically in all of the countries for the SMP and OMT. The
14

The August 7, 2011 announcement falls on a weekend day. For that event, we use the change from the end of
Friday to the end of Tuesday.

25

largest reductions are at the 2- and 5-year maturities with both Italian and Spanish yields falling
around 200 bps due to both the SMP and the OMT. The reductions are generally significant at
the 5% level (indicated by boldface).15 For the LTROs, bond yields fall in Italy, Spain and Ireland,
with the largest effect of around 50 bps at the 2-year maturity seen for Spain, whereas yields do
not fall in Portugal and Greece. Given the volatility in Portuguese and Greek bond yields over
this period, it is possible that other news may have outweighed the LTRO effect in Portugal and
Greece. The yield changes for the overall LTRO effect are not significantly different from zero
for any of the GIIPS countries. However, as we will see when we examine the latent
components of bond yields, the LTROs had significant effects on the sovereign segmentation
component of Spanish yields.

B. Channels for Effects on Bond Yields
We first examine the signaling and duration-risk channel in Table 4. The table presents the 2day changes in the Euro swap rate (EONIA OIS) across the event dates. It is evident that the
general change in interest rates across the event dates is small, especially compared to the
changes in GIIPS sovereign bond yields. That is, the signaling and duration risk channels played
a small role in the impact of ECB policies.
We next turn to more detailed evidence on the relative roles of the default risk premium, the
redenomination risk premium, and the segmentation channel in the impact of ECB policies on
sovereign bond yields. In this analysis, bond yields are expressed as a spread over the swap
rate to strip out the signaling and duration risk effects. For data availability reasons we focus on
Italy, Spain and Portugal.

Italy
Figure 3 Panel A shows swap-adjusted sovereign bond yields on domestic-law EUR bonds and
foreign-law USD bonds for Italy for a pair of bonds maturing in 2015, as well as the difference
between the two series which captures redenomination and domestic sovereign segmentation.
15

To assess statistical significance of the yield change for a particular policy announcement (for a given country
and maturity) we regress (for each country) daily yield changes from 2010 to 2012 on policy announcement
dummy variables. For each policy announcement (e.g. the first SMP announcement) the corresponding dummy
variable is set to one on the event date and the following day and we test for the significance of this dummy
variable. To assess statistical significance of yield change totals across several announcement dates for a given
policy (e.g. the total impact of SMP for a given country, across the two announcements) we estimate the same
regressions but use dummy variables set to one on days on which an announcement is made and on the first day
after an announcement is made.

26

These series are part of the input that we use to estimate the state-space model to extract the
latent components of bond yields. Table A.1 in the Appendix lists the specific securities that we
use. The vertical lines in Figure 3 mark event dates.
The figure provides a preliminary indication that the default risk premium plays the dominant
role in explaining the movements in bond yields in Italy. The swap-adjusted yield on the USD
bond is of similar magnitude as the swap-adjusted EUR bond yield, indicating the importance of
the default risk premium. There is, however, also substantial movement in the redenomination
plus domestic sovereign segmentation component of the EUR bond yield, underscoring the
importance of carefully identifying the various components and their relative changes around
event dates. For that purpose Figure 3 Panel B shows the series for ENI EUR bonds and ENI CDS
used to identify redenomination risk in our baseline approach. The swap-adjusted ENI EUR yield
rises substantially before the SMP dates, before the first LTRO date and before the first OMT
date. However, so does the ENI CDS rate. Therefore, the difference between the two ENI series,
which captures redenomination, is generally small. This suggests that redenomination risk is
unlikely to have played a major role for yields in Italy.16 Recall that the work of Bai and CollinDufresne (2011) finds that swap-adjusted yields tend to exceed CDS rates during crisis times
even absent redenomination risk, suggesting that this conclusion is unlikely to be driven by CDS
bond-basis biases.
We next turn to the Kalman filter analysis which accounts for lags in the reaction of asset prices
to news. Table 5 presents our estimates for how the observable variables load on
contemporaneous and lagged values of the latent factors in our baseline specification (as
outlined in Panel B of Table 2). For the Italian securities, ML estimation suggests truncation
after lag 2; for Spain and Portugal, ML estimation suggests truncation after lag 3 and lag 2,
respectively. From lag 1 onwards the weights decay geometrically, and, together with the “lag
0” coefficient, they always sum to one. Table 5 shows the weights. The delayed reaction issue
is particularly important for foreign-currency bonds. The weight on the contemporaneous
latent factor realization at “lag 0” is less than 0.50 in some cases. CDS and domestic bond yields
react with less delay.
We repeat the event study analysis with the latent components of bond yields that we extract
using the Kalman filter. The changes in the extracted latent components over the two-day

16

This result contrasts with that of observers focusing on the (negative) CDS-bond basis of Italian sovereign bonds
which was higher than that for ENI bonds just before the LTROs and which some have suggested indicated
substantial redenomination risk for Italy at that time (see in particular Di Cesare, Grande, Manna and Taboga
(2012)).

27

event windows are presented in Table 6.17 Columns labeled with (i) show the estimates from
our baseline specification as outlined in Panel B of Table 2. Columns labeled with (ii) present the
estimates from the specification in Panel C of Table 2 that does not rely on the CDS bond basis.
These estimates provide an upper bound estimate of the role of redenomination risk. Columns
labeled with (iii) show the results corresponding to Panel D of Table 2 where we allow for the
possibility that foreign currency bond yields contain a foreign market segmentation component
reflecting their illiquidity and specific investor clientele.
The first Panel in Table 6 presents the results for Italy. The estimates from the three different
specifications are broadly similar. The effects of SMP and OMT on the one hand and the LTROs
on the other are markedly different.
We find a strong and significant reduction of the default risk premium component by 31 to 117
basis points for each of the SMP and the OMT. The domestic market segmentation component
is also strongly affected by SMP and OMT. It declines by between 79 and 133 basis points for
each of these policies. Almost all of these changes are significant at the 5 percent level.
In contrast, the redenomination component for Italy remains virtually unchanged around event
dates. Method (ii) suggests some role for reduced redenomination risk but remember that
method (ii) was designed to provide an upper bound estimate on the role of redenomination by
using the swap-adjusted EUR yield for a fairly safe non-financial firm (ENI) to measure
redenomination risk. Some part of the -24 bps reduction for the SMP and -48 bps reduction for
the OMT is thus likely to be due to a reduced default risk premium not a reduced
redenomination risk premium, as suggested by method (i) and (iii) which exploit information on
ENI default risk from ENI CDS.
The LTROs have comparatively small effects in the case of Italy, with the only significant effect a
34 to 40 bps reduction in the default component.
Figure 3, Panel C plots the entire time series of the extracted default risk premium,
redenomination risk premium, and domestic market segmentation components in our baseline
specification corresponding to the our baseline identification in Table 2 Panel B and the results
shown in Table 6 column (i).

Spain
17

The total effect summed across all components is not exactly equal to the bond yield effects shown in Table 3,
for several reasons: First, Table 3 looked at constant-maturity yields, while the state-space model is applied to
specific bonds with a fixed maturity date (see Table A1 in the appendix for a list of the specific instruments used).
Second, the Kalman filter allows for measurement error and delayed reactions of yields.

28

Figure 4 Panel A plots the swap-adjusted EUR and USD yields for a pair of Spanish government
bonds maturing in 2013. As with our analysis of Italy, the evidence suggests that the dominant
factor driving yields is the default risk premium since the dollar-denominated bonds (which are
not subject to redenomination risk and less affected by ECB-induced changes in market
segmentation) have yields that are quite similar to those for the euro-denominated bonds.
There is, however, also substantial movement in the redenomination plus domestic sovereign
segmentation component of the EUR bond yield. This component drops substantially around
the LTRO dates. To separate redenomination and segmentation, Figure 4 Panel B plots the
Telefonica series used in our baseline approach. The difference between the Telefonica CDS
and the swap-adjusted Telefonica USD yield, which captures redenomination risk, does not
move sharply around the LTRO dates. Together, Panel A and B of this figure thus suggests that
the LTROs substantially reduced domestic sovereign segmentation for Spain. To more carefully
assess the changes in the various components around event dates, Table 6 shows (in the middle
panel) the Kalman filtering results for Spain.
The results in Table 6 for Spain paint a similar picture for the SMP and OMT to that found for
Italy with regards to the policies’ impact on the default risk premium and domestic sovereign
segmentation. These components fall by similar magnitudes as in Italy. The default risk
premium falls by between 44 and 96 bps for each of the SMP and OMT and domestic sovereign
segmentation by between 73 and 87 bps for each of the SMP and OMT. In addition, however,
Spanish bonds experienced a substantial drop in the redenomination risk premium component
around the SMP and OMT announcements, with reductions between 20 and 56 basis points.
The result that the redenomination risk premium was reduced by the SMP and OMT for Spain is
robust across methods, i.e. to whether we identify redenomination risk from the difference
between the Telefonia CDS and swap-adjusted Telefonica USD yields (method (i)) or from
Endesa CDS (method (ii) and (iii)). The series for Endesa is shown in Figure 4 Panel D. The
reductions in the Endesa CDS on the first SMP date and the first and third OMT dates (the dates
that drive the overall results as seen in Table 6) are visible in the graph.
Figure 4, Panel C plots the entire time series of the extracted default risk premium,
redenomination risk premium, and domestic market segmentation components in our baseline
specification. In interpreting this figure, it is useful to keep in mind that the extracted series do
not necessarily represent an accurate picture of the level of a component. In our baseline
specification for Spain, the redenomination component is identified, roughly speaking, as the
difference between the Telefonica swap-adjusted USD yield and Telefonica’s CDS rate (see
Table 2 Panel B). If the USD bond yield is elevated to compensate for the bond’s illiquidity, the
extracted redenomination risk component is biased downward and can be negative, as in the
figure. However, if the illiquidity component in the USD yield does not change much on the ECB
29

policy announcement date, our event study results in Table 6 will still provide an accurate
measure of the change in the redenomination component around the event date. Moreover,
we study the policies with three different specifications in which the bias goes in different
directions, and the results are robust across methods.
As a further robustness check on the role of redenomination risk for Spain, we look for
domestic non-financial euro-denominated corporate bonds. These are rare, but in Figure 4
Panel D we include two available series for Enagas (a gas distribution utility) and Abertis (an
infrastructure firm), again shown as yields in excess of swap rates. There appears to be some
movement in these yields around the OMT dates, but not much change around the first SMP
date. It is possible that our estimates in Table 6 overstate the impact of redenomination risk
around the first SMP date. However, even based on the Table 6 estimates, the reduction in the
redenomination risk premium is smaller than the reduction in the default risk premium and the
effect on domestic market segmentation. Thus, our overall conclusion for Spain with regard to
the SMP and OMT is similar to that for Italy: The market perceived these policies to mainly
affect domestic government bond yields via a reduced default risk premia and via effects on
domestic sovereign segmentation.
The LTROs have a different effect than the SMP and OMT. As in Italy, there is not much effect of
the LTROs on the default risk premium and redenomination risk premium components, but
unlike in Italy, the domestic market segmentation component falls strongly with magnitudes of
69 to 83 basis points consistent with our earlier discussion of this based in Panel A and B of
Figure 4. The fact that we find a substantial effect of the LTROS for Spain via the domestic
market segmentation components is consistent with the data in Table 1 Panel B. As a
percentage of the outstanding debt, the resident banks’ purchases of domestic sovereign bonds
over the period from 2011:Q3 (pre-LTRO) to 2012:Q2 (after the second allotment of LTRO
money was dispersed) were much larger in Spain (about 10 percent of the bonds outstanding
for Spain and about 5 percent for Italy and 2 percent for Portugal).

Portugal
Figure 5 Panel A plots the swap-adjusted EUR and USD yields for a pair of Portuguese
government bonds maturing in 2015. As with our analysis of Italy and Spain, the fact that the
USD-denominated bonds have yields close to those of the domestic bonds suggests that the
dominant factor driving yields is the default risk premium.
The results of the Kalman filter analysis is in the bottom panel of Table 6. For the SMP and
OMT, the results are similar to those from Spain with the largest channels being reductions in
30

the default risk premium and lowered bond yields via reduced domestic sovereign
segmentation. Reduced redenomination risk plays a smaller role. The effects of the LTROs in
Portugal are insignificant for all yield components.
Overall we conclude from our analysis that: (a) Default risk premium and domestic sovereign
segmentation effects were the dominant channels through which the SMP and the OMT
affected sovereign bond yields of Italy, Spain, and Portugal; (b) Redenomination risk may have
been present at times and it may have been a third policy channel for the SMP and OMT in the
case of Spain and Portugal, but not for Italy. (c) The effects of the LTROs are generally small
except for Spain for which they appear to have reduced sovereign bond yields via the domestic
sovereign segmentation channel. On average across Italy, Spain and Portugal, considering both
the SMP and OMT and using Table 6(i), reduced default risk accounts for 37% of the reduction
in bond yields, reduced redenomination risk for 13%, and reduced market segmentation for
50%.The fact that we do find some role for redenomination risk as a policy channel in Spain and
Portugal is consistent with the ECB’s frequently stated concern about redenomination risk.
However, it is important to emphasize that while the ECB’s concerns about redenomination risk
appear to have been most intense just prior to the OMT, motivated by perceptions of high
redenomination risk for Spain, our estimates suggest that even for Spain, the OMT worked
mainly via an impact on the default risk premium and domestic sovereign segmentation with
only a smaller role for reductions in redenomination risk.
The role for the domestic sovereign segmentation channel is potentially consistent with the ECB
stating “dysfunctional’’ markets as a central motivation for the SMP, although the fact that the
market segmentation component turns negative in Spain and Italy could indicate that the ECB
policies lead to a “negative” segmentation effect where domestic yields were temporarily
depressed due to “excess demand” for domestic bonds (from the ECB or domestic banks).

C. Greece
Our decomposition analysis up to this point excluded Greece. Our identification schemes
cannot be applied to Greece because we lack suitable yield and CDS data. To identify the
redenomination risk premium component, we require either a company that has foreigncurrency international debt outstanding along with either CDS or euro-denominated domestic
bonds (method i), or a safe corporation with CDS or euro-denominated domestic bonds.
method ii). In Greece, there is no suitable candidate company that would satisfy these
requirements.
31

For these reasons, we pursue a more limited analysis for Greece. Figure 6 plots the yields of
domestic EUR-denominated Greek sovereign bonds and the yield of USD-denominated foreignlaw sovereign bonds, both maturing in 2013 and expressed relative to EUR and USD swap rates,
respectively. The difference between the two yield series, domestic minus foreign yield,
represents a combination of the redenomination risk component and domestic sovereign
segmentation effects. It is shown in the figure as the blue line. The vertical lines represent the
two SMP announcement events. We focus on the period up to August 2011 because data
become erratic or unavailable after that.
As Figure 6 shows, the swap-adjusted domestic bond yield fell dramatically, by 897 bps, in the
2-day window around the first SMP announcement day. In comparison, there is a small rise of
42 bps on the second SMP date, consistent with the focus on the second wave of the SMP on
Italy and Spain. In the 2-day window around the first SMP date, the swap-adjusted USD yields
fell by 533 bps, far less than the domestic yield, leading the redenomination plus domestic
sovereign segmentation component to fall by 364 bps. Therefore, while the default risk
premium channel (captured by the USD bond) was the most substantial, an important
additional policy channel for the SMP was its impact on redenomination or domestic sovereign
segmentation. The redenomination plus domestic sovereign segmentation component
becomes substantially negative after the first SMP date. Since redenomination risk cannot be
negative this suggests that a substantial channel through which the SMP impacted Greek bond
yields was the domestic sovereign segmentation channel. The actual and expected ECB
purchases thus reduced the yields bonds to be purchased (domestic) relative to those that the
ECB would not purchase (foreign). This evidence of negative domestic sovereign market
segmentation effects is consistent with the evidence in Trebesch and Zettelmeyer (2014) that
drops in yields were concentrated among those particular domestic bonds that the ECB actually
purchased after the announcement.

V.

Macroeconomic Impact

To assess the broader macroeconomic impact of the ECB policies, beyond their effects on
sovereign bond yields, we now turn to asset price reactions of and changes in the aggregate
market values of stocks and corporate bonds.

A. Stock and Corporate Bond Market Reactions
32

Table 7 Panel A reports changes in country level stock indices. The stock returns are calculated
using the Datastream indices18. For the SMP and OMT, stock returns rise across the board. The
effect of the OMT is the largest, with the overall EMU index increasing by over 13%. For the
LTROs, the stock return evidence is mixed with some countries experiencing positive returns
and others experiencing negative returns, but none of the LTRO effects are statistically
significant.
In Panel B and C we break out the stock results into financial sector stocks and non-financial
stocks. Effects are larger for financial sector stocks but even non-financial stocks increase
around 12% on the OMT event dates. We have seen in Table 3 that the ECB policies increased
government bond prices. Since the financial sector holds a large amount of government bonds,
it is likely that the financial sector stock returns are influenced by the direct gain on the value of
bond holdings (e.g. Acharya and Steffen, 2015). In Table 8 we assess how much of the financial
sector stock returns on the event dates can be explained by the gain on GIIPS sovereign bond
holdings. The table is based on banks that both provided data to the EBA's 2011 stress test and
were publicly traded on the particular event date with data available in Compustat Global
Security Daily. We compare actual (value-weighted) stock returns for these banks to returns
implied by the change in the market value of their sovereign bond holdings. The number of
banks varies between 31 and 35 across event dates, but since the banks in the EBA stress test
are the largest ones in each country their stock returns are likely the key drivers of the country
level financial sector stock returns (which are value-weighted). We calculate implied stock
returns based on reported holdings of each of the GIIPS countries' sovereign bonds by maturity
bucket, along with our documented yield changes by maturity from Table 3.
The table suggests that for many countries, only a small fraction of the large financial sector
returns on the first SMP event date and the first and third OMT event dates can be explain by
the increase in market value of GIIPS sovereign bonds held by financial institutions. The
exceptions are Portugal, Greece, Germany and Belgium. In the sample of banks and event
dates, the implied return has little explanatory power for actual returns (whether controlling
for market beta or not). Instead, returns are much better explained by the bank's market beta
on the Eurostoxx index (SXXT, a fairly broad index with about 300 firms included) multiplied by
the realized 2-day return on this index around the particular event date. In a regression of 2-day
stock returns using all seven announcement dates and all 35 banks with sufficient data, the
bank-level stock return implied by GIIPS sovereign bond holding has a small (near zero) and
insignificant coefficient whereas beta (estimated recursively using the past 120 days of returns)
multiplied by the 2-day market return around the event has coefficient close to 1 (significant at

18

We use Datastream indices rather than MSCI indices because Datastream indices use all stocks whereas MSCI
indices are based only on free float.

33

the 1 % level). We do not include the regression in a table for brevity. This finding suggests that
financial sector stock returns cannot be explained primarily by sovereign bond holdings but
instead are likely to be driven by a more general impact of policies on the economies. This is
consistent with substantial policy effects on non-financial stocks in Table 7 Panel C.
Table 9 presents changes in corporate bond yields. We use the Barclays indices for corporate
bonds, with data available for Italy and Spain, and Portugal for part of the period. The average
durations of the corporate bond indices are around 4 years. The OMT appears to have had the
largest effect on corporate yields, with larger effects for Spain than Italy, but with effects much
smaller than those documented for sovereign bonds in Table 3. The corporate bond yield
indices are a based on a mix of domestic law euro-denominated bonds and foreign law eurodenominated bonds (Eurobonds). They are thus difficult to interpret in terms of channels
(default vs. redenomination) because foreign law euro-denominated bonds under some
circumstances likely could be redenominated even if under foreign-law (if the euro ceased to
exist as a currency, see Nordvig and Firoozye, 2012). The corporate bond indices are
nonetheless useful for understanding whether corporations benefitted from ECB policies and
thus for assessing the broader macroeconomic impact of these policies.19

B. Quantifying the Policy Impact
We next do some simple calculations to assess potential welfare effects of the SMP and OMT.
Table 10 reports the total change in stock market value and value of government and corporate
bonds (€ Billions), based on 2-day changes in asset prices, focusing on the SMP and OMT, which
are the policies with strong effects on valuations. From the table, we compute that the
increase in the market value of GIIPS bonds is €280 billion (corporate bonds account for only
around €5 billion of this as indicated by the last column which is based on sub-indices for
corporate bonds, available for Italy, Spain and Portugal). The increase in the stock market value
for GIIPS countries is €161 billion, while it is €769 billion for the EMU as a whole.
One metric for the benefit of these policies is the increase in asset values across the Euro area.
One can view the change in the stock market value as a proxy for the change in present value of
cash flows generated by the private sector (net of taxes), and the change in bond values as a
proxy for the change in the present value of cash flows to bond holders. The total market value
increase in GIIPS debt and EMU stock market is €1,049 billion (=€280 billion + €769 billion). As
19

We have also examined exchange rate reactions on the event dates. Using the trade-weighted index of the Euro
exchange rate from the ECB (series EXR.D.E5.EUR.EN00.A) we find no significant changes in the Euro exchange rate
around out SMP, OMT or LTRO event dates. This suggests that changes in euro-zone competitiveness via changes
in the Euro is unlikely to have been a major channel through which beneficial macroeconomic effects have worked
for these policies.

34

noted above, there is likely some double counting in this computation since the increase in
bond values directly increase financial-sector stock market values. A conservative approach to
address this is to assume that 100% of the increase in bond values is reflected in the stock
market increase. In this case, the market value increase due to the policy is €769 billion.
Alternatively we can use the Bruegel data from Table 1 Panel B to assess what fraction, f, of
GIIPS sovereign debt is owned by GIIPS and core country banks and estimate the overall market
value increase as (1- f)*€280 billion + €769 billion. Using resident bank holdings from the
Bruegel data along with an estimate of the ratio of GIIPS plus core bank holdings to resident
bank holdings from the data on the 2011 EBA stress test discussed above, we estimate that f
varies between 25.7 % and 37.9 % across the GIIPS countries (column (8)-(9) of Table 1 Panel B).
If we set f to 1/3 (for both sovereign bonds and corporate bonds), we find a market value
increase due to the SMP and OMT of €955 billion. This benefit is likely an underestimate
because we implicitly assume that all banks are publicly traded and, more importantly, because
it neglects any market value changes for non-publicly traded firms, along with wage gains via
reduced economic contraction.
The cost of the policy depends on the underlying problem addressed by the policies. If the
underlying problem is one of multiple equilibria created by rollover risk, or if the problem is
high bond yields caused by segmentation and illiquidity problems, then the ECB policies may
cost zero, and could in theory turn a profit for the ECB. In the pure multiple equilibrium case, a
policy announcement such as OMT rules out the bad equilibrium at zero cost. In the case where
bond yields are high because of illiquidity/segmentation frictions, the SMP is profitable as the
ECB earns an abnormal return on its purchases of bonds.
If the underlying problem is one of pure solvency, then these policies may have positive costs to
the ECB (or to taxpayers from core countries). An upper bound on this cost is the increase in the
market value of GIIPS government debt of around €275 billion. Suppose that the SMP and OMT
are viewed as signals that in the event of a sovereign (near-) default, there will be fiscal
transfers from core countries to the affected countries. Then, the SMP and OMT lower bond
yields because they reduce the default risk premium of bond-holders. In this case, the expected
fiscal transfer is equal to the increase in the value of GIIPS government debt.20
The €275 billion number is thus an upper-bound cost to core-country taxpayers. To the extent
that the holders of the GIIPS bonds are investors from the core countries, some of the increase
in value of the GIIPS bonds cycles back to the core-countries. In other words, part of this
number could reflect risk that is shifted from core bond investors (most likely financial
institutions, to which core taxpayers are indirectly exposed) to core taxpayers.
20

In order to not double-count the costs of the programs to core tax payers we do not consider the effects of the
programs on the market values of core-country sovereign or corporate bonds.

35

A further caveat is that this calculation does not capture the potential costs to core taxpayers
from future debt issues of GIIPS sovereigns that raise the amount of outstanding debt (rather
than rolling over existing debt). If investors believe that fiscal transfers will be forthcoming in
the event of a sovereign debt crisis, GIIPS countries could issue debt at higher prices. This fiscaltransfer-induced increase in the market value of future net debt issues is not captured in our
calculation. One can view the conditionality in the OMT program as an attempt to prevent such
fiscal transfers induced by future debt issues. A related issue in terms of potential costs of the
programs is whether the ECB has ``lost reputation’’ in keeping inflation low. Figure 7 graphs a
measure of 10-expected inflation for the euro area based on inflation swap contracts. While
there are increases in expected inflation around some of the announcement dates expected 10year inflation remains around 2% in 2013 suggesting that any such reputation loss has been
small. Low, not high, inflation has been the concern for the ECB in the years since the onset of
the debt crisis.
As noted above, the right way to look at these numbers is on a relative basis. The ratio of
benefit to cost is at least €955/€275, indicating that the policies have been potent in improving
the expected macroeconomic situation.

VI.

Conclusion

We began with the observation that European government bond yields have been high at
various times from 2010 to 2012. We then documented the basic impact of three ECB policies
on sovereign bond yields in GIIPS countries finding that the SMP and OMT were much more
effective at reducing sovereign yields than the LTROs. The main contribution of the paper was
then to provide a new framework for how to decompose the policy-induced yield changes in
order to determine how policies succeeded in lowering yields. The default risk premium and
sovereign bond segmentation effects appear to be the dominant channels through which the
SMP and the OMT affected sovereign bond yields. A redenomination risk premium may have
been present at times and it may have been a third policy channel for the SMP and OMT in the
case of Spain and Portugal, but not for Italy. As for the LTROs, the effects of the LTROs on
sovereign yields are generally small except for Spain for which they appear to have reduced
sovereign bond yields via the sovereign segmentation channel. Importantly, we find that the
ECB’s policies have had beneficial macroeconomic spillovers. That is, ECB actions have not
merely engineered transfers from core countries to GIIPS countries, as suggested by some
observers. For the SMP and OMT we document these effects by measuring stock returns
around ECB announcement dates, for both GIIPS and EMU countries.
36

Beyond the specific ECB policy actions we have studied, the methodology of the paper can be
used to monitor and diagnose Eurozone risks in real-time. That is, our methodology offers a
decomposition of yield movements into default risk premium, segmentation and
redenomination risk premium components. Understanding these channels may be useful to
policy-makers in responding to Eurozone shocks. For example, suppose yields on European
sovereigns suddenly spiked, and our methodology suggests that the spike is largely due to a rise
in redenomination risk. In this case, actions such as the OMT may more directly and more
effectively stabilize the economy than, for example, a liquidity injection into banks.
References
Acharya V., Steffen S. (2015) The “greatest” carry trade ever? Understanding eurozone bank
risks, Journal of Financial Economics 115, 215-236.
Aguiar M., Amador M. (2014). Sovereign Debt, in: Handbook of International Economics Vol. 4,
Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Andrade P., Cahn C., Fraisse H., and Mesonnier J.-S. (2015) Can the provision of long-term
liquidity help to avoid a credit crunch? Evidence from the Eurosystem’s LTRO, Banque de
France. Working Paper.
Bai J., Collin-Dufresne P. (2011) The determinants of the CDS-bond basis during the financial
crisis of 2007-2009. Columbia University. Working Paper.
Carpinelli L., Crosignani M. (2015) The effect of central bank liquidity injections on bank credit
supply, New York University. Working Paper.
Cole H., Kehoe T. (2000) Self-fulfilling debt crises, Review of Economic Studies 67, 91-116.
Corradin S., Rodriguez-Moreno M. (2013) Limits to arbitrage: empirical evidence from euro area
sovereign bond markets, European Central Bank. Working Paper.
Credit Suisse (2010) Sovereign CDS Primer.
Crosignani M., Faria-e-Castro M., Fonseca L. (2015) Central bank interventions, demand for
collateral, and sovereign borrowing costs, New York University. Working Paper.
De Pooter M., Martin R. F., Pruitt, S. (2012) The effects of official bond market intervention in
Europe, Federal Reserve Board. Working Paper.
Di Cesare A., Grande G., Manna M., Marco, T. (2012) Recent estimates of sovereign risk premia
for Euro-area countries, Banca d'Italia. Working Paper.
37

Duffie D., Singleton K. J. (1999) Modeling term structures of defaultable bonds. Review of
Financial studies 12, 687-720.
Duffie D. (2010) Presidential address: asset price dynamics with slow‐moving capital, Journal of
Finance 65, 1237-1267.
Eser F., Schwaab B. (2013) Assessing asset purchases within the ECB's securities market
programme, European Central Bank. Working Paper.
Falagiarda M., Reitz S. (2015) Announcements of ECB unconventional programs: Implications
for the sovereign risk of Italy, Journal of International Money and Finance 53, 275-295.
Feldhütter P., Lando D. (2008) Decomposing swap spreads, Journal of Financial Economics 88,
375-405.
Garcia-Posada M., Marchetti M. (2016) The bank lending channel of unconventional monetary
policy: The impact of the VLTROs on credit supply in Spain, Economic Modelling 58, 427-441.
Garzarelli F. (2012) Global markets daily: Can the EMU sovereign bond-CDS `basis’ normalize?,
Goldman Sachs. Research Note.
Greenwood R., Vayanos D. (2010) Price pressure in the government bond market, American
Economic Review 100, 585–90.
Gromb D., Vayanos D. (2002) Equilibrium and welfare in markets with financially constrained
arbitrageurs, Journal of Financial Economics 66, 361–407.
Ivashina V., Scharfstein D. S., Stein J. C. (2015) Dollar funding and the lending behavior of global
banks, Quarterly Journal of Economics 130, 1241–1281.
Krishnamurthy A., Vissing-Jorgensen A. (2011) The eﬀects of quantitative easing on interest
rates, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall 2011, 215-287.
Krugman P. (1988) Financing vs. forgiving a debt overhang, Journal of Development
Economics 29, 253-268.
Lamont O., Thaler, R. (2003) Can the market add and subtract? Mispricing in tech stock carveouts, Journal of Political Economy 111, 227–68
Mitchell M., Pulvino T., Stafford E. (2002) Limited arbitrage in equity markets, Journal of
Finance 57, 551–84
Myers S. (1977). The Determinants of corporate borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics 5,
147-175.
38

Nordvig J., Firoozye N. (2012) Planning for an orderly break-up of the European Monetary
Union, submission to the Wolfson Economic Prize.
Reinhart C., Rogoff K. (2011) The forgotten history of domestic debt, Economic Journal 121,
319-350.
Szczerbowicz U. (2015) The ECB unconventional monetary policies: have they lowered market
borrowing costs for banks and governments?, International Journal of Central Banking 11, 91127.
Schwarz K. (2010) Mind the gap: Disentangling credit and liquidity in risk spreads, Wharton
School. Working paper,.
Trebesch C., Zettelmeyer J. (2014) ECB interventions in distressed sovereign debt markets: The
case of Greek bonds, University of Munich. Working Paper.
Zettelmeyer J., Trebesch C., Gulati M. (2013) The Greek debt restructuring: An autopsy,
Economic Policy 28, 513-563.

39

0

0

5

2

4

6

8

10 15 20 25

Figure 1. 2-Year Government Bond Yields, 2010 to 2012

01jan2011

01jan2012

01jan2013

Ireland

01jan2012
Greece

Source: Bloomberg

01jan2012

Spain

0

01jan2011

01jan2011

Portugal

50
01jan2010

01jan2010

Italy

100 150 200 250

01jan2010

01jan2013

01jan2013

100
0

50

Billion euros

150

200

Figure 2. ECB bond holdings under the Securities Markets Programme (SMP)

01jul2010

Source: ECB

01jan2011

01jul2011

01jan2012

01jul2012

01jan2013

Figure 3. Bond yield decomposition for Italy
A. Italy, sovereign bond yields

B. Italy, corporate non-financial bond yields and CDS

C. Italy, Kalman filtering results (baseline)

Figure 4. Bond yield decomposition for Spain
A. Spain, sovereign bond yields

B. Spain, corporate non-financial bond yields and CDS

C. Spain, Kalman filtering results (baseline)

D. Spain, alternative measures incorporating redenomination risk premia

Figure 5. Bond yield decomposition for Portugal
A. Portugal, sovereign bond yields

B. Portugal, corporate non-financial bond yields and CDS

C. Portugal, Kalman filtering results (baseline)

Figure 6. Bond yield decomposition for Greece around SMP dates

Figure 7. 10-Year inflation swap rate (European CPI, ex-Tobacco).

Source: Bloomberg.

Table 1. Amounts of sovereign bond purchases due to ECB policies
Panel A. Securities markets programme, country distribution and average maturity of ECB holdings as of December 31,
2012
Issuer country
ECB holdings (EUR billion), principal value
Average remaining maturity (years)
Italy
102.8
4.5
Spain
44.3
4.1
Portugal
22.8
3.9
Ireland
14.2
4.6
Greece
33.9
3.6
Source: ECB press release, http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pr/date/2013/html/pr130221_1.en.html.
Note: Average maturities at purchase were up to 2.6 years higher than those stated above since purchases took place
from May 2010 to February 2012.

Panel B. Changes in resident bank holdings of GIIPS sovereign bonds during period of 3-year LTRO loans, Billions of
Euros
Residents,
total

Resident
Banks

Central
Bank

Other
Public
Institutions

Other
Residents

NonResidents

Total

(GIIPS plus
core bank
holdings)/
(Resident
bank
holdings)

Pct of total
owned by
GIIPS and
core banks

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)=(2)*(8)/(7)

2010:Q1
2011:Q3
2011:Q4
2012:Q2
2012:Q22011:Q3

735
813
883
983

224
268
265
354

62
81
89
94

(5)
ITALY
449
464
528
535

774
778
722
676

1,509
1,591
1,605
1,659

1.72

28.5

170

86

12

-102

68

2010:Q1
2011:Q3
2011:Q4
2012:Q2
2012:Q22011:Q3

306
390
427
464

142
165
197
232

16
25
28
29

54
65
63
62

71
SPAIN
94
134
139
142

260
259
245
195

566
649
672
659

1.16

33.9

74

66

3

-3

-64

10

2009
2010
2011
2012
20122011

35
58
61
69

19
35
37
41

0
1
2
1

8
PORTUGAL
16
22
22
27

105
103
123
135

140
161
184
205

8

4

-1

12

21

2010:Q1
2011:Q3
2011:Q4
2012:Q2
2012:Q22011:Q3

12
18
19
22

8
15
16
20

5
IRELAND
4
2
2
2

69
71
66
61

81
90
85
83

4

5

-1
GREECE
7
9
6
2

-10

-6

0

0
1
1
1
0

0

1.88

1.40

37.9

25.7

2010:Q1
76
39
4
26
202
278
2011:Q3
62
33
4
16
93
155
2011:Q4
46
27
3
11
62
108
1.53
37.7
2012:Q2
25
13
6
5
39
64
2012:Q22011:Q3
-37
-20
1
-11
-7
-55
-91
Sources: Column (1)-(7) are based on the Bruegel database of sovereign bond holdings. Holdings are at principal values
for Italy, Portugal and Ireland and at market values for Spain. For Greece they are market value up to 2012:Q1 and
principal value after that. Column (8) is based on EBA stress test results as of the end of 2011.

Table 2. Identification
Panel A. The basic idea

Sovereign Yield – Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
A measure of redenomination risk from
corporate non-financial bonds

Sovereign
default
1
1

Redeno- Domestic sovereign
mination
segmentation
1
1
0
0

0

1

0

Panel B. Baseline implementation (method (i))
Corporate
default

Redenomination

Domestic sovereign
segmentation

0
0
1
1

1
0
1
0

1
0
0
0

Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica CDS Rate

SPAIN
1
1
0
0

0
0
1
1

1
0
0
1

1
0
0
0

Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
EDP GBP Yield - GBP Swap
EDP CDS Rate

PORTUGAL
1
1
0
0

0
0
1
1

1
0
0
1

1
0
0
0

Corporate
default

Redenomination

Domestic sovereign
segmentation

0
0
0

1
0
1

1
0
0

0
0
0

1
0
1

1
0
0

Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield-USD Swap
ENI EUR Yield-EUR Swap
ENI CDS Rate

Sovereign
default
ITALY
1
1
0
0

Panel C. Alternative implementation (method (ii))

Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
ENI EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
Endesa CDS

Sovereign
default
ITALY
1
1
0
SPAIN
1
1
0

Panel D. Robustness check allowing for foreign segmentation (method (iii))

Sov. Default
Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
ENI Yield - Swap
ENI USD Yield – USD Swap
ENI CDS Rate

1
1
0
0
0

Sovereign EUR Yield-EUR Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica CDS Rate
Endesa CDS Rate

1
1
0
0
0

Corp.
Default
ITALY
0
0
1
1
1
SPAIN
0
0
1
1
0

Redenom.

Domestic
Sov. Seg.

Foreign
Mkt. Seg.

1
0
1
0
0

1
0
0
0
0

0
1
0
1
0

1
0
0
1
1

1
0
0
0
0

0
1
1
0
0

Table 3. Impacts of policies on sovereign bond yields, by policy and country, 2-day changes
Avg.
yield
Policy
SMP

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

-47
-84
-131

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

-72
-23
-31
-126

-48
-30
-15
-93

-48
11
-46
-83

-89
-41
-54
-184

-69 -113 -89
-37 -98 -36
-7
-37 -67
-113 -248 -192

-63
12
-78
-129

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011
Total
Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

-46
35
-11

-61
30
-31

-19
36
17

-58
32
-26

-219
-120
-339

-25
-46
-69 -34
10
30
47
35
-15
-16
-22
1
PORTUGAL
-92 -378 -268 -176
0
-172 -188 -52
-92 -550 -456 -228

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

ND
ND
ND
ND

0
-5
4
-1

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011
Total
Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

-27
9
-18

4
7
11

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

Policy
SMP

OMT

3-year
LTROs

Policy
SMP

OMT

3-year
LTROs

-116
-64
-21
-201

5yr

10yr

Avg.
yield 6mo

2yr
ITALY
-15
-80
-26 -103
-41 -183

3-year
LTROs

6mo

-55 -31
-107 -92
-162 -123
-77
-29
-42
-148

10yr

-62
-92
-154

ND
ND
ND

2yr 5yr
SPAIN
-87 -75
-115 -112
-202 -187

-51
-98
-149

ND
ND
ND

-79 -72
28
34
-51 -38
IRELAND
ND -289 ND
ND -281 -102
ND -570 ND

-127
-49
-176

-3
-12
-42
-8
-107 -98
-152 -118

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND

-57
-13
5
-65

-26
-7
-49
-82

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

-29
11
-18

-27
-2
-29

-ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

-30
-6
-3
108
24
5
78
18
2
GREECE
-430 -1123 -698 -500
ND
93
8
-3
ND -1030 -690 -503

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND

12
-21
-65
-74

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND

-78
-67
-36
-181

Dec 1, 2011
ND
ND
500
175 -147
Dec 8, 2011
ND
ND
499
80
90
Total
ND
ND
999
255 -57
Sources: Avg. yields are from Barclay's indices. 6-month, 2, 5, and 10-year yields are mid-yields from
Bloomberg. ND=No data. Bold indicates significance at the 5% level.

Table 4. Impacts of policies on euro swap (EONIA OIS), 2-day changes
Policy
SMP

OMT

3-year LTROs

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

2yr
1
-21
-20

5yr
5
-15
-10

10yr
15
-16
-1

Total

-9
4
3
-2

4
6
6
16

12
5
8
25

Total

-4
-1
-5

-5
6
1

-6
2
-4

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

Source: Bloomberg
Note: Bold indicates significance at the 5 pct level.

Table 5. Weights on contemporaneous and lagged latent factors (up
to lag 2), baseline specifications

Sovereign Yield - Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
ENI Yield - Swap
ENI CDS Rate

Sovereign Yield - Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica USD Yield - USD Swap
Telefonica CDS Rate

Sovereign Yield - Swap
Sovereign USD Yield - USD Swap
EDP GBP Yield - GBP Swap
EDP CDS Rate

ITALY (q = 2)
Lag 0
Lag 1
Lag 2
0.87
0.12
0.02
0.32
0.33
0.35
0.54
0.30
0.16
0.61
0.27
0.12
SPAIN (q = 3)
Lag 0
Lag 1
Lag 2
0.81
0.16
0.03
0.51
0.27
0.14
0.42
0.28
0.18
0.67
0.23
0.08
PORTUGAL (q = 2)
Lag 0
Lag 1
Lag 2
0.76
0.19
0.05
0.33
0.33
0.34
0.50
0.31
0.19
0.65
0.25
0.10

Lag 3
0.01
0.07
0.12
0.03

Table 6. Latent yield components, 2-day changes (bps)
ITALY
Default Risk Premium

Redenomination Risk Premium

Domestic Sovereign Segmentation

Policy
SMP

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

(i)
-28
-7
-35

(ii)
-25
-6
-31

(iii)
-41
-11
-51

(i)
-4
-5
-9

(ii)
-23
0
-24

(iii)
-5
-5
-9

(i)
-27
-76
-103

(ii)
-11
-81
-92

(iii)
-14
-73
-87

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

-22
-8
-35
-64

-22
-9
-29
-60

-41
-11
-65
-117

7
-4
8
11

-17
-8
-22
-48

6
-5
9
10

-79
-49
-5
-133

-55
-44
20
-79

-60
-43
24
-79

Total

-45
11
-34

-44
9
-35

-57
17
-40

28
-9
19

14
0
14

28
-9
19

-42
22
-20

-29
14
-15

-30
17
-14

3-year LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

SPAIN
Default Risk Premium

Redenomination Risk Premium

Domestic Sovereign Segmentation

Policy
SMP

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

(i)
-47
-17
-64

(ii)
-44
-17
-61

(iii)
-32
-12
-44

(i)
-21
1
-20

(ii)
-36
-5
-41

(iii)
-36
-3
-39

(i)
-14
-72
-86

(ii)
-3
-70
-73

(iii)
-14
-73
-87

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

-40
-36
-20
-96

-36
-31
-15
-81

-39
-12
-24
-76

-24
17
-31
-37

-17
-6
-19
-42

-23
-5
-28
-56

-22
-93
37
-78

-32
-76
25
-83

-24
-94
39
-79

Total

-6
7
1

-6
4
-1

-18
1
-17

-14
12
-3

-4
14
8

-1
19
18

-67
-2
-69

-78
-5
-83

-68
-3
-72

3-year LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

PORTUGAL
Default Risk Premium

Redenomination Risk Premium

Domestic Sovereign Segmentation

Policy
SMP

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

(i)
-126
-2
-128

(i)
-72
-46
-118

(i)
-79
-88
-167

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

-7
-37
-71
-116

-25
13
-15
-28

25
-67
-9
-51

Total

50
-10
40

-6
40
34

-57
-15
-71

3-year LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

Note: Bold indicates significance at the 5 pct level.

Table 7. Impact of ECB policies on stock market values, by policy and country, 2-day changes
Panel A. All stocks
GIIPS

Core
GerNetherGreece
many
France
lands
2-day returns around event dates
5.93
5.12
7.82
6.32
-5.21
-5.55
-3.37
-3.98
0.72
-0.43
4.45
2.34

Policy

Ann. Date

Italy

Spain

Portugal

Ireland

SMP

May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

9.06
-2.28
6.78

9.39
-2.64
6.75

7.77
-4.14
3.63

6.03
-1.96
4.07

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

7.28
1.59
4.74
13.61

9.12
1.04
4.56
14.72

4.00
-0.15
3.89
7.74

2.58
1.10
2.05
5.73

-0.65
-0.15
2.63
1.83

3.71
1.29
3.11
8.11

5.55
1.45
2.92
9.92

3-year
LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011
Total

1.11
-0.96
0.15

1.17
-0.09
1.08

0.66
-1.09
-0.43

-1.02
-0.52
-1.54

1.35
-0.87
0.48

0.15
-0.63
-0.48

0.14
-0.34
-0.20

EMU

Belgium

Austria

Finland

7.70
-1.63
6.07

6.89
-5.63
1.26

6.22
-0.17
6.05

7.55
-3.48
4.07

3.66
0.37
2.52
6.55

3.73
0.58
1.40
5.71

3.16
0.78
3.34
7.28

4.88
0.77
4.14
9.79

7.19
1.52
4.83
13.54

0.57
-0.40
0.17

0.41
-0.83
-0.42

0.39
-1.12
-0.73

-1.33
-2.43
-3.76

0.13
-0.76
-0.63

Panel B. Financial sector stocks
GIIPS

Core
GerNetherGreece
many
France
lands
2-day returns around event dates
7.97
6.13
14.04
10.54
-2.46
-5.83
-3.42
-5.01
5.51
0.30
10.62
5.53

Policy

Ann. Date

Italy

Spain

Portugal

Ireland

SMP

May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

13.27
-0.21
13.06

14.95
-2.02
12.93

10.12
-0.81
9.31

14.59
5.96
20.55

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

8.59
0.69
8.24
17.52

14.72
0.60
5.75
21.07

3.09
-1.73
16.28
17.64

10.36
0.09
9.77
20.22

-0.45
-1.84
4.57
2.28

5.64
1.24
5.09
11.97

7.94
1.80
6.60
16.34

3-year
LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011
Total

2.78
-1.33
1.45

2.40
-0.07
2.33

8.43
-0.87
7.56

-3.79
-0.10
-3.89

-0.41
-1.53
-1.94

2.36
-0.66
1.70

2.92
-1.50
1.42

EMU

Belgium

Austria

Finland

11.22
-1.80
9.42

9.41
-6.93
2.48

8.33
-0.26
8.07

11.92
-3.14
8.78

3.90
1.00
4.87
9.77

3.54
0.43
4.40
8.37

4.77
1.46
4.40
10.63

4.17
1.70
2.62
8.49

9.71
1.45
7.52
18.68

2.73
-1.83
0.90

1.97
-1.16
0.81

3.29
-2.79
0.50

0.45
-0.77
-0.32

2.28
-1.25
1.03

Panel C. Non-financial sector stocks
GIIPS

Core

Policy

Ann. date

Italy

Spain

Portugal

Ireland

SMP

May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

7.09
-3.04
4.05

6.55
-2.93
3.62

7.29
-4.60
2.69

5.26
-2.48
2.78

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

6.89
1.87
3.52
12.28

6.69
1.20
3.96
11.85

4.06
0.00
2.62
6.68

1.95
1.20
1.47
4.62

GerNetherGreece
many
France
lands
2-day returns around event dates
4.69
4.91
6.44
5.08
-6.63
-5.51
-3.36
-3.63
-1.94
-0.60
3.08
1.45
-0.69
0.27
2.17
1.75

3.42
1.30
2.79
7.51

5.16
1.39
2.25
8.80

0.55
0.60
0.11
-0.82
1.82
-0.21
-0.34
Dec 1, 2011
-0.83
-0.10
-1.11
-0.55
-0.70
-0.62
-0.12
Dec 8, 2011
Total -0.28
0.50
-1.00
-1.37
1.12
-0.83
-0.46
Source: Datastream indices downloaded from Datastream. Bold indicates significance at the 5% level.
3-year
LTROs

EMU

Belgium

Austria

Finland

6.29
-1.58
4.71

5.00
-4.69
0.31

5.98
-0.16
5.82

6.26
-3.57
2.69

3.59
0.31
1.88
5.78

3.77
0.61
0.82
5.20

2.21
0.37
2.70
5.28

5.01
0.60
4.43
10.04

6.65
1.54
4.20
12.39

-0.11
0.06

0.07
-0.75

-1.11
-0.18

-1.60
-2.69

-0.37
-0.65

-0.05

-0.68

-1.29

-4.29

-1.02

Table 8. How much of bank stock returns can be explained by gains on GIIPS sovereign bond holdings?
GIIPS

Core

Market capweighted
average bank
stock return

Italy

Spain

Portugal

Ireland

GerNetherGreece
many
France
lands
2-day returns around event dates
11.96
9.58
16.68
17.90
55.43
10.58
2.12
1.15

Belgium

Austria

Finland

14.63
12.17

10.76
0.02

15.00
0.07

Policy

Ann. date

SMP

May 10, 2010

Actual
Implied

14.81
1.16

16.01
0.80

4.47
12.57

16.22
4.11

Aug 7, 2011

Actual
Implied

1.20
3.40

-5.34
1.54

-1.05
5.63

3.50
0.44

-0.60
-0.21

-5.88
5.68

-3.93
1.65

-6.11
0.82

-2.87
12.23

-11.47
0.01

-1.84
0.05

Total Actual
Implied

16.01
4.56

10.67
2.34

3.42
18.20

19.72
4.55

11.36
55.22

3.70
16.26

12.75
3.77

11.79
1.97

11.76
24.40

-0.71
0.03

13.16
0.12

OMT

3-year
LTROs

Jul 26, 2012

Actual
Implied

12.27
3.26

16.10
1.16

-0.08
2.00

1.39
0.16

-0.04
4.79

7.01
3.67

13.56
1.77

8.93
0.76

8.44
13.18

4.25
0.01

5.87
0.01

Aug 2, 2012

Actual
Implied

0.18
0.17

1.51
0.04

-0.57
1.35

-0.37
0.04

-0.33
3.13

1.22
0.50

1.70
0.16

0.63
0.09

-2.82
0.47

0.53
0.00

-1.55
0.00

Sep 6, 2012

Actual
Implied

9.83
1.70

6.42
0.91

8.26
6.64

4.34
0.20

6.53
1.55

12.63
2.99

11.40
1.07

9.77
0.53

13.44
11.53

9.65
0.01

6.03
0.00

Total Actual
Implied

22.28
5.13

24.03
2.11

7.61
9.99

5.36
0.40

6.16
9.47

20.86
7.16

26.66
3.00

19.33
1.38

19.06
25.18

14.43
0.02

10.35
0.01

Dec 1, 2011

Actual
Implied

1.51
1.76

2.78
0.98

0.78
1.61

-0.53
0.11

-0.17
-0.55

5.37
3.57

4.96
1.12

5.40
0.52

17.71
18.69

1.05
0.00

3.30
0.00

Dec 8, 2011

Actual
Implied

-2.45
-1.52

0.09
-0.52

-0.88
-3.80

5.71
0.00

-0.30
-3.93

-1.45
-2.85

-2.23
-1.02

-2.36
-0.39

-1.41
-12.65

-6.46
-0.01

-2.49
-0.01

Total Actual
-0.94
2.87
-0.10
5.18
-0.47
3.92
2.73
3.04
16.30
-5.41
0.81
Implied
0.24
0.46
-2.19
0.11
-4.48
0.72
0.10
0.13
6.04
-0.01
-0.01
Note: The table is based on banks that both provided data to the EBA's 2011 stress tests and were publicly traded on the particular event date and have data in
Compustat Global Security Daily. The number of banks varies between 31 and 35 across event dates. We calculate implied stock returns based on reported
holdings of each of the GIIPS countries' sovereign bonds by maturity bucket, along with our documented yield changes by maturity from Table 3. In case of
missing values in Table 3, we do the following: If the 6-month yield is missing, use the 2-year yield. If the 5-year yield is missing, use the average of the 2 and
10-year yields. If the 10-year yield is missing, use the 5-year yield, and for Greece use the 10-year yield for all maturities when only the 10-year yield is available.

Table 9. Impacts of policies on corporate bond yields, by policy and country, 2-day changes
Policy
SMP

OMT

3-year
LTROs

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

Italy
-3
15
12

Spain
-16
16
0

Portugal
-43
-20
-63

Ireland
ND
ND
ND

Greece
ND
ND
ND

Total

-4
-6
-30
-40

-26
-7
-58
-91

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

ND
ND
ND

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

-40
-30
-35
12
7
28
Total
-28
-23
-7
Source: Barclay's indices. Bold indicates significance at the 5% level.

Table 10. Increase in total market value of GIIPS sovereign bonds and EMU stocks on SMP and OMT event dates, 2-day
changes

SMP
OMT
Total

Italy

Spain

GIIPS total

EMU

28.5
49.7
78.1

Portugal Ireland Greece
Stocks
1.9
1.9
1.3
3.0
2.6
0.4
5.0
4.5
1.7

27.5
44.7
72.2

61.1
100.4
161.5

167.7
601.0
768.6

Italy

Spain

Portugal Ireland Greece

GIIPS total

Bonds (government and corporate)

Italy,
Spain,
Portugal
Corp
bonds
0.0
4.5
4.5

SMP
63.6
39.9
14.0
9.7
41.6
168.8
OMT 62.1
43.0
0.0
6.3
0.0
111.4
Total 125.7
82.9
14.0
16.0
41.6
280.2
Sources:
Stocks: For each SMP and OMT announcement date we calculate the two-day change in stock market value for a given
country (or the EMU overall) using the product of the corresponding 2-day stock return from Table 7, Panel A and the
market value at the end of the day prior to the particular announcement (both returns and market value data are
obtained from Datastream and are for Datastream’s stock indices).
Bonds: For each SMP and OMT announcement date we calculate the two-day change in bond market value for a given
country based on the total market value of Barclay’s country level bond index (obtained from Datastream). These bond
indices cover both government and corporate bonds. For Italy, Spain and Portugal separate sub-indices covering only
corporate bonds are used in the last column. Bond market coverage is very low for Greece for the second SMP date and
all OMT dates and for Portugal for all OMT dates (index coverage drops discretely on a date prior to these dates).

Table A.1. Input data for Kalman filter
For bond yields, whenever possible, we use Bloomberg CBBT or BGN mid-yields. We choose between CBBT and BGN based
on which of the two series has lower serial correlation of yield changes (measured by the R2 in a regression of yield changes
on five own lags). For the Portugal USD bond, neither CBBT nor BGN is available for an extended period and we fill in BVAL,
Bloomberg’s estimate of market value calculated using proprietary methods. We use Bloomberg data when available and
Datastream otherwise.

Sovereign EUR Yield

ITALY
Italy 3.75% 08/01/2015

Bloomberg (CBBT)

Sovereign USD Yield

Italy 4.50% 01/21/2015

Bloomberg (BGN)

ENI EUR Yield

ENI SpA 4.00% 06/29/2015

Bloomberg (BGN)

ENI CDS Rate

EUR Senior CDS

ENI USD Yield

ENI Finance 6.125% 12/17/2018

Bloomberg ENIIM CDS EUR SR
*

Bloomberg (BGN)

SPAIN
Sovereign EUR Yield

Spain 4.20% 07/30/2013

Bloomberg (CBBT)

Sovereign USD Yield

Spain 3.625% 06/17/2013

Bloomberg (BGN)

Telefonica USD Yield

Telefonica Emisiones 6.421% 06/20/2016

Bloomberg (CBBT)

Telefonica CDS Rate

EUR Senior CDS

Bloomberg TELEFOA CDS EUR SR

Endesa CDS Rate

EUR Senior CDS

Datastream ELE1EAC, ELE2EAC, …

PORTUGAL
Sovereign EUR Yield

Portugal 3.35% 10/15/2015

Bloomberg (CBBT)

Sovereign USD Yield

Portugal 3.50% 03/25/2015

Bloomberg (CBBT)

EDP Finance 6.625% 08/09/2017

Bloomberg (CBBT)

EDP GBP Yield

Datastream EDP1EAC, EDP2EAC,
…
Adjusted by difference in CDS rates matched to 2015 domestic and the 2018 USD bond.

EDP CDS Rate
*

EUR Senior CDS

Table A.2. Other data series used in figures

Enagas EUR Yield

SPAIN
Enagas 4.375% 07/06/2015

Bloomberg (BGN)

Abertis EUR Yield

Abertis 4.95% 08/08/2013

Datastream 36606T

GREECE
Sovereign EUR Yield

Greece 4.00% 08/20/2013

Bloomberg (BGN)

Sovereign USD Yield

Greece 4.625% 06/25/2013

Bloomberg (BGN)

Table A.3. Liquidity-risk related movements in yield spreads

Policy
SMP

Ann. date
May 10, 2010
Aug 7, 2011
Total

OMT

Jul 26, 2012
Aug 2, 2012
Sep 6, 2012
Total

3-year
LTROs

Dec 1, 2011
Dec 8, 2011

Italy
Domestic
Foreign
-7
-7
-5
-5
-11
-11
-3
-2
-1
-6

-3
-2
-1
-6

Spain
Domestic Foreign
-6
-8
-4
-5
-10
-13
-3
-2
-1
-5

-4
-2
-1
-7

Portugal
Domestic
-24
-17
-41

Foreign
-10
-7
-16

-11
-7
-3
-22

-5
-3
-1
-9

4
4
3
5
14
6
-3
-3
-2
-3
-9
-4
Total
1
1
1
1
5
2
Note: We estimate the liquidity beta by regressing daily sovereign yield changes (using the same bond yield data
samples as in Panel A of Figures 3, 4, and 5) on daily changes in the KfW-Bund spread (based on Germany sovereign
bonds and KfW bonds, both maturing on 07/04/2015, with data from Bloomberg) and the change corresponding
sovereign CDS rate (including two lags of each variable, with the liquidity beta as the three KfW-Bund coefficients). The
liquidity-risk related impact on yield movements on day t is calculated as the liquidity beta times the change in the KfWBund spread on day t, which we then regress on event dummies. The coefficients on the event-window dummies are
shown in the table. Bold indicates significance at the 5% level.

