                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     EXPLODING ASTHMA AND ADHD CASELOADS:
                       THE ROLE OF MEDICAID MANAGED CARE

                                         Anna Chorniy
                                          Janet Currie
                                       Lyudmyla Sonchak

                                      Working Paper 23983
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w23983


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           October 2017, Revised April 2018




We thank Genevieve Kenney, Dan Miller, Tom Mroz, Gaurav Sabharwal, David Silver, Amanda
Starc, Tom Vogl, Florence Watts, participants at 2016 ASHEcon and 2017 AEA (HERO)
meetings and seminar participants at Harvard University, Notre Dame University, and Princeton’s
Center for Health and Wellbeing for their helpful feedback on the project. We are also grateful to
the Center for Health and Wellbeing for financial support. Finally, we would like to express our
gratitude to SC RFA and DHHS for their help and patience with our data requests. In particular,
we thank Chris Finney, Joe Magagnoli, Sarah Crawford, Muhammad Salaam, and Julius
Covington. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Anna Chorniy, Janet Currie, and Lyudmyla Sonchak. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exploding Asthma and ADHD Caseloads: The Role of Medicaid Managed Care
Anna Chorniy, Janet Currie, and Lyudmyla Sonchak
NBER Working Paper No. 23983
October 2017, Revised April 2018
JEL No. I11,I13

                                        ABSTRACT

In the U.S., nearly 11% of school-age children have been diagnosed with ADHD, and
approximately 10% of children suffer from asthma. In the last decade, the number of children
diagnosed with these conditions has inexplicably been on the rise. This increase has been
concentrated in the Medicaid caseload nationwide. One of the most striking changes in Medicaid
has been the transition from fee-for-service (FFS) reimbursement to Medicaid managed care
(MMC), which had taken place in 80% of states by 2016. Using Medicaid claims from South
Carolina, we show that this change contributed to the increase in asthma and ADHD caseloads.
Empirically, we rely on variation in MMC enrollment due to a change in the “default” Medicaid
plan from FFS to MMC, and on rich panel data that allow us to follow the same children before
and after they were required to switch. We find that the transition from FFS to MMC explains
about a third of the rise in the number of Medicaid children being treated for ADHD and asthma,
along with increases in treatment for many other conditions. These are likely to be due to the
incentives created by the risk adjustment and quality control systems in MMC.

Anna Chorniy                                   Lyudmyla Sonchak
173 Julis Romo Rabinowitz Bld.,                Department of Economics
Princeton University                           SUNY Oswego
Princeton NJ 08544                             425 Mahar Hall, Oswego, NY 13126
achorniy@princeton.edu                         lyudmyla.sonchak@oswego.edu

Janet Currie
Department of Economics
Center for Health and Wellbeing 185A
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu
The prevalence of childhood chronic conditions has continued to increase over the past decade.

This paper focuses on the two most common childhood conditions: asthma and attention-deficit

hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The number of children whose parents reported that they had

ever been diagnosed with ADHD increased by two million between the 2003 and 2011 waves of

the National Survey of Children’s Health, rising to 11% of all school-aged children (Visser et al.,

2014). Between 2001 and 2010, the number of children who had been diagnosed with asthma

increased from 8.7 to 9.3%, although the number who reported an asthma attack in the past

month held steady and the number of asthma-related hospitalizations and deaths continued to fall

(CDC, 2012). These asthma trends may reflect either more diagnoses of milder cases or better

treatment for those who have been diagnosed.

       In this paper, we propose and test a novel hypothesis, which is that the increase in

diagnoses for these childhood conditions was driven at least partially by changes in Medicaid,

the means-tested public health insurance program that covers low to moderate income children.

One motivation for this hypothesis is the observation that in national data, the increase in

treatment for ADHD and asthma over the course of the 2000s was largely driven by children on

Medicaid, and not by children with private health insurance coverage.

       Figures 1 and 2, are based on data from the national-level Medical Expenditure Panel

Survey (MEPS), for children less than 17 years of age. Figure 1 shows that while the overall

number of children taking any kind of prescription drug fell, the fraction with prescriptions for

ADHD medications rose, and all of the increase is accounted for by children on Medicaid.

Figure 2 shows that the fraction of children taking prescription drugs for asthma has also
increased. Up to 2009, it increased at a similar rate for the privately and publicly insured, while

after 2009, all of the increase has been among Medicaid recipients.1

       One of the largest changes in Medicaid over the course of the 2000s is that it was

converted from a largely “fee-for-service” (FFS) program, in which physicians were reimbursed

for each service provided, to a managed care model in which providers received a capitated fee

intended to cover all services provided to a covered child. There are several features of

Medicaid Managed Care (MMC) which might lead to an increase in diagnoses and treatment of

chronic conditions.

       First, children may gain access to providers under MMC. For example, children who did

not have a primary care physician would be assigned one under MMC. Second, insurers often

receive a higher capitated fee for a child with a disability. The intent of these “risk-adjustment”

payments is to encourage managed care plans to enroll all children rather than “cream-

skimming” by enrolling healthy children and encouraging children with chronic conditions to

enroll elsewhere. However, the higher payments may also create incentives to increase

diagnoses of disability. Third, MMC providers are subject to regular reporting requirements for

a number of quality measures. While FFS providers are subject to similar requirements, it may

be easier for the state to monitor a handful of insurers who contract with the state to provide

MMC services than to monitor a large number of individual providers. One important quality

measure involves requirements for timely preventive screening of children. More screening is

likely to result in more diagnosed cases of childhood disability, other things being equal.



1
  MEPS asks whether children took particular medications. The NSCH incidence numbers are in
response to questions about whether a child was ever diagnosed with a particular condition,
whether a child has it currently, and whether a child is currently taking medication. Our work
will focus on whether the child is currently being treated for a condition. See Appendix Table 1
for a comparison of South Carolina current prevalence rates with national rates from NSCH.
        We investigate these issues using a 60% random sample of all children on Medicaid in

South Carolina (SC) during the period of 2004 to 2015. Our sample focuses on children under

17, and the claims data are matched to birth certificate records in order to obtain more nuanced

background information about the children.

        We rely on exogenous variation in MMC enrollments created by changes in South

Carolina’s Medicaid program. Between Oct. 2007 and May 2008, South Carolina changed the

“default” plan for an enrollee from FFS to a MMC plan, which resulted in a sharp increase in

MMC enrollments.2 In 2013 a number of FFS Primary Care Case Management plans were

converted to MMC, which again sharply increased MMC enrollments.

        We find that the transition to MMC increased the probability of being treated for ADHD

by 26.6% and increased the number of children being treated for asthma by 29.9%. These

estimates in turn suggest that the switch to MMC can explain 89.0% of the 30.4% increase in the

probability of being diagnosed with ADHD and 82.1% of the 36.4% increase in asthma

caseloads over our sample period.

        The evidence indicates that increases in access to primary care, additional screenings, and

the incentives created by risk adjustment were all important mechanisms. In fact, these

explanations are not mutually exclusive because the incentives created by risk adjustment

reinforce explicit incentives to increase screening, which in turn is facilitated by greater access.

We find that children are 49.0% more likely to have had a well-child visit, and approximately

2
  This change was part of the “Healthy Connections Choices” program which was rolled out in the
Midlands in October 2007, followed by the Piedmont in Jan. 2008, the Low country in March 2008, and
the Pee Dee in May 2008. In addition to the change in the default rule, the number of MMC plans in the
county was also an important factor. In regressions that included enrollee characteristics, county fixed
effects and year fixed effects, we found that the probability of being enrolled in MMC for at least one
month went up by 2.6 percentage points with each additional plan available. In 2003, two counties had no
MMC plan, while the rest had one plan. By 2008, one county had three plans, six had five plans, twelve
had six plans, and the remaining 27 counties had seven plans. By 2012, all counties had converged to
four plans.
69.0% more likely to have received a developmental screening, as well as 88.1% more likely to

have received a hearing test, and 56.0% more likely to have received vaccinations.

       There is also some evidence that children are more likely to be prescribed medications

that lead to a higher risk adjustment weight. The child’s individual weight in the risk adjustment

formula goes up by 58.3% under MMC. Our calculations suggest that no more than half of the

increase in diagnoses could be a mechanical effect of increased screening, while the remainder

reflects “up coding” of child health conditions.

       Finally, we ask whether the increase in diagnosis and treatment is accompanied by

improvements in child health. We actually find increases in office visits for sickness, emergency

room (ER) visits for preventable, non-preventable, and also non-urgent conditions, as well as

hospitalizations for preventable conditions. These patterns may reflect gatekeeping by MMCs

since fewer children were able to obtain an appointment with a specialist. They may also reflect

difficulty accessing primary care physicians for care beyond the annual well child visit.

       A large part of the increase (especially for ER visits) is driven by asthma, and we see that

over 40% of children with asthma received fewer than two prescriptions for asthma in the past

twelve months, a proportion that remained constant with the advent of MMC. We cannot say

whether these large and striking changes in patterns of utilization reflect changes in underlying

health, but they are certainly not consistent with improvements in the efficiency of the care

provided under the Medicaid program.

       The paper is organized as follows. The background section 2 outlines the relevant

features and changes in the SC Medicaid program. We then provide a brief overview of features

of ADHD and asthma, and their treatment. Sections 3 and 4 provide an overview of the data and
of our empirical strategy. Section 5 describes our results and Section 6 provides a discussion and

conclusions.



       2. Background

       2.1 South Carolina’s Medicaid Program and the Roll-out of MMC

       Under federal regulations, states have some scope to set income eligibility guidelines,

define services, and set payments for providers in the Medicaid program. In South Carolina, two

changes occurred over our sample period that might be expected to have off-setting effects on

the composition of the caseload. First, income cutoffs were raised from 150% of the federal

poverty level (FPL) to 200% in 2008 and 208% in 2014. Second, in 2011, South Carolina

launched an initiative to use administrative data from other welfare programs to identify families

who were eligible for Medicaid. This initiative, called Express Lane Eligibility, also streamlined

the re-enrollment processes.

       As a result of these changes, Medicaid enrollment in South Carolina grew over our

sample period, as shown in Figure 3. To the extent that the composition of the Medicaid

caseload was changing over time in a way that would be expected to alter asthma and ADHD

caseloads, such changes could complicate our interpretation of the effects of the switch within

Medicaid from FFS to MMC. Table 1 shows that among households with a positive monthly

income, income approximately doubled. However, the fraction of the caseload with zero

countable incomes also almost doubled. The fraction of children who were African-American

fell from 52.3% to 45.3% and the fraction Hispanics increased correspondingly. The children’s

mean birth weight stayed approximately constant, and the fraction of mothers with some college

increased slightly over time.
       Table 2 attempts to assess the likely effect of these changes in the composition of the

caseload on rates of asthma and ADHD. We first used data from 2004-2005 to estimate the

prevalence of ADHD and asthma as a function of observed characteristics including gender,

race, age, birth month, enrollment category, monthly family income, county, birth weight,

mother’s age at birth, and mother’s education at the time of the birth.

       We then used the estimated coefficients to predict ADHD and asthma rates for each year

from 2006 to 2015. Table 2 also shows the actual rates of ADHD and asthma observed in our

data in each year. The table suggests that very little of the observed increase in ADHD can be

predicted using changes in the sample composition. For asthma, the changes in sample

composition actually predict a fall in the rate rather than the observed increase, which is

consistent with a relatively more advantaged population being drawn into care by the expansions.

We conclude that changes in the composition of the caseload are unlikely to be responsible for

the increasing rates of asthma and ADHD that we observe.

       Prior to 2007, SC Medicaid operated a predominantly FFS system. In 2007, the state

began a two pronged effort to increase enrollments in MMC. First, the state began defaulting

new enrollees into MMC (Madalena and Tester, 2010). Since it was not possible to enroll people

in MMC in areas that were not served by plans, the state also made a concerted effort to increase

the number and geographic coverage of MMC plans.

       Figure 3 shows the dramatic increase in the fraction of the Medicaid caseload enrolled in

MMC after 2007. MMC enrollment is captured in two different ways: Whether a child was

enrolled for at least a month, and whether the child was enrolled for ten months or more. The gap

between these two series reflects the fact that children who were “defaulted” into Medicaid

would be counted as enrolled for at least one month, but could take action to return to FFS
Medicaid, in which case they would not be enrolled for ten months or more. We chose to focus

on ten months because Medicaid has a two month grace period meaning that someone whose

coverage lapsed could still expect claims to be covered by Medicaid retroactively for two months

if the beneficiary re-enrolls. Hence, anyone with at least ten months of coverage was effectively

covered for the whole year. We have also used a six-month cutoff, with similar (though

somewhat smaller) results.

       The two series show similar trends, but there are always fewer children enrolled for a

continuous ten-month period than are enrolled for at least one month. Conditional on being

enrolled in Medicaid, we view being enrolled in MMC for a month as a largely exogenous

decision determined by the state while being enrolled for ten months is an endogenous choice

which reflects the decision to stay in MMC and not to exercise the right to leave the program.

       MMC became nominally mandatory for most classes of enrollees as of 2011, but this

nominal change did not result in any uptick in MMC enrollment, as shown in Figure 3. It does

seem to have narrowed the gap between one month and ten month enrollment rates, but did not

eliminate it, suggesting that families could still choose to exit MMC.

       There is a sharp increase in enrollment in 2013 which corresponds to the conversion of

primary care case management (PCCM) networks to MMC providers. These PCCMs were

operated on a FFS basis, with providers receiving an additional fee for providing case

management services. They were phased out largely because there did not seem to be any

difference in performance between PCCMs and other FFS providers even though PCCMs were

more expensive to the government given the additional case management fee. With the

conversion to MMC, these plans became subject to all the regulations governing MMCs, as

described further in section 2.2 below.
       While the broad trends are similar across SC counties, there was considerable geographic

variation in timing across the state, which was driven in part by a lack of plan capacity in some

counties. Figure 4 shows the distribution of MMC enrollments across counties in various

sample years, showing the general tendency towards higher enrollments over time but also the

wide geographic variation across SC at a point in time over most of the sample period.

       The passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 had relatively little impact on children in

South Carolina since children in families with incomes less than 200% of the FPL were already

covered by 2010, and since South Carolina chose not to take up the optional Medicaid expansion

to previously uncovered groups (mainly adults).



2.2 Important Features of MMC

       In this section we describe three key features of MMC contracts that could impact the

diagnosis and treatment of childhood chronic conditions including asthma and ADHD. These

features are a responsibility to ensure access to providers; risk adjusted compensation

mechanisms; and quality of care requirements (in particular, provision of health screenings).

       MMCs are required to show that they have an adequate network of providers in a county.

In particular, they must show that there is at least one primary care provider available to serve

patients within a 30-mile radius of the patient’s address and assign the patient to a particular

provider. MMCs are also required to accept new patients who present themselves and to provide

referrals to specialists and hospitals if necessary. Furthermore, plans often require PCPs to

contact new enrollees and see them for an initial office visit and assessment within the first 90

days of enrollment (e.g. see WellCare provider manual). A higher number of plans in a county is
associated with a greater willingness of physicians to participate in managed care.3 Hence, it is

reasonable to hypothesize that higher MMC enrollments will be associated with a higher

likelihood of having access to preventive care such as well-child visits and immunizations.

        MMCs are reimbursed a fixed amount (the capitated payment) for each enrollee per

month of enrollment.4 The base fee depends on the patient’s characteristics including their age,

sex (in some age groups), and Medicaid qualifying category. These fees are calculated annually

based on the expected expenses generated in the past by enrollees in each group. Capitated

payments create an incentive for plans to seek out healthy patients within a group and to try to

steer sicker, more expensive ones elsewhere. This tendency is called “cream skimming.”

        In order to encourage MMC plans to serve sicker patients with complicated conditions,

starting in 2009, the state adjusts capitation rates based on the relative number of these more

expensive patients in each plan. In order to identify patients with chronic conditions, South

Carolina uses “Restricted Medicaid Rx Model,” (MRx) developed by the University of

California San Diego (UCSD) (http://medicaidrx.ucsd.edu/). The MRx model is one of several

different risk adjustment methods that are used by state Medicaid programs across the country.

The model is based on the prescription drugs taken by the enrollees rather than on diagnoses per

se. The argument underlying the reliance on prescriptions is that prescriptions are more

accurately reported than diagnoses and less subject to gaming.



3
  As Ly and Glied (2014) point out, having multiple plans available in a market enables a physician to
decline participation in a plan that offers low rates and avoid situations where a single plan could reduce
payments in the future. The availability of multiple plans increases doctor bargaining power and
remuneration (Dafny et al., 2013).
4
  Two previous studies (Bokhari et al. (2005) and Conrad (2005)) have suggested that capitation might
encourage the use of stimulant medications for ADHD because it is cheaper than therapy. However, in
SC, behavioral therapy is “carved out” of MMC plans in our sample period, which means that plans are
not responsible for the cost of such therapy and this type of cost incentive for promoting the use of
stimulant medication is not present.
       At the beginning of each month, an insurer receives the capitated fee. At the end of the

year, all the claims submitted to the SC Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) are

run through the MRx model to determine the number of plan enrollees who filled at least one

prescription for drug classes that are specified in the model. Each drug class has a weight that

reflects the additional cost of treating a child with that condition. Each enrollee’s score is the

sum of these additional weights and the base weight for their group. The average score is then

calculated for every plan. Finally, plans that have higher average enrollee scores have their

capitation rate bumped up for all enrollees, while the plans that have the healthiest enrollees by

these criteria may see a retroactive reduction in their capitation rate. For example, in the last two

years of our data, two out of six insurers received a 4% rate bump in both years, while the lowest

ranked plan received a 7% reduction in capitated fees.

       A partial list of drug classes and weights is shown in Table 3. The complete list can be

found on the UCSD website listed above. Both ADHD and asthma are included on the list of

conditions with weights of 0.777 and 0.322 respectively. That is, if an enrollee took one of the

listed ADHD medications at least once, then his or her weight would be the sum of the age

category weight and 0.777, while if they took an asthma medication it would be the base weight

plus 0.322. A child with multiple conditions could have an even higher weight.

       Figure 5 provides anecdotal evidence that MMC plans devote considerable attention and

resources to encouraging providers to properly code all of a child’s medical conditions. Insurers

“educate” providers on a regular basis. As the information on the Blue Cross-Blue Shield

(BCBS) website suggests, they offer monthly webinars, newsletters and bulletins, monthly

regional workshops, direct support, monthly “Gaps in Care” reports, provider report cards, and

on-site visits aimed at encouraging providers to code correctly. BCBS of SC also has an internal
system that rates providers based on how many patients are treated according to the guidelines

and how the provider compares to other providers in his or her locality, with monetary rewards at

stake (a physician recognition program). Other insurers have similar programs.

       Risk adjustment creates an incentive for providers to diagnose and prescribe medications

for ADHD, asthma, and other conditions. Whether or not it is attractive to increase diagnoses of

a particular condition will depend on the cost of screening for the condition, the probability of

finding the conditions if the child is screened, how costly it is to treat that condition, and the

expected future cost of not treating it. As we will argue below, ADHD and asthma are diseases

with characteristics that may make them particularly attractive targets for additional screening

and diagnosis under this risk adjustment system.

       A third component of MMC regime that encourages the diagnosis and treatment of

childhood chronic conditions is mandated screening for such conditions. In principle, all children

in the Medicaid program are entitled to Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnostic and Treatment

(EPSDT) benefits and states must cover a broad array of preventive services. The SC

Department of Health and Human Services specifies that Medicaid children are to receive all

screenings according to the American Academy of Pediatrics schedule. In practice however,

rates of screening are low in most jurisdictions. For example, in our sample overall, only 43.9%

of Medicaid children received a general health screening each year.

       MMC plans are required to have written procedures for notifying, tracking, and following

up eligible children. In order to improve compliance, plans are allowed to provide incentives to

their members at their own expense, such as monetary rewards and prepaid gift cards. For

example, one of the SC MMC plans, WellCare, offers enrollees a $20.00 reward for completing

annual child health check-ups. WellCare also sends providers lists of children who are non-
compliant. They assess primary care providers’ adherence to EPSDT tracking and follow-up

guidelines via random audits and require poor performers to implement corrective action plans.

The BCBS BlueChoice Medicaid Health Plan urges providers to use their Gaps in Care Reports

to identify patients in need of well-child visits and pays an additional $30 for each well-child

visit provided. These examples suggest that MMCs take the screening requirements seriously,

perhaps because MMC plans are required to submit quality data, including information on

EPSDT compliance, to the state.

       These performance data feed into performance measures, compensation, ranking, and

enrollment auto-assignment mechanisms. A part of the capitation fee is withheld if performance

falls below the required minimum, and the undistributed funds are re-allocated to providers

above the 75th percentile on quality measures. If a plan does not achieve the National Medicaid

25th percentile for any quality measure, it has to submit a corrective action plan and may be

subject to liquidated damages of $250,000 for each unmet measure. In 2012, SC withheld 1%

from capitation fees and allowed MCCs that improved their quality measures by one standard

deviation on 10 measures to receive a bonus payment. In 2013, the amount withheld was 1.5%

and improvement was required for 16 measures. Other things being equal, we would expect these

incentives to increase screening, and the increased screening should lead to more diagnoses of

childhood chronic conditions.



2.3 Characteristics of ADHD and Asthma

       ADHD is a neurological condition defined by persistent symptoms of inattention and/or

hyperactivity-impulsivity. It is one of the most common mfental health disorders affecting

school-aged children. Asthma is a chronic inflammation of the airways in the lungs. It is one of
the most common physical chronic childhood illnesses, and the most frequent cause of childhood

ER visits and hospitalizations.

        While ADHD and asthma are quite different disorders, they do share certain similarities.

First, they affect large numbers of children, suggesting that greater screening is likely to turn up

additional cases. Second, diagnosis is often difficult. For ADHD, there is no fully “objective”

test to determine whether a child has the condition or not. The diagnostic criterion states that a

child with ADHD must have had at least six of the symptoms for six months or more to a degree

that is maladaptive and inconsistent with the child’s developmental level. The symptoms must

also be present in two or more settings. For asthma, physicians can conduct a test of lung

capacity using a spirometer, but this test is difficult to do in young children. In practice, it is

often difficult to distinguish the symptoms of asthma (including wheezing, coughing, chest

tightness, and breathlessness), from other respiratory conditions such as allergies, influenza, or

bronchitis.

        A third common feature is that medication is the first-line treatment for both conditions.

The vast majority of children diagnosed with ADHD receive medication, with some also

receiving behavioral therapies. Many studies have shown short-term improvements in attention

and decreases in disruptive behavior in medicated children, though the longer-term effects of

medication for ADHD are more controversial (Scheffler et al., 2009; Visser et al., 2014; Currie

et al., 2014; Dalsgaard et al., 2014; Chorniy and Kitashima, 2016). Although research is

ongoing, the bulk of the evidence suggests that ADHD medication affects behavior in a way that

may improve safety and health outcomes, however there is little evidence of long-term

improvements in academic performance.
        Asthma is managed by avoiding triggers and using medications for both long-term

control and for the immediate relief of symptoms. Children who adhere to their medication

regime are much less likely to experience asthma symptoms or to need care in ERs or hospitals

(Donahue et al., 1997; Adams et al., 2001).5 Early asthma treatment is also thought to prevent

the development of irreversible airway obstruction (Agertoft and Pedersen, 1994).

        A fourth characteristic of both ADHD and asthma is that medications for these conditions

are often prescribed by general practitioners, and general practitioners seem to feel confident in

their ability to diagnose and treat these conditions. Davis et al. (2012) survey primary care

pediatricians in Kentucky and finds that 98.5% respondents report being comfortable diagnosing

ADHD and 100% feel comfortable treating it. To provide some context, out of these same

respondents only 41.5% feel comfortable diagnosing eating disorders (with 21.5% comfortable

treating them) and only 69.2% are comfortable diagnosing autism (with 41.5% comfortable

treating it). All of the respondents reported encountering ADHD patients at least monthly, with

all other conditions trailing behind. Finally, these doctors are confident of their ability to treat

ADHD even though only 10% of the survey respondents believed that they were “well prepared”

by their residency program to either diagnose or treat behavioral or mental health problems.

Anderson et al. (2015) analyze 2008-2011 MEPS data and find that 42% of ADHD children only

see a primary care provider. In contrast, 83% children with anxiety or mood disorders were

referred to a mental health specialist.

        A fifth point of commonality between asthma and ADHD is that untreated, both

conditions can lead to severe consequences. Asthma is a cause of about 2 million child

emergency room visits each year and 439,000 child hospitalizations. In extreme cases, it can


5
 The most common medications used for long-term control of asthma are inhaled corticosteroids, which
should be used daily to reduce the reactivity of air-ways and prevent attacks.
result in death. Children suffering from ADHD face behavioral, learning, developmental and

emotional problems that extend into adulthood. Currie and Stabile (2006) find a large negative

effect of ADHD on children’s academic test scores and schooling attainment, while Fletcher and

Wolfe (2009) report a higher probability of engaging in criminal behavior.

          In summary, both ADHD and asthma are conditions with features that may make

increases in diagnosis and treatment likely given the provider incentives created by MMC. They

are common, so that additional screening is likely to uncover undiagnosed cases. They are

difficult to definitively diagnose, but paradoxically, frequently diagnosed and treated by non-

specialists. They are straightforward to treat in that the first-line treatment in both cases involves

the prescription of common medications which are widely viewed as safe and which receive a

positive weight in the MRx risk adjustment model used in many states, including South Carolina.

And finally, the consequences of missing a serious case could be severe for the affected

individual, leading providers to wish to err on the side of being aggressive about diagnosis and

treatment.



3. Data

Our analysis is based on a 60% random sample of Medicaid enrollees under 17 years of age who

were enrolled at some time over the period from 2005 to 2015. The sample has complete

information about health services utilization for 577,209 individuals, including hospital, ER,

outpatient, and pharmacy claims. We exclude children who ever qualified for Medicaid based on

foster care or disability status because these children are not eligible for MMC. In total, there

are 2,960,843 child-year observations.
       Claims include information on primary and secondary diagnoses, procedure codes

(Current Procedural Terminology Codes or CPT), dates of service, the Medicaid plan type,

payment amounts, and basic information about the provider. An unusual and important feature

of these claims data is that we have detailed information about both FFS and MMC providers

(rather than observing, for example, only the capitated MMC payment).

       The claims are coupled with a file that details the enrollment status of every child, the

basis of their eligibility, and family characteristics. For children born after 1993, we merge the

SC Medicaid claims data with the SC birth certificate (Vital Statistics) data which were obtained

from the SC Department of Health and Environmental Control. These data are collected from

maternal and hospital worksheets a few days after birth. They provide information about a

child’s health at birth, and the mother’s basic demographic information including level of

schooling.

       We identify children as currently having ADHD or asthma if the respective ICD-9/10

(International Classification of Disease) codes are recorded as either a primary or secondary

diagnosis for a visit over the past 12 months, or if the child was prescribed medication for one of

these conditions in the past 12 months. Over the entire period, 6.4% of children had an ADHD-

related event in a given year, while 16.4% had an asthma-related event.

       Table 4 provides an overview of the characteristics of the children in our sample. The

sample is evenly divided between boys and girls. In terms of race, 41% of the children are

African-American and a further 8% are Hispanic. The average age when a child is first observed

is about 3 years old (though many children are observed from birth on). On average, children

stay in the sample for five years. Sixty-four percent of the sample enrollees qualified for

Medicaid through the Optional Coverage for Women and Infants category (OCWI) which covers
those with incomes between 50 and 150/200/208% of the FPL depending on the year, and 20%

qualified through the low income family category which covers those with incomes less than

50% of the FPL. About 42% of children lived in families with zero net income, a fraction that

rose sharply after 2011 when the state stepped up efforts to auto-enroll people who had already

proven eligible for other welfare programs. Sample mothers were 24 years old on average, and

only 21% had any college education. Overall then, the sample is very disadvantaged.



4. Methods

       We wish to estimate the effect of MMC enrollment on the probability that a child is

diagnosed and treated for asthma or ADHD, and on the probability that they receive different

types of care. Hence, the main equation of interest is:


   (1) Dict = aManagedcare1ict + Xict b+ µcounty+µyear+ eict,
       or

   (2) Dict = aManagedcare10ict + Xictb + µcounty+ µyear + eict,


where for individual i, in county c, at time t, Dict represents the probability of being diagnosed

and/or treated for asthma or ADHD; Managedcare1ict is equal to 1 if an individual is enrolled in

MMC for at least one month in year t and is zero otherwise; Managedcare10ict is equal to 1 if an

individual is enrolled in MMC for at least ten months in year t and is zero otherwise; Xict is a

vector of individual and family characteristics including the child’s gender, race, birth month,

child age and maternal age (single year of age dummies), birth weight (<1500g, 1500-2499g,

2500-2999g, 3000-3499g, 3500-3999g, 4000-4999g, >=4500g) maternal education category (<9,

9-11, high school diploma, some college, college plus, missing), Medicaid enrollment category

and monthly family income ($0, $200, $200-399…). Mother characteristics are collected at
child’s birth. Medicaid enrollment categories and family income are recorded annually, as a part

of the enrollment renewal process.6 We include county (µcounty) and year (µyear) fixed effects in

all specifications to control for county and year-level determinants of diagnosis and treatment

rates. All standard errors are clustered at the county level, in order to allow for correlations

between outcomes of children within the same county.

        As discussed above, the fraction of children enrolled in MMC for at least one month

increased dramatically between 2007 and 2008 because children were defaulted into MMC plans

where those plans were available. It increased slowly for the next few years as MMC

penetration spread. It increased sharply again in 2013 when PCCM plans were converted to

MMC. The extent of these increases varied across counties over time because of differences in

MMC capacity (number and size of plan networks). We regard these increases in one month

enrollments as largely exogenous to the actions of families.

        Other things being equal, one might expect a longer period of enrollment in MMC to

have a greater effect on outcomes. It would take time to get diagnosed and treated for a chronic

condition. However, as Figure 3 shows, the fraction of children who remain enrolled in MMC

for ten months or more is much smaller than the fraction of those who were initially defaulted

into these plans. Clearly, remaining enrolled in MMC is a choice. The endogeneity of

remaining enrolled makes it difficult to distinguish between the causal effects of staying enrolled

for a longer period and selection into remaining enrolled. Hence, in addition to estimating OLS

models of the form (2), we also estimate instrumental variables models in which the endogenous

Managedcare10ict is instrumented using the exogenous Managedcare1ict.

6
  Although both variables are income-related, each of them is valuable. Medicaid enrollment is precisely
recorded and does not have missing values. However, it provides us with little variation, since most
enrollees are signed up through either Low Income Family program or OCWI. Family income, on the
other hand, is a continuous variable, but it has missing values, in part due to the fact that some enrollees
are eligible through other social programs and their income was not recorded in the Medicaid data base.
       Hence, the first stage equation is:

   (3) Managedcare10ict = dManagedcare1ict + Xictg+ µcounty + µyear + vict.

       One key contribution of this paper is that we are able to go beyond simply asking whether

MMC has an effect on diagnosis and treatment and investigate the mechanisms underlying this

effect. We estimate a series of models examining the role of several features of the managed

care model: risk adjustment mechanism, screening requirements, and access to care, in driving

our results about the effects of MMC.

       In order to evaluate the role of risk adjustment, we estimate models with the same form

as (1) and (2) using the following dependent variables: The child’s individual weight in the MRx

model; and the child’s individual weight excluding drugs prescribed for ADHD or asthma. A

comparison of these two outcomes helps us to measure how much of any observed upweighting

of the child is accounted for by asthma and ADHD alone.

       In order to examine access to care and screening, we look for procedures that indicate

that screening or preventive procedures took place. These include child well visits, blood work,

developmental screening, hearing tests, and vaccinations.

       Asthma is a condition that can lead to acute health emergencies, and thus these

emergencies should be less likely to occur if someone is properly diagnosed and treated, we

examine hospital stays and ER visits for asthma, as well as for asthma-related diseases including

upper respiratory infections (URI). And because we find that MMC is associated with increases

in hospitalizations and ER visits for asthma, we also conduct a deeper look at the type of

medications that are being prescribed for asthma when patients switch to MMC, asking whether

new patients are more likely to receive long-acting preventive drugs, or short-term acute

response drugs.
        Finally, given previous evidence that treatment for ADHD can reduce ER visits and

hospitalization for injuries (Chorniy and Kitashima, 2016; Dalsgaard et al., 2014) we also

examine the effect of MMC on these outcomes.



5. Estimation Results

        The first column of Table 5 shows the first stage regression, (3). Not surprisingly, the

estimate suggests that being defaulted into a plan increases the probability of being enrolled ten

months or more: Relative to the baseline ten-month enrollment rate of 36.5%, the probability of

being enrolled ten months or more doubles.

        The remaining columns show the effect of being enrolled for one month or ten months on

the probability of being treated for ADHD (Panel A) or asthma (Panel B) in a given year.7 We

first show OLS estimates of the one month and ten month effects without controls in columns (2)

and (3). We then show the effect of including controls on the coefficient for being enrolled ten

months or more in column (4), and finally, we show the instrumental variables estimate of the

effect of being enrolled ten months or more in column (5). We follow this presentation format

across all the tables.

        The OLS estimates without controls suggest that, as expected, being enrolled for ten

months or more has a larger effect on drug treatment for these two conditions than being enrolled

for one month. A comparison of columns (3) and (4) shows that the effect is only somewhat




7
  We observe a child having a physician visit and/or filling a prescription in a given year with a nearly the
same probability as just filling a prescription. On average 6.4% of children have a visit for ADHD in a
given year and/or fill a prescription for ADHD medication in our sample, while 6.2% only fill a
prescription. For asthma the comparable figures are 16.4% and 13.5%. Hence, it is not surprising that the
estimates using prescriptions are very similar to those using both diagnoses and prescriptions, as shown in
Appendix Table 2.
attenuated by adding an extensive set of controls, including the personal and family

characteristics listed above, as well as indicators for county and year.

       As discussed earlier, OLS estimates of the ten-month effect may be biased by the

endogeneity of the choice to remain enrolled in MMC. For example, we might expect sicker

children who were more in need of services to be either more likely to exit MMC (if they

strongly prefer FFS) or to stay in MMC (if some aspects of managed care are better for children

with chronic conditions). A comparison of columns (4) and (5) indicates that the IV estimates

are slightly smaller than the corresponding OLS estimates, but the difference is not significant.

       Our preferred estimate of 0.017 for ADHD suggests that being enrolled in managed care

for ten months or more increases the probability of being prescribed medication for ADHD by

26.6%. This estimate in turn suggests that the switch to MMC can explain 89.0% of the 30.4%

increase in the probability of being diagnosed with ADHD that occurred in our sample

population between 2004 and 2015 (see Table 2). For asthma, the increase in the probability of

having an asthma-related event is 29.9%, which explains 82.1% of the 36.4% increase in asthma

caseloads over our sample period.

       We begin our analysis of the mechanisms underlying these results with Table 6, which

shows the effect of enrollment in MMC on individual risk adjustment scores. Comparing

columns (1) and (2), we again see that enrollment for ten months or more is estimated to have a

larger effect on risk adjustment scores than enrollment for one month or more. Comparing

columns (2) and (3) shows that in this case, adding controls substantially lowers the estimated

effect of MMC. This comparison suggests that children in MMC have characteristics that make

them likely to be coded as sicker than children still in FFS. The IV estimates of being in MMC
for ten months or more are slightly smaller than the OLS, though still large relative to their

respective baselines and also statistically significant.

       Our preferred estimate from Panel A suggests that MMC enrollment for ten months or

more increases the risk adjustment score by 0.067 on a baseline of 0.115, an increase of 58%.

Panel B presents an estimate excluding the extra weight associated with ADHD and asthma.

Here our preferred estimate suggests an increase of 0.043. Hence about 36% of the increase in

the risk adjustment score that accompanies MMC is accounted for by ADHD and asthma alone.

The importance of these two conditions is consistent with the fact that these are very common

diagnoses.

       The third panel of Table 6 examines the estimated impact of MMC on risk adjustment

scores if we require patients to have at least two prescriptions for a given condition in the past

twelve months in order to be assigned a higher weight associated with this condition. The reason

for this thought experiment is that if there is even one prescription for a condition such as

ADHD, then providers are entitled to the higher risk adjustment weight. By comparing the

actual increase in risk adjustment weights in Panel A to the increase in the risk adjustment

weight that would be observed if we excluded people with only one prescription, we can get a

sense of how much upweighting is accounted for by single prescriptions. The comparison of

Panel A and Panel C suggests that over half of the increase in the weight (56%) can be accounted

for this way.

       Table 7 explores the effect of MMC on access to care in doctors’ offices and to the

various types of screening activities that we can observe in the claims data. The estimates shown

here imply that being enrolled in MMC for ten months or more increases the probability that a

child received a well-child visit in the past twelve months by 49.0%. Turning to some of the
individual screening activities that might take place during a well-child visit, we see a 38.5%

increase in the probability of blood work; a 69.0% increase in the probability that the child is

assessed using a developmental screen (from a very low baseline of 2.9%); an 88.1% increase in

the probability of a hearing screen; and a 56.0% increase in the probability that the child received

any vaccinations.8

        These findings suggest that the switch to MMC could have had a large effect on

diagnoses through the mechanism of increased access to care and screenings. If for example, the

true incidence of ADHD was 7.3%, and the true incidence of asthma was 16.5% (our measured

rates in 2015), and all well-child visits resulted in appropriate screening for children who would

have been undiagnosed previously, then the increase in well-child visits could potentially

increase diagnoses of ADHD by 0.88pp ((7.3-5.5)*0.490) and diagnoses of asthma by 2.2pp

((16.5-12.1)*0.490). These calculations suggest that increases in screenings could translate into

15.7% more ADHD cases and 18.2% more asthma cases, relative to the 2004 baseline which can

be compared to the actual percentage increases of 30.4 and 36.4 for ADHD and asthma,

respectively. This calculation represents an upper bound on the effect of screening because it

assumes that all of the new diagnoses are accurate. It is possible that some of them actually

reflect up-coding of the child’s condition due to the incentives created by risk adjustment.

        If MMC is helping children in need of care to access necessary care then one might hope

that increases in diagnosis and treatment to result in fewer sick visits to physicians, although it is

also possible that sick visits could increase with access. One should, however, expect to see




8
  Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine whether the child is up to date in their immunizations because
the records usually do not say what vaccine or a combination of vaccines was administered. This
common limitation in claims data can make it difficult to assess provider compliance with mandated
vaccination schedules.
decreases in ER visits and hospitalizations that could be prevented through adequate access to

preventable care (dubbed preventable ER visits and preventable hospitalizations) below.

        These hypotheses are examined in the last panels of Table 7 and in Table 8.            Panel F of

Table 7 shows that in addition to having increasing well-child visits, MMC is also associated

with a significant 26.3% increase in the number of sick-child visits to doctor’s offices. Panel G

indicates that children received 30.3% more visits to mental health specialists under managed

care. It is important to note that mental health was “carved out” of the managed care contract,

which means that it was covered on a FFS basis even for children in managed care (and managed

care companies were not responsible for paying for outpatient and inpatient mental health visits

until July 2016). Managed care did have to pay for all other specialists, and Panel H shows that

access to such specialists was reduced under MMC by 17.1%.

        Table 8 considers hospitalizations and ER visits for different types of conditions. We

distinguish visits for conditions that are considered to be preventable by adequate primary care

(e.g. asthma); visits for conditions that could have been treated in a primary care setting (though

doctors offices may not have been open when the ER visit occurred); visits for non-urgent

conditions (i.e. someone could have waited to be seen in a primary care setting); and visits that

                                                 ,
were appropriately treated in an ER setting.9 10 The table shows that most types of visits


9
   Lu and Kuo (2012) analyze pediatric ambulatory care-sensitive (ACS) conditions, or hospitalizations
that are potentially preventable, using the 2006 Kids’ Inpatient Database. They include asthma, bacterial
pneumonia, diabetes, immunization preventable conditions, among other conditions. They found that
respiratory conditions comprised the largest share of potentially preventable pediatric hospitalizations.
We use the ICD9/10 condition codes provided by Lu and Kuo (2012) and identify claims with these
conditions as a primary diagnosis on hospital claims as “preventable.”
10
   Following earlier work (e.g. Miller (2012)), we adopted the coding algorithm and classification of ER
visits developed by John Billings and colleagues at New York University (see, e.g., Billings et al., 2000).
The categories are based on the patient's diagnostic code include: non-urgent ER visits (e.g. sore throat);
PC-treatabla (e.g. ear infection); PC-preventable (e.g. asthma attack); Non-preventable visits (e.g. a
cardiac dysrhythmia); Injuries, and other.
increased substantially. The only exception was hospitalizations that were not considered

preventable, which showed no change (Panel B). Our preferred IV estimates suggests that

preventable hospitalizations increased by 10.0% with MMC, while ER visits for preventable

conditions increased by 27.2% (Panel A and Panel C). Even non-urgent visits to the ER

increased by 28.9%, suggesting that patients either don’t have access to primary care or prefer to

use the ER rather than their assigned primary care physician, who might be as far as thirty miles

away from their home. Note that unlike it is for most patients with private insurance, Medicaid

patients had no co-pays for using the ER under either FFS or MMC.

        Table 9 focuses on asthma and injuries, two important causes of hospitalization and ER

use in our sample. Panels A and B focus on asthma, which accounts for one seventh of the

preventable hospitalizations, and half of the children with an ER visit for a preventable cause in

our sample. We see no effect of MMC on hospitalization for asthma (Panel A), but Panel B

shows that MMC is associated with a 27.6% increase in ER visits for asthma. Since asthma can

be difficult to diagnose and there may be some confusion with other upper respiratory diagnoses,

Panel C shows the estimated impact of MMC on upper respiratory tract infections. These

estimates also indicate an increase with MMC (which rules out the possibility that MMC merely

caused a relabeling of upper respiratory diagnoses as asthma).

        The remaining four panels of Table 9 examine the effect of MMC on the probability of

hospitalization and ER use for injuries. Other things being equal, one would not expect the type

of health insurance a child has to cause increases in the probability of serious injury so that

statistically significant effects here are likely to reflect changes in access or patterns of

utilization. Yet, Panel D indicates that the probability of hospitalization for injury increases by
50.0% with MMC. Panel E shows that the probability of using the ER for injury increases by

28.1%. One population that might experience a decline in injury in response to the switch to

MMC are children with ADHD. In this population, medication has been shown to have positive

effects in terms of reducing the risk of injury (Chorniy and Kitashima, 2016; Dalsgaard et al.,

2014). Panels F and G examine the subsample of children who had at least one visit or

prescription for ADHD over the entire sample period. In this subsample, we see no increase in

the use of hospitalization for injury, and the use of ERs goes up by a smaller amount than in the

full sample (10.0%).

       It is puzzling that finding more cases of asthma and providing these patient with access to

asthma medication is not just ineffective when it comes to reducing ER visits related to asthma,

but actually coincides with increases in the use of the ER. One possibility is that asthma

medication is not being used correctly. Figure 6 examines the fraction of children in each year

who a) had at least one visit or prescription for ADHD or asthma, and b) got two or more

prescriptions. This fraction is quite low for asthma in both MMC and FFS and relatively

constant over the sample period. The figure suggests that the large increase in diagnoses did not

translate into more effective asthma control.

       Table 10 shows several tests of this hypothesis. The first two panels examine the impact

of MMC on the probability that children on Medicaid received either three or more (Panel A) or

six or more (Panel B) prescriptions for asthma in a given year, and shows that MMC had no

statistically significant effect. Effective asthma control would have required a child to

continuously take corticosteroid medication, something that could not be achieved with a single

30-day prescription.
        Generally asthma patients require both a long-acting steroid medication which reduces

the likelihood of an asthma attack, and a short-acting asthma attack medication. Panels C and D

of Table 10 examine the effects of MMC on the types of medication taken. They show that

MMC was associated with increases in the number of children who were prescribed only long-

acting medications, or only short-acting asthma attack medications in the past 12 months. Both

of these patterns suggest improper treatment of asthma which could possibly be a factor in the

increasing ER asthma visits.11



6. Discussion and Conclusions

        Increasing rates of chronic conditions among children are a grave concern, and also a

puzzle given that other health indicators such as mortality have shown great improvement, and

underlying causes, such as smoking and pollution, have been declining (Currie and Schwandt,

2016). This study focuses on two of the most common serious childhood chronic conditions,

ADHD and asthma.

        Starting from the observation that in national data, the rise of these conditions appears to

be occurring mainly among children on Medicaid, we document a remarkable finding, which is

that in the South Carolina Medicaid caseload, most of the increase in ADHD and asthma over the

period from 2004 to 2015 can be attributed to the switch to from Fee-for-Service to Medicaid

Managed Care. By September 2014, all but twelve states were contracting with managed care




11
   Another possibility that cannot be investigated using our data is that patients are not receiving
sufficient education in how to use their medications properly. Inhalers require some basic training to be
used correctly and it is “well documented that patients can have problems adopting the correct inhaler
technique and thus receiving adequate medication” (Price et al, 2012). Sestini et al. (2006) report that
many doctors are unfamiliar with the characteristics of the available inhalers and have only limited ability
to guide patients in their usage.
organizations to cover Medicaid recipients, suggesting that the switch from FFS to MMC may be

driving changes in caseloads in other states as well (Paradise, 2015).

       We focus on three aspects of risk-based managed care systems which may jointly have

contributed to increases in the treatment of asthma and ADHD. First, managed care may

improve access to care. Second, through the risk adjustment mechanism, MMC creates

incentives to diagnose children with conditions that increase a child’s weight in the risk

adjustment formula. In the methodology adopted by South Carolina, children are “counted” in

the weighting formula only if they receive a prescription, and hence, there is a strong incentive to

write at least one prescription for a condition with an added weight, and less incentive to ensure

follow through on medication compliance. Third, both because of these financial incentives and

quality control mechanisms, MMC may increase screening for chronic conditions, which, other

things being equal, would be expected to yield more cases.

       Our estimates suggest that all of these forces are at work. MMC increases the probability

that a child received a well-child visit by 49.0%, and we see increases in the probability of

having blood work, developmental and hearing screens, and vaccinations. We also see a 58%

increase in the child’s individual risk adjustment weight, with a third of the increase being

accounted for by asthma and ADHD alone.

       To summarize the results, the actual increase in ADHD and asthma caseloads was 30.4%

and 36.4% respectively. We calculate that the switch to MMC increased caseloads for these two

conditions by 26.6% (ADHD) and 29.9% (asthma). And an upper bound on the effect of

increased screening alone is 15.7% (ADHD) and 18.2% (asthma).

       In principle, increases in diagnoses and treatment should improve health outcomes.

Unfortunately, we find little evidence that this is the case. Instead, we find increases in
preventable hospitalizations and in almost all types of ER visits. A large part of the increase in

ER visits is driven by asthma, and we see that over 40% of children with asthma received fewer

than two prescriptions for asthma in the past 12 months, a proportion that remained constant with

the advent of MMC. The only category of care that shows a decrease is office visits to

specialists.

        While managed care plans improve access to primary care physicians and ensure that a

larger share of Medicaid enrollees benefit from preventive care, other features of the program

apparently backfired. First, risk adjustment incentives distort prescribing practices in that more

children receive medications but providers have no incentive to follow-up on adherence.

Second, access to primary care and specialists seems to have changed in a way that encourages

reliance on emergency rooms for even non-urgent care. We cannot say whether these large and

striking changes in patterns of utilization reflect a deterioration in underlying child health, but

they are certainly not consistent with improvements in the efficiency of the care provided under

the Medicaid program. They suggest that patients in MMC may have experienced difficulties

accessing primary care outside of the annual well-child visit.

        Children on Medicaid are among the most vulnerable patient populations. Our results

indicate that their care is very sensitive to the incentives provided by the reimbursement system.

The switch to MMC plans in South Carolina was associated with more screening and more

detected cases of the two most common childhood chronic conditions: ADHD and asthma.

However, the switch to MMC does not seem to have resulted in an increase in the quality of care

the children received, judged by using the metric of preventable hospitalizations, ER visits, and

medication compliance. Further research into the disappointing results in terms of health care

utilization is warranted.
References

Adams, R. J., Fuhlbrigge, A., Finkelstein, J. A., Lozano, P., Livingston, J. M., Weiss, K. B.,
and Weiss, S. T. (2001). Impact of inhaled anti-inflammatory therapy on hospitalization and
emergency department visits for children with asthma. Pediatrics, 107(4):706–711.

Agertoft, L. and Pedersen, S. (1994). Effects of long-term treatment with an inhaled
corticosteroid on growth and pulmonary function in asthmatic children. Respiratory medicine,
88(5):373–381.

Agertoft, L. and Pedersen, S. (2000). Effect of long-term treatment with inhaled budesonide
on adult height in children with asthma. New England Journal of Medicine, 343(15):1064–
1069.

Anderson, L. Elizabeth, Minghua L. Chen, James M. Perrin, and Jeanne Van Cleave. (2015).
Outpatient visits and medication prescribing for US children with mental health conditions.
Pediatrics 136, no. 5 (2015):1178-1185.

Barry, Colleen L., Andres Martin, and Susan H. Busch. "ADHD medication use following FDA
risk warnings." The journal of mental health policy and economics 15.3 (2012): 119.

Billings, J., Parikh, N., & Mijanovich, T. (2000). Emergency room use: The New York story
(Issue Brief No. 434). New York, NY: The Commonwealth Fund.

Bokhari, F. A. and Schneider, H. (2011). School accountability laws and the consumption
of psychostimulants. Journal of Health Economics, 30(2):355–372.

California Department of Health Care Services, Medi-Cal Managed Care Division. Avoidable
ER visits: 2010 Statewide Collaborative Quality Improvement Project: Reducing Avoidable
Emergency Room Visits. Jun. 2012.

Centers for Disease Control. National Surveillance of Asthma: United States, 2001–2010, Series
3 #35 (Hyattsville MD: National Center for Health Statistics) Nov. 2012.

Chorniy, A. and Kitashima, L. (2016). Sex, drugs, and ADHD: The effects of ADHD
pharmacological treatment on teens’ risky behaviors. Labour Economics, 43:87–105.

Currie, J. and Fahr, J. (2005). Medicaid managed care: effects on children’s Medicaid coverage
and utilization. Journal of Public Economics, 89(1):85–108.

Currie, J. and Stabile, M. (2006). Child mental health and human capital accumulation: The case
of ADHD. Journal of Health Economics, 25(6):1094–1118.

Currie, J., Stabile, M., and Jones, L. (2014). Do stimulant medications improve educational
and behavioral outcomes for children with ADHD? Journal of Health Economics, 37:58 –
69.
Currie, J., and Schwandt, H. (2016). Mortality inequality: the good news from a county-level
approach. The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2), 29-52.

Dalsgaard, S., Nielsen, H. S., and Simonsen, M. (2014). Consequences of ADHD medication
use for children’s outcomes. Journal of Health Economics, 37:137 – 151.

Davis, D. W., Honaker, S. M., Jones, V. F., Williams, P. G., Stocker, F., & Martin, E. (2012).
Identification and management of behavioral/mental health problems in primary care pediatrics:
perceived strengths, challenges, and new delivery models. Clinical pediatrics, 51(10), 978-982.

Donahue, J. G., Weiss, S. T., Livingston, J. M., Goetsch, M. A., Greineder, D. K., and Platt,
R. (1997). Inhaled steroids and the risk of hospitalization for asthma. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 277(11):887–891.

Fletcher, J. and Wolfe, B. (2009). Long-term consequences of childhood ADHD on criminal
activities. The Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics, 12(3):119.

Fletcher, J. M. (2014). The effects of childhood ADHD on adult labor market outcomes. Health
Economics, 23(2):159–181.

Glied, S., Sisk, J., Gorman, S., and Ganz, M. (1997). Selection, marketing, and Medicaid
managed care. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6164. Sept.1997.

Hammer, P. J. and Sage, W. M. (2003). Critical issues in hospital antitrust law. Health Affairs,
22(6):88–100.

Houtrow, Amy J., Kandyce Larson, Lyn Olson Neil Halfon (2014). Changing Trends of
Childhood Disability, 2001-2011, Pediatrics, 134(3), August.

Kitashima, L. and Chorniy, A. (2017). ADHD medication effects on primary and secondary
students’ academic achievement. Princeton University Working paper. May 2017.

Leibowitz, A., Buchanan, J. L., and Mann, J. (1992). A randomized trial to evaluate the
18 effectiveness of a Medicaid HMO. Journal of Health Economics, 11(3):235–257.

Lu, Sam, and Dennis Z. Kuo. "Hospital charges of potentially preventable pediatric
hospitalizations." Academic pediatrics 12, no. 5 (2012): 436-444.

Ly, D. P. and Glied, S. A. (2014). The impact of managed care contracting on physicians.
Journal of General Internal Medicine, 29(1):237–242.

Miller, S. (2012). The effect of insurance on emergency room visits: an analysis of the 2006
Massachusetts health reform. Journal of Public Economics, 96(11), 893-908.

Morrill, M. S. (2017). Special Education Financing and ADHD Medications: A Bitter Pill to
Swallow. North Carolina State University Working Paper. Apr. 2017.

Paradise, Julia (2015). Medicaid Moving Forward. Kaiser Family Foundation, Issue Brief, March
9.

Roohan, P. J., Franko, S. J., Anarella, J. P., Dellehunt, L. K., and Gesten, F. C. (2003).
Do commercial managed care members rate their health plans differently than Medicaid
managed care members? Health Services Research, 38(4):1121–1134.

Scheffler, R. M., Brown, T. T., Fulton, B. D., Hinshaw, S. P., Levine, P., and Stone, S.
(2009). Positive association between attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder medication use
and academic achievement during elementary school. Pediatrics, 123(5):1273–1279.

Scheffler, R. M., Hinshaw, S. P., Modrek, S., and Levine, P. (2007). The global market for
ADHD medications. Health Affairs, 26(2):450–457.

Visser, S. N., Danielson, M. L., Bitsko, R. H., Holbrook, J. R., Kogan, M. D., Ghandour,
R. M., Perou, R., and Blumberg, S. J. (2014). Trends in the parent-report of health care
provider-diagnosed and medicated attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: United states,
2003–2011. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 53(1):34–
46.
FIGURES	  

Figure	  1.	  Nationwide	  trends	  in	  filled	  ADHD	  prescriptions	  




                                                                                                                                                                  	  

Notes:	   Data	   source:	   Medical	   Expenditures	   Panel	   Survey	   (MEPS),	   2004-­‐2013.	   The	   sample	   includes	   all	   ADHD	  
prescriptions	  filled	  by	  children	  under	  17	  years	  old.	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure	  2.	  Nationwide	  trends	  in	  filled	  asthma	  prescriptions	  




                                                                                                                                                                    	  
Notes:	   Data	   source:	   Medical	   Expenditures	   Panel	   Survey	   (MEPS),	   2004-­‐2013.	   The	   sample	   includes	   all	   asthma	  
prescriptions	  filled	  by	  children	  under	  17	  years	  old.	  
	  

	                                                     	  
	  

Figure	  3.	  Share	  of	  SC	  Medicaid	  enrollees	  in	  Medicaid	  managed	  care	  (MMC)	  




                                                                                                                                                                                 	  
Notes:	   Data	   source:	   SC	   Medicaid,	   2004-­‐2015.	   The	   enrollment	   figures	   are	   based	   on	   monthly	   enrollment	   information	   of	  
patients	  up	  to	  17	  years	  old.	  “MMC”	  stands	  for	  Medicaid	  managed	  care.	  The	  number	  of	  enrollees	  (solid	  line)	  is	  depicted	  
using	  the	  secondary,	  right-­‐hand	  side	  axis.	  
	  

	                                                     	  
Figure	  4.	  Distribution	  of	  counties	  by	  share	  of	  SC	  Medicaid	  enrollees	  in	  MMC	  




                                                                                                                                                                  	  

Notes:	  Data	  source:	  SC	  Medicaid,	  2004-­‐2015.	  The	  enrollment	  figures	  are	  based	  on	  monthly	  enrollment	  (one	  more	  
or	  more)	  information	  of	  patients	  under	  17	  years	  old.	  “MMC”	  stands	  for	  Medicaid	  managed	  care.	                                 	  
Figure	  5.	  Sample	  job	  postings	  for	  a	  managerial	  position	  at	  insurance	  companies	  that	  provide	  managed	  care	  plans	  




                                                                                                                                                                     	  
                                                                                                     th
Notes:	  These	  job	  advertisements	  have	  been	  accessed	  on	  April	  20 ,	  2017	  using	  LinkedIn	  search	  tool.	  Selected	  
categories	  describing	  the	  positions	  are	  included.	  
	  	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Figure	   6:	   Share	   of	   Children	   with	   at	   Least	   One	   Asthma	   or	   ADHD	   Event	   in	   a	   Given	   Year	   With	   2+	  
Prescriptions	  in	  Past	  12	  Months	  
	  
100.0%

  90.0%

  80.0%

  70.0%

  60.0%

  50.0%

  40.0%
                                ALL	  ADHD
  30.0%                         ALL	  ASTHMA

  20.0%                         MCO	  ADHD

  10.0%                         MCO	  
                                ASTHMA
    0.0%
        2005               2006           2007            2008           2009           2010            2011           2012            2013           2014           2015
                                                                                                                                                                            	  
Table	  1.	  SC	  Medicaid	  Sample	  Population	  Characteristics
Characteristics                          2004             2005             2006             2007            2008             2009             2010            2011             2012             2013             2014            2015
Family	  net	  income
Monthly	  income                        605.7            561.4           479.4            577.4            701.7           703.2            762.5            813.0           745.1            688.6            798.6            738.8
Monthly	  income,	  if	  >0           902.7            965.0           1016.9           1053.9           1113.9          1120.8           1168.3           1252.8          1314.9           1384.3           1551.2           1745.5
Missing,	  %                             5.7%             6.2%            7.1%             7.3%             7.2%            6.4%             5.8%             4.8%            4.6%             3.2%             2.6%             1.6%
Zero,	  %                               31.0%            39.2%           49.1%            41.9%            34.3%           34.9%            32.7%            33.4%           41.4%            48.7%            47.2%            56.7%
Demographics
Male                                     52.4%           51.8%            51.4%            51.2%           50.8%            50.5%            50.2%            50.1%           50.1%            50.1%            50.2%            50.4%
Age                                        6.9             6.9              6.7              6.5             6.4              6.6              6.7              6.9             7.2              7.4              7.5              7.6
Race:	  	  	  White                   40.2%           40.0%            39.6%            39.3%           39.1%            39.7%            40.2%            40.6%           41.0%            41.4%            41.5%            41.7%
                  Black                  52.3%           51.4%            50.8%            49.9%           49.0%            47.9%            47.1%            46.5%           46.5%            46.1%            45.8%            45.3%
                  Hispanic                5.3%            6.2%             7.3%             8.4%            9.4%             9.7%             9.8%             9.8%            9.3%             9.3%             9.4%             9.4%
N	  obs.                               222,091         223,736          221,764          220,497         226,781          245,539          261,412          273,409         299,608          314,061          328,512          345,524
Birth	  certificate	  data
Birth	  weight,	  g             3,192                  3,188            3,183            3,180           3,180            3,181            3,181            3,182           3,182            3,183            3,185            3,186
Mother's	  age                    23.6                   23.7             23.7             23.7            23.7             23.8             23.9             24.0            24.2             24.3             24.5             24.6
School:	  Elem                    5.3%                   5.5%             5.7%             5.9%            6.1%             6.0%             5.8%             5.6%            5.2%             5.0%             4.9%             4.8%
       High	  school             29.7%                  30.0%            30.4%            30.5%           30.5%            30.1%            29.4%            28.8%           28.1%            27.4%            26.5%            26.0%
       High	  school	  diploma 42.6%                   41.7%            40.7%            40.0%           39.3%            39.0%            38.4%            37.8%           37.4%            36.9%            36.2%            35.8%
       Some	  college            15.4%                  16.0%            16.6%            17.2%           17.7%            18.2%            19.1%            20.1%           21.0%            22.0%            22.9%            23.4%
       College	  diploma          7.0%                   6.8%             6.6%             6.5%            6.4%             6.7%             7.2%             7.7%            8.2%             8.7%             9.5%             9.9%
N	  obs.                        138,810                149,025          157,108          165,121         177,561          197,634          210,582          220,272         238,745          248,351          257,381          249,506

Notes:	  The	  table	  is	  based	  on	  a	  60%	  random	  sample	  of	  SC	  Medicaid	  population	  under	  17	  years	  old	  in	  2004-­‐2015,	  excluding	  children	  in	  foster	  care	  and	  disabled	  
children.	  Birth	  certificates	  data	  are	  available	  for	  in-­‐state	  births	  for	  children	  born	  after	  1992.	  These	  records	  are	  matched	  to	  Medicaid	  records	  on	  name,	  date	  of	  
birth,	  race,	  gender,	  and	  hospital	  of	  birth,	  when	  available.
Table	  2:	  Current	  ADHD	  and	  Asthma	  
Actual	  and	  predicted	  incidence	  rate	  based	  on	  SC	  Medicaid	  population	  characteristics

                                    ADHD                                                ASTHMA
    Year                          Predicted Predicted                                   Predicted Predicted
                   Actual            OLS      Logit                       Actual           OLS      Logit
    2004            5.6%             5.5%     5.5%                        12.1%          13.0%      13.0%
    2005            5.5%             5.5%     5.5%                        12.7%          12.9%      12.9%
    2006            5.4%             5.4%     5.4%                        13.4%           12.9%     12.9%
    2007            5.3%             5.3%     5.3%                        14.2%           13.1%     13.1%
    2008            5.5%             5.2%     5.2%                        15.1%           13.2%     13.2%
    2009            5.9%             5.4%     5.3%                        17.2%           13.1%     13.1%
    2010            6.4%             5.5%     5.4%                        17.5%           13.1%     13.1%
    2011            6.8%             5.5%     5.4%                        17.7%           13.0%     13.0%
    2012            6.8%             5.8%     5.6%                        18.2%           12.8%     12.7%
    2013            7.2%             5.9%     5.8%                        18.1%           12.5%     12.5%
    2014            7.3%             5.9%     5.7%                        17.6%           12.3%     12.3%
    2015            7.3%             5.9%     5.8%                        16.5%           11.9%     11.9%

*	  Actual:	  measures	  "current"	  ADHD	  (doctor	  visit	  or	  prescription	  medication	  in	  a	  given	  year).
Table	  3.	  Selected	  Medicaid	  Rx	  risk	  adjustment	  model	  components
                             Conditions                                Mean	  outcome Weight
Asthma                                                                                          15.4%                 0.322
ADHD                                                                                             6.1%                 0.777
Infections,	  Low	  Severity                                                        36.9%                      0.000
Infections,	  Medium	  Severity                                                     18.0%                      0.137
Eye,	  Ear,	  Nose	  and	  Throat                                                 17.2%                      0.151
Inflammatory/Autoimmune                                                               10.5%                      0.156
Pain                                                                                   5.4%                      0.000
Gastric	  Acid	  Disorder                                                            4.2%                      0.000
Nausea                                                                                 4.2%                      0.316
Cardiac                                                                                1.6%                      1.175
Depression/Anxiety                                                                     1.6%                      1.110
Notes:	  The	  table	  lists	  the	  conditions	  that	  have	  a	  prevalence	  of	  at	  least	  1%	  in	  our	  	  
sample,	  measured	  by	  the	  share	  of	  patients	  taking	  medications	  from	  the	  MRx	  Risk	  
adjustment	  model,	  per	  year.
Table	  4.	  Descriptive	  statistics
                                               Mean	                                                         Mean	  
         Characteristics                                                Characteristics
                                               (SD)                                                           (SD)
PANEL	  A                                                   PANEL	  B
Individual	  characteristics                                Yearly	  enrollment	  information
Male                                            0.51         Cat:	  Low	  income	  family             0.20
Race:	  White                                  0.41         OCWI	  Children                            0.64
Black                                           0.41         OCWI	  Infants                             0.12
Hispanic                                        0.08         Monthly	  family	  income:	  $0          0.42
                                                             Monthly	  family	  income,	  if	  >$0 1,264.72
Age	  (December)                               7.00                                                   (914.48)
                                               (4.79)
Age	  1st	  in	  sample                      2.73
                                               (4.12)
Years	  in	  sample                           5.13
                                               (3.28)

PANEL	  C
Birth	  certificate	  information
Mother's	  educ.:	  Elem.	  school          0.03
Some	  High	  school                         0.16
High	  school	  diploma                      0.23
Some	  college                                0.14
College/grad	  school                         0.07
Mother's	  age                               24.49
                                              (5.61)
Birth	  weight,	  g                         3,198
                                              (558)
N	  counties                                   46
N	  enrollees,	  <=16	  y.o.              577,209
N	  obs.,	  person-­‐year                 2,960,843

Notes:	  Descriptive	  statistics	  are	  based	  on	  a	  sample	  that	  excludes	  children	  and	  
teens,	  who	  at	  any	  time	  during	  the	  sample	  period	  qualified	  for	  Medicaid	  based	  on	  
their	  foster	  care	  or	  disability	  status,	  because	  they	  are	  not	  eligible	  for	  MMC.	  
Table	  5:	  OLS	  and	  IV	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  ADHD	  and	  Asthma	  Diagnoses,	  and	  First	  Stage

                                                          (1)                  (2)                   (3)                  (4)                (5)
Estimation	  Type                                    1st	  Stage             OLS                   OLS                  OLS                 IV
Time	  Enrolled                                       10+	  mo              1+	  mo             10+	  mo            10+	  mo          10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                      YES                   NO                    NO                   YES                YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                           YES                   NO                    NO                   YES                YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  ADHD
Child	  in	  MMC                                                          0.011***              0.028***      0.020***                   0.017***
                                                                             (0.002)               (0.002)       (0.001)                    (0.003)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                            0.064
Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  asthma
Child	  in	  MMC                                                          0.042***                    0.077***            0.057***       0.049***
                                                                             (0.003)                      (0.003)            (0.003)        (0.006)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                     0.164
Panel	  C:	  First	  stage	  -­‐-­‐	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  Enrollment	  1+	  months	  on	  Enrollment	  10+	  months
Child	  in	  MMC	  1+	  months                                 0.529***
                                                                    (0.003)
Mean	  outcome                                                      0.365

Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  	  	  Controls	  include	  
the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  of	  age	  dummies),	  birth	  weight	  
(<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  college,	  
college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399,…).
The	  F-­‐statistic	  for	  the	  first	  stage	  is	  41,566.
Table	  6:	  OLS	  and	  IV	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Individual	  Risk	  Adjustment	  Scores

                                                                  (1)                   (2)                 (3)                     (4)
Estimation	  Type                                                OLS                  OLS                  OLS                      IV
Time	  Enrolled                                                1+	  mo             10+	  mo            10+	  mo              10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                               NO                   NO                   YES                     YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                                    NO                   NO                   YES                     YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Risk	  Adjustment	  Score
Child	  in	  MMC                                             0.139***             0.181***             0.088***             0.067***
                                                                (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.004)                 (0.008)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                 0.115
Panel	  B:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Risk	  Adjustment	  Score	  Excluding	  Extra	  Weight	  for	  Asthma	  and	  ADHD
Child	  in	  MMC                                             0.091***             0.118***             0.060***             0.043***
                                                                (0.004)              (0.005)              (0.003)                 (0.006)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                 0.053
Panel	  C:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Risk	  Adjustment	  Score,	  Including	  Only	  Children	  with	  2+	  Prescriptions
Child	  in	  MMC                                             0.078***             0.108***             0.058***             0.038***
                                                                (0.004)              (0.004)              (0.003)                 (0.006)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                 0.038
Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  dummies),	  birth
weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  
college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
Table	  7:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Office	  Visits	  for	  Well	  and	  Sick	  Child	  Care,	  Past	  12	  Months
                                                                          (1)                       (2)                   (3)                   (4)
Estimation	  Type                                                       OLS                        OLS                   OLS                    IV
Time	  Enrolled                                                       1+	  mo                 10+	  mo               10+	  mo            10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                                       NO                        NO                    YES                   YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                                            NO                        NO                    YES                   YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  Well	  Child	  Visits
Child	  in	  MMC                                                  0.121***                  0.112***                 0.162***             0.215***
                                                                      (0.007)                     (0.006)               (0.005)               (0.013)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.439
Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  Blood	  Work
Child	  in	  MMC                                                  0.036***                  0.049***                 0.050***             0.050***
                                                                      (0.010)                     (0.010)               (0.009)               (0.015)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.130
Panel	  C:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Developmental	  Screen	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                  0.025***                  0.024***                 0.014***             0.020***
                                                                      (0.004)                     (0.004)               (0.003)               (0.005)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.029
Panel	  D:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Hearing	  Screen	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                  0.030***                  0.023***                 0.028***             0.052***
                                                                      (0.005)                     (0.004)               (0.003)               (0.011)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.059
Panel	  E:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  Receiving	  Any	  Vaccinations	  
Child	  in	  MCO                                                  0.116***                  0.101***                 0.121***             0.172***
                                                                      (0.011)                     (0.010)               (0.007)               (0.016)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.307
Panel	  F:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  Sick	  Visits	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                   0.089***                 0.119***                 0.148***             0.211***
                                                                        (0.006)                 (0.005)                 (0.004)               (0.012)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.802
Panel	  G:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Sick	  Visits,	  MH	  Professional
Child	  in	  MMC                                                  0.049***                  0.099***                 0.066***             0.074***
                                                                      (0.010)                     (0.010)               (0.004)               (0.007)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.244
Panel	  H:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Sick	  Visits,	  Other	  Specialist
Child	  in	  MMC                                                -­‐0.084***                -­‐0.046***                 0.003            -­‐0.084***
                                                                      (0.012)                     (0.012)               (0.010)               (0.022)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                               0.490
Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  of	  age	  dummies),	  
birth	  weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  
college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
Table	  8:	  OLS	  and	  IV	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Hospital	  and	  ER	  Use	  in	  Past	  12	  Months

                                                                                                     (1)                  (2)              (3)            (4)
Estimation	  Type                                                                                   OLS                 OLS              OLS              IV
Time	  Enrolled                                                                                1+	  mo                10+	  mo        10+	  mo      10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                                                                  NO                   NO               YES            YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                                                                       NO                   NO               YES            YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  Hospitalizations	  for	  Preventable	  Conditions	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                         -0.0016***                -0.0012***        0.0012***       0.0007*
                                                                                               (0.0003)                (0.0003)         (0.0002)       (0.0004)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.007
Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  Of	  Any	  Hospitalization	  for	  non	  PC-­‐Preventable	  Conditions
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                         -0.0033***                -0.0048***        0.0019***        0.0002
                                                                                               (0.0004)                (0.0003)         (0.0002)       (0.0005)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.013
Panel	  C:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  ER	  Visit	  for	  PC-­‐Preventable	  Conditions	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                            0.0027***               0.0044***        0.0061***      0.0079***
                                                                                               (0.0006)                (0.0006)         (0.0005)       (0.0008)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.029
Panel	  D:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  ER	  Visit	  for	  PC-­‐Treatable	  Conditions	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                            0.0056***               0.0073***        0.0188***      0.0260***
                                                                                               (0.0018)                (0.0014)         (0.0012)       (0.0023)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.093                                 	  
Panel	  E:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Not	  PC	  Preventable/Treatable	  Conditions
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                            0.0034***               0.0039***        0.0065***      0.0081***
                                                                                               (0.0006)                (0.0006)         (0.0005)       (0.0010)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.024
Panel	  F:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Any	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Non-­‐urgent	  Conditions
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                            0.0084***               0.0116***        0.0161***      0.0228***
                                                                                               (0.0017)                (0.0013)         (0.0009)       (0.0020)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                   0.079
Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  of	  age	  dummies),	  birth
weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  
college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
Only	  claims	  with	  asthma	  as	  a	  primary	  diagnosis;	  all	  birth-­‐related	  claims	  were	  excluded.
Table	  9:	  Effects	  of	  MMC	  on	  Hospital	  and	  ER	  Use	  for	  Asthma	  and	  Injuries	  in	  Past	  12	  Months
                                                                                               (1)                       (2)               (3)            (4)
Estimation	  Type                                                                          OLS                         OLS               OLS              IV
Time	  Enrolled                                                                           1+	  mo                 10+	  mo            10+	  mo      10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                                                          NO                         NO                 YES            YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                                                               NO                         NO                 YES            YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Any	  Hospitalizations	  for	  Asthma	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                        -0.0001                   0.0001            0.0002***         0.0001
                                                                                         (0.0001)                  (0.0001)             (0.0001)       (0.0001)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                               0.001
Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Any	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Asthma	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                   0.0070***                    0.0038***           0.0028***        0.0026***
                                                                                         (0.0003)                  (0.0003)             (0.0002)        (0.0004)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                               0.008
Panel	  C:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  	  an	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Other	  Respiratory	  Infection	  
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                   0.0072***                    0.0088***           0.0187***        0.0234***
                                                                                         (0.0020)                  (0.0016)             (0.0012)        (0.0024)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                               0.092
Panel	  D:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  a	  Hospitalization	  for	  Injury
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                         0.0001                    0.0002             0.0003**        0.0005**
                                                                                     (0.0001)                 (0.0002)                (0.0001)          (0.0002)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                          0.001
Panel	  E:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  an	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Injury
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                   0.0067***                  0.0212***      0.0206***               0.0225***
                                                                                     (0.0018)                (0.0015)                 (0.0010)          (0.0020)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                0.080
Panel	  F:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  a	  Hospitalization	  for	  Injury,	  Ever	  ADHD	  Sample
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                    0.0001                     0.0001                 0.0002       0.0005
                                                                                     (0.0002)                   (0.0002)               (0.0002)     (0.0004)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                0.001
Panel	  G:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  the	  Probability	  of	  an	  ER	  Visit	  for	  Injury,	  Ever	  ADHD	  Sample
Child	  in	  MMC                                                                    -0.0014                  0.0114***              0.0191***    0.0115***
                                                                                     (0.0026)                   (0.0024)               (0.0017)     (0.0030)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                                                0.115
Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
The	  "Ever	  ADHD"	  sample	  includes	  all	  440,734	  children	  ever	  diagnosed	  or	  treated	  for	  ADHD.
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  of	  age	  dummies),	  
birth	  weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  
college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
Only	  claims	  with	  asthma	  as	  a	  primary	  diagnosis;	  all	  birth-­‐related	  claims	  were	  excluded.	  Obs,	  where	  hospital	  
stay/ER	  visits	  that	  preceded	  the	  prescription	  event	  were	  excluded.
Table	  10:	  OLS	  and	  IV	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Adherence	  to	  Asthma	  Med.	  Regime
Conditional	  on	  Having	  an	  Asthma	  Event	  at	  Some	  Time	  While	  in	  Sample,	  Past	  12	  Months
                                                               (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
Estimation	  Type                                             OLS                     OLS                   OLS                     IV
Time	  Enrolled                                           1+	  mo                  10+	  mo          10+	  mo               10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                            NO                      NO                    YES                    YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                                 NO                      NO                    YES                    YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Filling	  Prescriptions	  Covering	  3+	  Months
Child	  in	  MMC                                       0.024***                   0.047***           0.025***                    0.001
                                                          (0.003)                    (0.003)             (0.002)                 (0.005)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                0.109
Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Filling	  Prescriptions	  Covering	  6+	  Months
Child	  in	  MMC                                       0.011***                   0.026***           0.016***                 -­‐0.0005
                                                          (0.002)                    (0.002)             (0.002)                 (0.005)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                0.052
Panel	  C:	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Only	  Filling	  Prescriptions	  for	  Long-­‐Acting	  Steroids
Child	  in	  MMC                                       0.0125***                  0.0246***          0.0192***               0.0203***
                                                        -­‐0.0013             -­‐0.0013               -­‐0.001              -­‐0.0021
Mean	  outcome                                                                               0.044
Panel	  D:	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  Probability	  of	  Only	  Filling	  Prescriptions	  for	  Asthma	  Attack	  Reliever
Child	  in	  MMC                                    0.0160***                     0.0181***          0.0089***           0.0112***
                                                        -­‐0.0007             -­‐0.0005              -­‐0.0004              -­‐0.0009
Mean	  outcome                                                                           0.023
Notes:	  There	  are	  1,346,493	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  
dummies),	  birth	  weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  
maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  
category,	  and	  month	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
Appendix	  Table	  1:	  Prevalence	  of	  ADHD	  and	  Asthma	  in	  SC	  Medicaid	  Sample	  and	  in	  MEPs

                                                             ADHD
                     NSCH                 NSCH             NCHS	  SC	        SC                             SC
   Year               US                   SC              Public	  Ins. Medicaid,	  2-­‐17               Medicaid
    2005                                                                              7.1%                     5.5%
    2006                                                                              7.1%                     5.4%
    2007             6.4%                 8.5%                 15.0%                  7.2%                     5.3%
    2008                                                                              7.5%                     5.5%
    2009                                                                              7.8%                     5.9%
    2010                                                                              8.3%                     6.4%
    2011             7.9%                10.1%                 12.4%                  8.7%                     6.8%
    2012                                                                              8.5%                     6.8%
    2013                                                                              8.8%                     7.2%
    2014                                                                              8.9%                     7.3%
    2015                                                                              8.9%                     7.3%

                                                            ASTHMA
                     NSCH                 NSCH             NSCH	  SC	        SC                             SC
  Year                US                   SC              Public	  Ins. Medicaid,	  0-­‐17               Medicaid
     2005                                                                             12.6%                        12.7%
     2006                                                                             13.3%                        13.4%
     2007          9.0%                  8.5%                12.7%                    14.0%                        14.2%
     2008                                                                             14.9%                        15.1%
     2009                                                                             17.1%                        17.2%
     2010                                                                             17.5%                        17.5%
     2011          8.8%                  8.5%                10.9%                    17.6%                        17.7%
     2012                                                                             18.1%                        18.2%
     2013                                                                             18.1%                        18.1%
     2014                                                                             17.6%                        17.6%
     2015                                                                             16.6%                        16.5%
Note:	  NSCH	  sample	  is	  0-­‐17,	  while	  our	  Medicaid	  sample	  is	  0-­‐16.
Our	  prevalence	  numbers	  are	  shown	  in	  the	  last	  column.	  In	  our	  sample,
current	  means	  the	  child	  had	  a	  doctor	  visit	  or	  a	  prescription	  in	  the	  past	  12	  months.
Appendix	  Table	  2:	  OLS	  and	  IV	  Estimates	  of	  the	  Effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  ADHD	  and	  Asthma	  Prescriptions

                                                          (1)                 (2)                   (3)                    (4)               (5)
Estimation	  Type                                    1st	  Stage            OLS                   OLS                    OLS                IV
Time	  Enrolled                                       10+	  mo             1+	  mo             10+	  mo              10+	  mo         10+	  mo
County;	  Year	  Fixed	  Effects                      YES                  NO                    NO                     YES               YES
Controls	  (incl.	  b.cert.)                           YES                  NO                    NO                     YES               YES
Panel	  A:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  ADHD
Child	  in	  MMC                                                         0.011***             0.027***       0.019***                    0.017***
                                                                            (0.002)              (0.002)        (0.001)                     (0.003)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                          0.062

Panel	  B:	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  on	  asthma
Child	  in	  MMC                                                         0.044***             0.076***       0.050***                    0.041***
                                                                            (0.004)              (0.003)        (0.003)                     (0.006)
Mean	  outcome                                                                                          0.135

Panel	  C:	  First	  stage	  -­‐-­‐	  The	  effect	  of	  MMC	  Enrollment	  1+	  months	  on	  Enrollment	  10+	  months
Child	  in	  MMC	  1+	  months                                 0.529***
                                                                    (0.003)
Mean	  outcome                                                      0.365

Notes:	  There	  are	  2,960,843	  observations.	  Standard	  errors	  are	  clustered	  at	  the	  county	  level.	  
Controls	  include	  the	  child's	  gender,	  race,	  birth	  month,	  child	  and	  maternal	  age	  (single	  year	  of	  age	  dummies),	  birth
weight	  (<1500g,	  1500-­‐2499g,	  2500-­‐2999g,	  3000-­‐3499g…	  >=4500g),	  maternal	  education	  (<12,	  12,	  some	  
college,	  college	  plus,	  missing),	  Medicaid	  enrollment	  category,	  and	  monthly	  family	  income	  ($200,	  $200-­‐399…).
The	  F-­‐statistic	  for	  the	  first	  stage	  is	  41,566.
