NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IMPACT OF COMPREHENSIVE SMOKING BANS ON THE HEALTH OF INFANTS
AND CHILDREN
Kerry Anne McGeary
Dhaval M. Dave
Brandy J. Lipton
Timothy Roeper
Working Paper 23995
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23995

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised April 2019

This research is supported by a grant from the National Cancer Institute (1R21CA167578-01) to
the NBER. We are grateful to Laura Argys, Ryan Brown, and Christina Robinson for valuable
comments on earlier drafts of this study. The majority of Brandy Lipton’s work on this project
was completed while she was employed by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The
views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views
of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, the
Department of Health and Human Services, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Kerry Anne McGeary, Dhaval M. Dave, Brandy J. Lipton, and Timothy Roeper. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Impact of Comprehensive Smoking Bans on the Health of Infants and Children
Kerry Anne McGeary, Dhaval M. Dave, Brandy J. Lipton, and Timothy Roeper
NBER Working Paper No. 23995
November 2017, Revised April 2019
JEL No. D1,H0,I1,K0
ABSTRACT
As evidence of the negative effects of environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) has mounted, an
increasingly popular public policy response has been to impose restrictions on smoking through
100% smoke-free bans (comprehensive smoking bans). Yet sparse information exists regarding
the impact these smoking bans at the state and local levels have on the health of children and
infants. A rationale for expansion of smoke-free laws implicitly presumes that potential public
health gains from reducing adult cigarette consumption and declines in adult ETS exposure
extend to children. However, if smokers compensate by shifting their consumption of cigarettes
from public venues that impose a comprehensive smoking ban to smoking at home, then these
policies may have a harmful effect on children and infants. This study provides estimates of how
comprehensive smoking bans impact the venue of smoking, and the health of children and
infants. Using models that exploit state- and county-level changes to smoking ban legislation over
time, estimates suggest that smoking bans have improved the health of both infants and children,
mainly through implementation of more comprehensive bans. Further, we find no evidence of
displacement among smokers (both smokers with and without children in the household), and
actually find that the bans had a positive spillover effect in terms of reducing smoking inside the
home – an effect which may further explain the improvement in infant and children’s health. Our
effect magnitudes imply that expanding comprehensive coverage from 60% (current level) to
100% of the population can prevent between approximately 1,110 – 1,750 low birthweight births
among low-educated mothers, resulting in economic cost savings of about $71 – $111 million
annually. Health improvements among older children add to these economic benefits.
Kerry Anne McGeary
Research Evaluation and Learning
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation
PO 2316
Princeton, NJ 08543-2316
kmcgeary@rwjf.org
Dhaval M. Dave
Bentley University
Department of Economics
175 Forest Street, AAC 195
Waltham, MA 02452-4705
and IZA
and also NBER
ddave@bentley.edu

Brandy J. Lipton
San Diego State University
Graduate School of Public Health
Hardy Tower room 119
5500 Campanile Drive
San Diego, CA 92182-4162
blipton@sdsu.edu
Timothy Roeper
New York University
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West 4th Street - 6th FL
New York, NY 10012
timothy.roeper@gmail.com

I.

Introduction
Environmental Tobacco Smoke (ETS) exposure is not trivial. The Centers for Disease

Control and Prevention (CDC) note that it threatens over 126 million non-smoking Americans,
including children. An estimated 150,000 to 300,000 children younger than 18 months of age have
respiratory tract infections linked to secondhand smoke, and 9% of total direct medical costs in the
first year of life can be attributed to ETS exposure (Leung et al. 2003). The estimated economic
burden of ETS exposure in the U.S. exceeds $5 billion in direct medical costs and $4.7 billion
annually in lost productivity costs (Bonnie et al. 2007a).
The enormity of these economic costs justifies the continued implementation of
comprehensive and extensive tobacco control programs comprising of excise tax hikes, antismoking educational campaigns, and support for smoking cessation since the 1970s. In addition,
both the CDC and Institute of Medicine (IOM) strongly recommend that states and localities enact
100% Smoke-Free Laws (comprehensive smoking bans) in all non-residential indoor locations,
mainly any worksites, restaurants, and bars (USDHHS 2007; Bonnie et al. 2007b). While these
recommendations aim to reduce smoking prevalence and ETS exposure for the entire U.S.
population, they are based on studies that investigate the impact of smoking restrictions on smoking
prevalence, smoking-related morbidities, and ETS exposure among only adults (i.e., not all ages).
A key and necessary link for a comprehensive evaluation of the effectiveness of 100% SFLs has
been missing from the CDC and IOM reports as very few studies have assessed whether and to what
extent 100% SFLs at the state and local levels impact the health of children and infants.
The health-promoting effects of smoking bans are well documented for adults, both in terms
of reducing smoking prevalence as well as non-smoking adults’ ETS exposure (Stillman et al. 1990;
Brauer and Mannetje 1998; Farrelly et al. 1999; Evans, et al. 1999; Valente et al. 2007). Further
justification for smoking bans derives from U.S. and international research that provides evidence
3

of a link from smoking bans to improvements in ETS-related morbidities for adults, such as:
respiratory health, and acute myocardial infarction. 1 It is important to note that these studies do not
estimate the impact on infants or children. The presumption that the beneficial effects found for
adults, a priori, will extend to infants and children may or may not be correct. For instance,
smokers may compensate for the comprehensive restrictions by partly shifting from consuming
cigarettes at banned venues to smoking at home (when children, infants, or pregnant women are
present). This potential unintended displacement of smoking to the home (or other non-banned
places) could raise ETS exposure of children and non-smoking family members. 2
Evidence on how smoking bans impact infants and children, and whether they lead to
increased smoking at home where children may be present, is very sparse. Adda and Cornaglia
(2010), based on time-use data from the American Time Use Survey and the National Human
Activity Pattern Survey, show that comprehensive bans in bars and restaurants decrease the amount
of time that smokers spend at these locations and increase the time spent at home, though whether
smokers are actually smoking more at home is not observed. 3 Using a limited sample from the
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey, they also find some evidence of an increase in
cotinine (a metabolite of nicotine) levels among children in smoking families, suggestive of a
displacement effect. In another study, Markowitz et al. (2013) show that state-level smoking
restrictions in restaurants and workplaces are not effective in improving birthweight using data from
the Pregnancy Risk Assessment Monitoring System (PRAMS). More recently, Gao and Baughman

1

See for instance Eisner et al. 1998, Goodman et al. 2007, Seo and Torabi 2007, Cesaroni et al. 2008, Meyers et al.
2009, Shetty et al. 2011, and Kvasnicka et al. 2018.
2
The primary site of ETS exposure for U.S. children is the home from parents or other adults smoking (Klepeis et al.
2001; Yousey 2006), and another common site of exposure is restaurants (Siegel et al. 2005). Due to their inability to
choose their environment, children in general are also exposed to more ETS than non-smoking adults (USDHHS 2007).
3
“Home” was defined broadly as anyone’s home, including the individual’s own home or others’ homes and did not
differentiate between children present or not.

4

(2017) find that comprehensive smoking bans have no positive impact on birth outcomes, and may
even lead to a possible decline in the health of infants born to younger mothers.
Our study adds to this very limited evidence base, exploiting data from the U.S. Natality File
and the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) combined with detailed information on all
comprehensive and limited smoking bans at local and state-levels, and provides a comprehensive
analysis of how these restrictions have impacted child health. We extend the limited prior work on
infants (Markowitz et al. 2013; Gao and Baughman 2017), and also provide the first national
analysis of the impact of these bans on the respiratory health of older children. In addition, by
exploiting information on the venue of smoking from the NHIS, we are able to directly estimate the
influence of smoking bans on displacement of smoking to the home when children are present.
Our results show that localities that have enacted comprehensive smoking bans across
workplaces, restaurants, and bars have experienced significant gains with respect to infant health
(birthweight, low birthweight) and the health of older children (respiratory health and ETS-related
morbidities). Further, we find no evidence of displacement of smoking behaviors to the home
(among both smokers with and without children in the household); rather, estimates suggest that
comprehensive bans have had a positive spillover effect in terms of reducing smoking inside the
home – an effect which may further explain the improvement in infant and children’s health. Our
effect magnitudes are small though clinically important, and imply that expanding the coverage of
comprehensive bans from the current level of 60% to 100% of the population can prevent between
1,110 – 1,750 low birthweight births among low-educated mothers, resulting in economic cost
savings of up to $111 million annually. Health improvements among older children add to these
economic benefits.
II.

Background

II. A. Comprehensive Smoking Bans and Child Health Outcomes
5

Very little work has directly assessed how comprehensive smoking bans have affected
infants and children. 4 According to a recent systematic review and meta-analysis, only five North
American studies (4 from the U.S. and 1 from Canada) have examined the effects of public smoking
bans on infant or child health, and none of these studies analyzes a nationally representative sample
(Been at al. 2014; Faber et al. 2016). These studies generally support improvements in child health
following the introduction of public smoking bans (see for instance, Rayens et al. 2008) though the
risk for bias may be high due to the use of small samples that are not nationally representative and
reliance on time-series or cross-sectional variation.
Two notable exceptions are Markowitz et al. (2013) and Gao and Baughman (2017), both of
which investigate the impact of comprehensive smoking bans on infant health only, without
explicitly examining the displacement hypothesis. In a relatively small scale study, Markowitz et
al. (2013) utilize data for 29 states and New York City, based on the PRAMS and spanning 19962008, to assess how tobacco control policies affect birth outcomes. They consider the effects of
state-level cigarette prices and excise taxes, and state-level comprehensive smoking bans in two
venues (restaurants and workplaces), and find very limited effectiveness of these bans. Higher
cigarette taxes and prices are found to elicit a stronger response, in terms of improvements in birth
outcomes and particularly in averting preterm births, among teen mothers and mothers with low
levels of educational attainment or on Medicaid. 5 In a larger scale study, Gao and Baughman (2017)
use data from the nationally representative U.S. Natality Detail File for all the births in the U.S.
from 1995 to 2009 to test the impact of comprehensive smoking bans and cigarette taxes on infant
birth weight, 5-minute APGAR scores and the incidence of cleft palate. Their results show, in

4

Simon (2016) studied the longer-term effects of early life exposure to cigarette smoke, utilizing exogenous variation
from in utero exposure to cigarette tax hikes, on the health of children between the ages of 2-17 years. He finds
consistent evidence that higher cigarette taxes during pregnancy reduce prenatal smoking (based on natality data) and
has longer-term positive effects on child health (based on the National Health Interview Surveys).
5
Fully banning smoking in restaurants is found to improve birth outcomes among more educated and higher-income
mothers.

6

general, that smoking bans are not associated with any improvements in infant health, with some
estimates pointing to adverse effects on low and very low birthweight among infants born to
younger mothers.
II. B. Comprehensive Smoking Bans and Displacement
Few studies have considered potential displacement effects associated with smokers
changing their behaviors in an effort to compensate for or circumvent the smoking restrictions.
Adams and Cotti (2008) find a higher incidence of alcohol-related fatal accidents following the
imposition of locally enacted comprehensive smoking bans in bars. They suggest that the benefit of
a ban from smokers choosing to stay at home or reducing their smoking is partially offset by the
increased miles driven by smokers wishing to smoke and drink, netting an increase in alcoholrelated accidents. Adda and Cornaglia (2010) find that comprehensive smoking bans in restaurants
and bars reduce the amount of time that smokers spend at these locations (during both weekdays
and weekends) and increase the time spent at home (on weekdays though not on weekends); 6 they
also find some increase in cotinine levels among children in smoking families, though these effects
are imprecise and not always consistent, and infer from these estimates that smokers may be
shifting their smoking to inside their home.
Our study expands upon this limited literature in several ways. First, by including the
earliest years of legislation, as well as state and local bans, we are able to exploit greater variation in
policy and at a finer level than Markowitz et al. (2013), Gao and Baughman (2017) and Adda and
Cornaglia (2010). Second, our study uses the most comprehensive and nationally representative
data on birth outcomes, child health and tobacco policy to provide a more complete picture of the
impact of smoking bans on infants and children. The national data raises the external validity of our

6
The time-use measures do not capture the act of smoking, either actual smoking or reported smoking. Hence,
increased time at home may not necessarily mean that the smokers were consuming cigarettes during their expanded
time spent at home, or consuming cigarettes in homes with children, as these analyses did not differentiate households
with and without children.

7

estimates, and the expanded sample sizes in the NHIS and the natality data are important for
maximizing statistical power in order to reliably detect effect magnitudes which may be potentially
small. To the best of our knowledge, we also provide the first national study of the effects of
comprehensive bans on ETS-related morbidities among older children. Third, we clarify if the
impact of the smoking bans on infant health is due to “own effects”, that is a reduction in smoking
by a pregnant woman exposed to these restrictions, or due to external effects, that is a reduction in a
non-smoking mother’s exposure to ETS because others around her are smoking less. Finally, we
provide the first direct estimates in the literature informing the displacement hypothesis by
assessing whether comprehensive smoking bans increase the probability that a smoker will now
smoke at home with children present.
III.

Data
We use two restricted datasets with geographic identifiers to investigate the effects of both

local and state comprehensive smoking bans on the health of children and infants and on the
likelihood of smoking at home. Each dataset offers unique advantages, is nationally representative,
and has a large sample size, allowing us to maximize statistical power and assess differential effects
across socio-demographic factors.
U.S. Vital Statistics Natality Data
In order to assess the effects of comprehensive smoking bans on birth outcomes we utilize
data on individual birth records from the U.S Vital Statistics Natality Detail Files. Detailed
information on all individual births occurring in the 50 states and D.C. are submitted by hospitals to
state vital registration offices, which is then reported to the National Center for Health Statistics
(NCHS). Information on each birth includes date and place of birth, along with the demographic
characteristics of the mother and father such as age, race, education, marital status, whether born in
the U.S., and parity. In order to minimize measurement error, we utilize exact information on the
8

timing of enactment and match the policy data based on maternal county of residence and the start
of pregnancy (month and year). The start of pregnancy is imputed based on gestational age and
birth month. 7
We utilize data from 1990 through 2012, representing 86.3 million U.S. births. This period
enveloped the first comprehensive smoking bans in three municipalities in CA to the proliferation
of these bans over the next two decades when almost 900 municipalities enacted a comprehensive
smoking ban in at least one venue and almost two-thirds of the U.S. population were exposed. We
measure two categories of infant health: 1) birthweight; and 2) gestation. Birthweight is measured
as a continuous outcome and alternately as an indicator for low birthweight (weighing less than
2,500 grams). Gestational age is measured continuously in weeks, and also as an indicator for
whether the infant was born preterm (gestation < 37 weeks).
Self-reported information on maternal smoking during pregnancy is also available. 8 Birth
certificates are generally thought to provide a reasonably reliable source of data on prenatal
smoking status for large observational studies (Nielsen et al. 2014), although underreporting of
smoking status has been suggested for as much as 20-30% of smokers (Tong et al. 2013; Brachet
2013). 9 Our main specifications are based on reduced form intention-to-treat analyses, and thus do
not require any information on maternal information. We use information on maternal smoking
only in supplementary models to provide some indirect information on the channels underlying the
effects of the smoking bans on birth outcomes. In doing so, we note the limitation imposed by the
potential underreporting of smoking status.

7

Results are not sensitive to using a standard 40-week gestational period.
These outcomes are not reported by some states (for instance, CA, IN, NY, SD, OK) over all or part of our sample
period. We exclude births occurring in these states when analyzing these behaviors. Limiting all analyses to those
states with consistent information on smoking does not materially alter our results or conclusions.
9
Brachet (2013) provides an excellent discussion of how misclassification of maternal smoking in the natality files may
bias the policy effects of cigarette taxes and consequently the instrumental variables estimate of the effects of maternal
smoking on birthweight.
8

9

National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS)
The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) has used the NHIS to monitor the nation’s
health since 1957. In order to assess the effects of smoking bans on child health and on the venue of
smoking, we utilize information from the NHIS after the sampling plan redesign in 1997, spanning
1998-2013. Because we use the one year lag of the smoking ban policies in this analysis, these data
cover policy years 1997-2012. This results in a pooled sample of 167,328 children under the age of
18. The primary child health outcomes of interest, obtained via parental reports in the child health
files, measure adverse health conditions linked to or which may be exacerbated by ETS: asthma
(ever diagnosed; asthma attack in the past year; hospital emergency room visit related to asthma),
hay fever (past year), any respiratory allergies (past year), three or more ear infections (past year),
whether the child had an emergency room (ER) visit for any reason in the past year, and selfreported general health status.
The NHIS also includes a proxy measure for ETS inside the home in the 1998 Health
Promotion Supplements and the 2000, 2005, and 2010 Cancer Supplements, yielding 41,096 adults
with at least one child under age 18 residing in the home. The ETS exposure data are derived from
questions regarding smoking anywhere inside the home.
All NHIS waves include information on maternal and paternal demographic characteristics
such as age, race, education, marital status, whether born in the U.S., income and the smoking status
of the parents and other adult household members. The restricted NHIS data were accessed through
the Census Research Data Center.
Tobacco Policy
To capture information on smoking bans over time, we use the most complete dataset
detailing information on comprehensive smoking bans passed and implemented at the local (city
and county-level) and state levels compiled by American Nonsmokers’ Rights Foundation (ANRF).
10

For clarity, ANRF prefers the term 100% smoke-free laws (SFLs), though for consistency we
continue to use the term, comprehensive smoking bans. Comprehensive smoking bans are much
more exclusionary and complete compared to the popular clean indoor air acts (limited smoking
bans) of the 1980s and 1990s, which also excluded venues including worksites, restaurants and free
standing bars (USDHHS 2006; USDHHS 2007; Bonnie, et al, 2007a, Bonnie et al. 2007b).

In

general, comprehensive smoking bans mandate that all areas in these venues must be completely
smoke-free, with minor exceptions. Limited bans, in contrast, either exempt areas or groups,
permit smoking in enclosed, separately ventilated smoking rooms, or allow for other exemptions.
The ANRF data offer complete information on the coverage of the comprehensive smoking
bans in workplaces, restaurants, and bars, and the implementation date that the provisions became
fully effective. To measure ban exposure, we create a set of dichotomous indicators by locality and
year to document whether a given county in a given year had implemented a smoking ban in each
venue, and whether each ban is comprehensive or limited in scope. See Table 1 for more
description of sample coverage.
In our empirical models, in order to bypass collinearity across the enactment and implementation of
these separate bans and to capture the smoking restrictions in their strongest capacity, we further
construct a consolidated indicator for comprehensive smoking bans in all venues, which captures
localities that have enacted comprehensive bans across all three sites – workplaces, restaurants, and
bars. Though the modal locality introduces the bans in all three venues at the same time, it is more
common for localities to have restaurant and bar coverage before having workplace coverage than
the reverse; hence, this consolidated indicator, which would not turn on until all venues in the
locality have banned smoking, may pick up some cumulative effect from changing cultural norms
regarding smoking as these bans become more pervasive. In order to disentangle this timing further
and assess robustness to alternate definitions, we also test an indicator for ‘any comprehensive
11

smoking ban’, which signifies if the locality has enacted a comprehensive smoking ban in any of the
three venues.
Our use of these data (1990 – 2012) add value to the literature, as prior studies primarily use
information on clean indoor air legislation or comprehensive smoking bans at the state level only;
our analyses utilize all currently available information at both the state and local (county and city)
levels in order to minimize measurement bias and fully capture an individual’s potential exposure to
comprehensive smoking bans in their vicinity, over the longest period of time used to date. 10 There
were a total of 4,984 ban changes across venues and ban types, and specifically 1,273 counties
experienced the strictest ban (comprehensive bans in all venues). Decomposing this policy
variation, 24 states implemented comprehensive bans in all venues covering a total of 1,193
counties that did not previously have bans, while 80 counties implemented comprehensive bans at
the local (county or city) level. Statewide bans accounted for 80.5 percent of treated births, and
county bans accounted for the remaining 19.5 percent.
Information on state-level taxes for cigarettes is obtained from The Tax Burden on Tobacco:
Historical Compilation (Orzechowski and Walker 2012). We match information on the
comprehensive and limited smoking bans and cigarette excise taxes to the birth records based on
maternal county of residence and the start of pregnancy (month and year). We match the policy
information based on start of pregnancy, rather than date of delivery, since infant health is affected
by in utero exposure to ETS over the course of the pregnancy. Furthermore, evidence suggests that
prenatal smoking is most responsive during the first trimester (Colman, Grossman, and Joyce 2003;
Colman and Joyce 2003). For the records in the NHIS, we match the comprehensive and limited
smoking bans and cigarette excise taxes based on county of residence and the one year prior to the

10
Pesko et al. (2016) show that incorporating local policy variation, in their case sub-state variation in the cigarette
price vs. more aggregated state-level cigarettes prices and taxes, can lead to significant differences in the estimates of
the policy response.

12

interview date, which allows for a one-year exposure lag mirroring the 9-month exposure lag (over
the pregnancy period) utilized in the birth certificate data. Since we would expect comprehensive
smoking bans to affect adult smoking behavior first and child health second, we do not incorporate
a lag when examining the adult outcome (i.e., whether anyone smokes inside the home).
Table 1 presents means for our analysis samples of interest, births to mothers with a highschool degree or less and births to unmarried mothers with a high school degree or less, relative to
all births. These means are derived from the Vital Statistics Natality files, and Table 2 presents
outcome means for the samples based on the NHIS. Table 1 shows the percent of the samples
exposed to comprehensive smoking bans by venue (comprehensive), limited smoking bans (limited)
and no bans over the sample period from 1990-2012. Over our sample period, nearly 20% of all
births were in localities with comprehensive coverage in at least one venue and nearly 11% of all
births were covered by comprehensive smoking bans in all three venues. In 1995, less than 2% of
the population resided in a locality or state with a comprehensive smoking ban in each of the three
venues. By 2012, over 48% of the population was exposed to a comprehensive worksite ban, over
64% were exposed to full bans in restaurants, and over 60% were exposed to these restrictions in
freestanding bars.
IV.

Methodology
Our empirical analysis is based on specifications that directly link the comprehensive bans

to infant and child health outcomes. The research design is a difference-in-differences (DD)
approach focusing on the reduced-form effect of being exposed to a locality with comprehensive
smoking bans in workplaces, restaurants, and bars. For each measure of infant and child health, we
estimate the following baseline health production function:
(1)

Hicst = αcs + θt + BANcst-1 β + Xicst λ + Taxst-1 δ + νicst

13

In equation (1), H denotes a specific measure of infant or child health (e.g. birthweight,
gestation, respiratory ailments) for a given birth i occurring in county c in state s and year t (in the
birth records) or for a given child i residing in county c in state s and interviewed in year t (in the
NHIS). BAN denotes the vector of smoking bans, including types of bans, effective in the county
(of birth, in the birth records; of residence in the NHIS) during pregnancy (for the birth records) or
during the year prior to interview date (in the NHIS). The vector X represents individual
characteristics. In models for birth outcomes, X includes maternal characteristics such as age,
educational attainment, marital status, and race/ethnicity. In models for child health, based on the
NHIS, X includes child characteristics (age, gender, race/ethnicity and birth weight) and maternal
characteristics (age, educational attainment, and marital status). All models also control for the
cigarette excise tax, which previous studies have found to affect maternal smoking and infant health
(Colman, Grossman, and Joyce 2003; Colman and Joyce 2003; Evans and Ringel 1999). 11 Equation
(1) further includes year (θt) and area fixed effects (αcs) at the county level in our preferred models
(and alternately at the state level, for comparison), which respectively control for any national
trends, county-specific time-invariant unobservable influences such as tobacco sentiment, strength
of the tobacco economy in the state (for instance, tobacco growing states), and other fixed area-level
factors such as culture and geography. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and account
for any correlation of the errors within state cells and over time. 12
The parameter of interest is β, which captures the net reduced-form effect of the types of
smoking bans on infant and child health, operating through any reinforcing and/or counteracting

11

Estimates are robust to excluding cigarette excise taxes from the specification. In models with the cigarette tax as the
outcome measure, the coefficient of the comprehensive smoking ban is statistically and economically insignificant.
Thus, we do not find any indication that the timing of the bans predicts or is systematically correlated with within-state
changes in the cigarette excise tax.
12
We estimate all models using ordinary least square. Results are robust to estimation via logit or probit regression for
dichotomous outcomes.

14

mechanisms. This effect is identified off the variation in the enactment of smoking bans within
counties over time.
We extend these specifications further to address specific issues. With respect to infants,
prenatal in-utero exposure may result from maternal smoking as well as maternal ETS exposure
from cigarette consumption of other family members or individuals even if the pregnant woman
herself does not smoke. Thus, we also estimate equation (1) alternately controlling for maternal
smoking. Comparison of the effect magnitudes between these specifications (excluding and
controlling for maternal smoking) can inform on whether, and to what extent, any potential effects
on infant health are being driven by the mother’s own smoking or by maternal exposure to ETS.
Low birthweight can result from preterm birth or intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR).
Smoking is the leading cause of IUGR, and fetal growth is also affected by prenatal ETS exposure
(Windham et al. 2000). The causes of preterm birth are not as well understood (Institute of
Medicine 2007), though smoking and ETS exposure are potential risk factors (Windham et al.
2000). In order to separate these effects, we also define a measure of fetal growth, which is
birthweight adjusted for gestational age.
We focus the main analyses to children and infants born to low-educated mothers, with at
most a high-school degree. These infants and children are a particularly vulnerable group given that
lower-educated mothers are significantly more likely to smoke during pregnancy (18.8% prevalence
rate relative to mothers with some college or higher educational attainment, who have a prevalence
rate of 6%), and are also more likely to live in neighborhoods with a higher smoking prevalence in
general, thus exposing themselves and their children to ETS. Results for the full sample are reported
in the appendix tables, and generally show similar patterns though expectedly smaller effect
magnitudes as the bans impact higher-educated mothers to a much lesser degree.

15

Next, we estimate versions of the above specifications directly linking the comprehensive
ban to the venue of smoking among adult smokers, based on information from the restricted NHIS.
Specifically, we assess the displacement hypothesis and test whether adults exposed to these
comprehensive smoking bans in workplaces, restaurants, or bars are more likely to smoke at home
with children present.
Finally, we conduct a series of checks to assess: 1) timing of the effects and differential prepolicy trends; 2) robustness to alternate measures and controls for the smoking bans; 3)
heterogeneity in the policy effects across urban / rural counties; 4) heterogeneity in the policy effect
across mother’s marital status and the child’s age (in models of child health based on the NHIS); 5)
potential mediating effects of the bans through prenatal alcohol use; and 6) robustness to combining
health outcomes in the NHIS within a broader health “index” in order to minimize type I error from
multiple testing. 13
V.

Results

V.A. Birth Outcomes
Table 3 presents estimates of equation (1) for infant health outcomes based on the birth
records. These models consider the strictest combination of smoking bans, assessing how birth
outcomes differ in localities that have enacted comprehensive bans in all three venues – worksites,
restaurants, and freestanding bars – relative to two separate control localities. Panels A and B in the
tables represent the differences in these reference groups. In Panel A, the reference group
comprises all other localities that do not have a comprehensive ban in all venues, whether or not
they enact any smoking ban. In Panel B, the reference group comprises localities that have no ban
of any kind; localities with limited and non-comprehensive bans across all venues are excluded

13

We thank the anonymous reviewers for suggesting some of these checks.

16

from these analyses. This comparison underscores the potential maximal effect by contrasting the
two extremes in terms of comprehensive bans in all three venues versus no bans in any venue. 14
We report models alternately controlling for state vs. county fixed effects for comparison,
since, as noted earlier, most of the policy variation (80.5%) in comprehensive bans is driven by
statewide changes. In discussing the estimates, however, we focus on models with county fixed
effects as these rely only on within-county variation in the implementation of bans for
identification. In contrast, identifying variation in models with state fixed effects utilizes both
within-state variation in the bans over time (due to statewide policy changes, for instance) as well as
any sub-state cross-county variation in bans (due to local policy changes). Model (1) in Panel B
suggests that comprehensive bans in all venues are associated with a 13 gram increase in mean
birthweight, which translates to about a 0.4% increase relative to the sample mean. The effect
magnitude, with only the state fixed effects, is somewhat larger, suggesting an 18 gram increase.
The smoking restrictions are also associated with a 0.24 – 0.3 percentage point decline in the
likelihood of low birthweight (3-4% decrease relative to the sample mean), though this estimate is
not statistically significant at conventional levels in the model with county fixed effects. The
potentially larger response for low birthweight is consistent with prior studies that also find larger
impacts of income-support policies and other transfer programs at the lower tail of the birthweight
distribution (Wehby, Dave, and Kaestner 2016; Hoynes, Miller, and Simon 2015; Almond, Hoynes,
and Schanzenbach 2011). This estimated response captures the effect of a locality with no ban in
any venue imposing a comprehensive ban in all venues. This extreme comparison increases the
standard errors as localities with limited bans are not part of analysis.
Furthermore, in order to assess whether there is heterogeneity in the policy response if the
policy is driven by a statewide enactment of the ban vs. a local change, we also estimated models
14

We also estimate more disaggregated specifications, which separately control for the other bans (discussed later under
“Specification Checks”).

17

with state fixed effects that rely only on the statewide variation in comprehensive bans. 15 These
models yield very similar effect magnitudes, suggesting an improvement in birthweight by 15
grams and a reduction in low birthweight by 0.21 percentage point. Furthermore, when we
separately control for comprehensive bans originating at the local level in the same models, the
effect magnitudes for both state-driven and local-driven policy changes are very similar, and these
estimates are contained within the confidence intervals of the estimates in Panel B of Table 3 for all
outcomes.
The increase in birthweight (and reduction in low birthweight) may reflect either an
improvement in fetal growth and/or an increase in gestational age (reduction in preterm birth). We
consider gestational age and preterm birth in models (3) and (4). Essentially, we find a significant
increase in gestational age by about 0.09 weeks (0.2%; model 3), though this increase does not seem
to operate at the lower tail of the gestation distribution and we find no significant effects on the
likelihood of a preterm birth (coefficient magnitude corresponds to about a 2% decline). Model (5)
informs whether the comprehensive smoking bans have an impact on birthweight conditional on
gestational age by presenting estimates for fetal growth, defined as birthweight in grams relative to
gestational age in weeks. We find an increase in fetal growth by about 0.2 gram (or 0.2%), though
the effect is insignificant when including county fixed effects.
Health-promoting effects of comprehensive smoking bans on birth outcomes capture two
potential channels. The first channel represents improvements in infant health from reduced
exposure to secondhand smoke by pregnant women, as others around her are incentivized to reduce
their smoking behaviors due to the bans. In contrast to this external effect, improvements in infant
health may also be realized from a direct reduction in prenatal smoking. In models (6)-(10), we
control for prenatal smoking in order to isolate the external effects of smoking restrictions on infant

15

Estimates are not reported and available upon request from the authors.

18

health through reduced exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS). Including prenatal
smoking in the specification is potentially problematic because the mediator is itself endogenous,
and hence would lead to biased estimates (Angrist & Pischke 2009). 16 Furthermore, as many as 2030% of smokers may misreport (Tong et al. 2013; Brachet 2013), which can lead to an attenuation
of the estimated effect of prenatal smoking on infant health. These caveats notwithstanding, the
magnitudes expectedly decline somewhat when we control for maternal smoking, suggesting that at
least part of the improvements in infant health are driven by a reduction in prenatal smoking.
Specifically, comparing models (1) – (5) to models (6)–(10), approximately 15-20% of the effect on
birth outcomes is due to a reduction in prenatal smoking (an “own-effect” from the mother reducing
her own smoking due to the smoking restrictions), and the remaining 80-85% of the effect may be
due to potential reductions in ETS. 17
We also estimate models for samples restricted to mothers who do not smoke, and find
similar effects which is validating. Furthermore, in models which treat prenatal smoking as an
outcome, we find that comprehensive bans in all venues reduce the probability of prenatal smoking
by about 0.008 (0.8 percentage point). Prior work (Evans and Ringel 1999; Wehby et al. 2013)
suggests that prenatal smoking reduces birthweight by about 200-400 grams. In our specification
(model 6 in Table 3 Panel B), the coefficient of prenatal smoking is -214 (p-value = 0.000) also
suggesting about a 200 gram decrease in birthweight associated with prenatal smoking. Combining
these two estimates [-0.008 * -214 = 1.7] suggests that the mean increase in birthweight in the
population, from the channel that operates from cumulative smoking bans to reduced prenatal

16

As an alternative, we also directly estimated the effect of the comprehensive bans on the joint probability between
low birthweight and prenatal smoking using multinomial logit models (MNL). The marginal changes in these joint
probabilities allow us to pick up potential interactions between infant health and prenatal smoking, and assess both
unconditional and conditional (on prenatal smoking) effects of the comprehensive SFLs on infant health. Results from
these analyses also suggested that about 20% of the observed effect of smoking bans on low birthweight represents an
“own-effect” operating through a reduced probability of the mother smoking during pregnancy.
17
This decomposition is back-of-the-envelope and should be interpreted with caution.

19

smoking, would be 1.7 grams. Model 1 in Table 3 Panel B suggests a mean increase in birthweight
of about 12 grams. Thus, at least about 14% of this total effect is due to a reduction in prenatal
smoking, and the rest is due to potential decrease in ETS exposure by pregnant women and their
unborn children. 18
Models in Table 3 further indicate that higher state excise taxes on cigarettes are
consistently and significantly associated with an improvement in infant health (higher birthweight,
reduced likelihood of low birthweight, longer gestation, and higher fetal growth). We find elasticity
estimates of birthweight and low birthweight with respect to cigarette taxes that are consistent with
the literature (Evans and Ringel 1999). 19
The specifications in Panel A in Table 3 assess the effects of a combined comprehensive ban
on smoking in all three venues (worksites, restaurants, and bars), though this time the reference
group includes all other localities. Thus, the reference group is a mixture of all localities that may
impose no bans at all, or comprehensive bans in just a few venues (but not all three), or those which
impose limited bans. Since the reference group includes localities which also have smoking
restrictions, though albeit not comprehensive smoking bans in all three venues combined, the effect
magnitudes are expectedly smaller. Nevertheless, these estimates continue to suggest that
cumulative smoking bans in all three venues combined are associated with improvements in infant
health, and much of the effect appears realized through potential decreases in second-hand smoke
exposure, comparing models (1)-(5) with models (6)-(10).

18

We further assess heterogeneity in the infant health effects among low-educated mothers by marital status. These
models suggest improvements in infant health born to both married and unmarried mothers, though with results
consistently indicating larger and significant effects among low-educated married mothers. This may reflect
complementarity in smoking between both spouses, and reduced exposure to ETS in the home if the husband’s smoking
is moderated because of the smoking restrictions. Taxes on the other hand have a much larger effect for low-educated
unmarried mothers, which may reflect this group’s relatively lower income levels. Studies have shown that smoking
rates among lower income individuals are generally more responsive to cigarette excise taxes (Colman and Remler
2008).
19
Estimates from models (1) and (2) in Table 3 imply a tax elasticity of 0.0014 for birthweight and 0.022 for low
birthweight.

20

The estimates discussed in Tables 3 represent an average effect realized over all births born
to mothers with lower educational attainment. It should also be noted that all of these estimates
presented and discussed above are still “intention-to-treat” (ITT)-type average population effects.
That is, these effects are averaged over two groups – those impacted by the smoking bans and those
not impacted. Conditioning on prenatal smoking, the improvement in infant health is most likely
operating through a reduction in ETS exposure as adults around the pregnant woman and in her
locality of residence cut down on their smoking. These bans should not have any major first-order
effects on non-smoking mothers who are not exposed to ETS. Data from the NHANES (1999-2000
and 2001-2002), based on serum cotinine levels as a biomarker of exposure, indicate that about 4351% of non-smokers are exposed to secondhand tobacco smoke (USDHHS 2006). This is the
population – those who are being exposed to ETS – that would presumably experience the largest
benefits from being covered by a comprehensive ban in all venues. We can use this prevalence of
the population exposed to ETS (about 50%) to roughly inflate the ITT estimates by a factor of two
and derive a ballpark treatment-on-the-treated effect. That is, among the population that is exposed
to ETS, comprehensive bans in all three venues are associated with 0.6% increase in mean
birthweight and about a 5% reduction in the likelihood of a low birthweight infant.
V. B. Child Health Outcomes
As described above, we find that comprehensive smoking bans are effective in improving
infant birth outcomes, among low-educated mothers. We extend these analyses to older children
using data from the NHIS; these results are reported in Table 6-8. These results expand the
literature by providing the first national estimates of the impact of comprehensive smoking bans on
child health outcomes, and a direct test of whether the bans are impacting the likelihood of a smoker
consuming cigarettes inside the home with children present.

21

For consistency and in order to focus on vulnerable groups, we continue to present and
discuss results for children with low-educated mothers. The child health outcomes considered are
health conditions which have been linked to exposure to ETS. The smaller sample size of the
NHIS, compared to the Natality Files, reduces the precision of these estimates, and so they should
be interpreted as suggestive. This limitation notwithstanding, there is indication that comprehensive
smoking bans are also effective in reducing adverse respiratory health conditions among children in
low-educated households.
Table 6 reports estimates for the combined effect of having comprehensive smoking bans in
worksites, restaurants and bars, with state and county fixed effects. For each respiratory outcome,
we present models for two samples: 1) children of lower educated mothers; 2) children of lower
educated mothers who have been diagnosed with asthma. The second sample allows us to
investigate whether smoking restrictions affect respiratory events among a group of children who
would be especially vulnerable to adverse health effects due to ETS. Each row represents a separate
specification by health outcome. Estimates for the full sample suggest a similar pattern of
estimates, albeit expectedly with smaller magnitudes. These results and those for additional
samples are reported in the appendix.
In general, we find that comprehensive smoking bans are associated with a reduction in
respiratory allergies, asthma attacks, ER visits, three or more ear infections and reports of fair or
poor health. These effects are statistically significant and the size of the effect varies, as expected
with the level of vulnerability of the children. For example, among children living with a lower
educated mother, there is evidence that comprehensive smoking restrictions in all venues leads to
substantial declines in adverse respiratory conditions and any ER visit in the past year. The latter
effect is especially sizeable at about 5 percentage points (over a 25% decrease). The effects are

22

magnified among children of lower educated mothers and who have been diagnosed with asthma,
though with the inclusion of county fixed effects we do lose precision with the smaller samples.
It should be noted that while children may not be necessarily exposed to ETS directly from
worksites, comprehensive smoking bans in workplaces may induce adults to quit smoking or smoke
less, thus reducing children’s exposure to ETS overall. Smoking restrictions in bars would also be
expected to exert their effect in a similar manner, whereas restrictions in restaurants may reduce
children’s direct exposure to ETS while in restaurants as well as reduce their exposure overall in all
places if adults are smoking less in general, which is consistent with prior work (Carton et al. 2016;
Anger et al., 2011; Shetty et al. 2011; Fichtenberg et al. 2002; Eisner et al., 1998).
The estimates discussed thus far indicate that, on the net, comprehensive smoke-free laws
have the capacity to improve both infant and child health. However, it is not clear whether these
improvements are being moderated by any counteracting effect due to adults shifting their smoking
to inside their home as a result of comprehensive restrictions imposed on their smoking behaviors in
other places, workplaces, restaurant and bars. That is, if the smoking restrictions are displacing at
least some of the smoking from the banned places to inside the home, where children or expectant
mothers may be present, then observed improvements in infant and child health may be smaller than
would otherwise be possible. Table 8 directly assesses potential displacement by estimating models
for whether adults (in lower-educated households with children) are more or less likely to smoke
inside the home (on one or more days per week) as a result of the comprehensive smoking bans.
Conditional on living with children who are younger than 18 years of age, we consider 3 groups: 1)
the entire subsample as defined, 2) those among the subsample that are also current smokers; 3)
those in the subsample that are current or former smokers.
Table 8 is presented in two panels. Panel A provides results for a reference group of all
localities without comprehensive smoking bans in all three venues, which could include those with
23

limited smoking bans. Coefficient estimates in Panel A are generally negative and in many
instances, economically meaningful, but not statistically significant given the dilution of the
reference group.
Turning to the results in Panel B, these are expectedly larger in magnitude and generally
significant. The reference group here is all localities with no ban of any type, offering the strongest
“treatment” as a locality with no ban switches to a comprehensive ban in all venues. Specifically, in
models (1) and (4) we find negative but insignificant effects. However, this group includes never
and former smoking adults, who should be minimally impacted by these bans. 20 Next, consider the
group that should most likely be affected by the bans in terms of their venue of smoking – current
smokers – in models (2) and (5). We find consistent evidence that comprehensive smoking
restrictions in all venues are associated with a reduction in smoking inside the home where children
are present. About 60% of smokers in the NHIS have smoked inside the home on at least one day
in the past week. In fact, the estimates presented Table 8 Panel B suggest a sizeable decline of 1122 percentage points in the prevalence of smoking inside the home, or about an 18-36% decrease
relative to the mean prevalence. We also expand the sample to include both current and former
smokers (models 3 and 6), as it is possible that smoking bans may affect the duration of smoking
abstinence and relapse among former smokers. The model with county fixed effects suggests a
smaller though significant 6 percentage points decline (10% relative to the mean) in the likelihood
of smoking at home. Therefore, not surprisingly we find that the largest effects are expectedly
realized among current smokers. 21 Given the lack of evidence of displacement, our results suggest
a positive transmission channel whereby the smoking bans may be further reducing children and
pregnant women’s exposure to ETS by reducing other adult members’ smoking inside the home.

20
The NHIS question specifically asks “Does ANYONE smoke inside the home?” and is asked of only the sample
adults. Never smokers may be impacted if they are living with a former or current smoker.
21
When we stratify our analyses among low-educated mothers across marital status, we find generally similar sized
negative effects on smoking at home across both groups.

24

Adda and Cornaglia (2010) found that bans in restaurants and bars reduce the time that smokers
spend in these venues and increase their time spent at home; our results suggest that this increase in
time spent at home does not translate into additional smoking inside the home where children
present. 22
This reduction in smoking inside the home likely reflects a reduction in the overall addictive
smoking stock. There is evidence that comprehensive smoking restrictions are associated with
reduced smoking participation and a higher likelihood of smoking cessation (USDHHS 2006;
USDHHS 2007; Bonnie et al. 2007a; Bonnie et al. 2007b; Anger et al. 2011; Carton et al. 2016).
Thus, if adults are less likely to smoke in general, and if current smokers are smoking less (and less
frequently), this would lead to reduced addictive smoking stock and a reduced urge to smoke when
at home. Relatedly, as smoking bans reduced smoking participation and consumption, this
“blanket” decline also extends to a decline in smoking at home.
Our findings of negative effects of a higher cigarette excise tax on smoking inside the home
is consistent with this hypothesis. Higher cigarette taxes should not have any first-order effects on
the venue of smoking since they do not change the relative cost of smoking at home versus outside.
Hence, as higher cigarette taxes reduce smoking in general, this decline – as with the
comprehensive smoking bans – also extends to a decline in smoking at home.
VI.

Specification Checks
To account for additional considerations, we implement various specification checks. First,

we test two alternate definitions of smoking bans: a) any comprehensive ban in place (i.e, in
workplaces, restaurants, or bars) and b) any ban in place, limited or comprehensive. These
alternative definitions may better account for initial effects in states and localities with early bans in
at least one venue and a potentially long lag between initial implementation and having
22

This does not preclude children being exposed to ETS elsewhere, but on the net our estimates suggest that
comprehensive smoking bans have had significant beneficial health effects for children.

25

comprehensive bans in all three venues. Smoke-free indoor locations may become the norm in such
areas even before formal implementation, which may cause us to underestimate the effects of indoor
smoking ban policies in our main models. On the other hand, informal or limited bans may also be
less of a deterrent and therefore weaker than formal comprehensive bans. Table 5 presents
estimates of the effects of “any comprehensive ban – in at least one venue” on infant health, and
Table 7 presents corresponding estimates for older children’s health. These results for a
comprehensive ban in any venue are qualitatively similar to the results for a combined
comprehensive ban in all venues and continue to indicate improvements in child health. The effect
magnitudes are generally smaller when compared with the effect of a comprehensive ban in all
venues. When we consider a broader definition, which captures any comprehensive or limited ban
in any venue, the effects are smaller and statistically insignificant, and in the county fixed effects
models, these effects of any comprehensive or limited ban become essentially zero. 23
We find these results reassuring in that they are consistent with a “dose-response”
relationship. Stronger, more encompassing coverage is associated with larger effects. The
strongest health effects emerge when a locality with no bans switches to comprehensive bans in all
venues (Tables 3 and 6, Panel B); effects are still significant but slightly smaller when an average
locality with no comprehensive bans (this could include a locality with limited bans or no bans at
all) switches to comprehensive bans in all venues (Tables 3 and 6, Panel A); effects are generally
significant but again weaker if an average locality with no comprehensive bans (this could include a
locality with limited bans or no bans at all) switches to a comprehensive ban in at least one venue
(Tables 5 and 7); and finally, effects are insignificant and close to zero if an average locality with no
bans institutes some ban (either limited or comprehensive in at least one venue), capturing the
“weakest” form of coverage across these specifications.

23

Results are available upon request.

26

We also separately estimated effects of comprehensive workplace bans and comprehensive
bans in bars and restaurants. While the patterns suggest that both are associated with improvements
in infant health, the effects tend to be stronger and more significant with respect to the workplace
bans. For instance, with respect to the reduction in low birthweight associated with a
comprehensive ban in all three venues, about two-thirds of this reduction is coming from a
comprehensive workplace ban, and about a third is due to a comprehensive ban in bars and
restaurants. The stronger effects for workplace restrictions may be due to two reasons: 1) these are
more salient as a mechanism for infants and children, as adults who are exposed to these restrictions
may be more likely to reduce their smoking; 2) it is more common for localities to have restaurant
and bar coverage before having workplace coverage, and thus we may pick up a cumulative effect
from changing cultural norms regarding smoking as these bans become more pervasive.
Some studies in the literature (for instance, Adda and Cornaglia 2006) utilize a population
coverage measure to capture exposure to the smoking restrictions. In alternate models, we tested a
continuous measure of the percent of the state population that is covered by comprehensive bans in
all venues. Estimates from these models are in line with the effects of the comprehensive ban
indicator, discussed above. Based on the coverage measure, we find that moving from 0 to 100%
coverage would improve birthweight by 13 grams, reduce low birthweight by 0.2 percentage point,
raise gestation by 0.07 week, and increase fetal growth by 0.22 gram (estimates which are very
similar to those reported in Table 3 Panel B).
Given that it may take time for smoking norms to change and it may also require multiple
attempts for smokers to quit successfully when exposed to bans (or it may take some cumulative
exposure period to the bans before smokers are incentivized to change their behaviors), there is a
strong potential for smoking bans to have an impact on infant health with some lag and for the
effects to possibly compound over time. To further disentangle some of these effects and their
27

timing, we estimate an event study specification and present the results in Table 4 and in Figures 1A
– 1D. Disentangling the timing reduces precision. However, the results are validating and
underscore three points. First, estimates are robust to whether the analyses are restricted to evertreated counties (Table 4 Panel A and Figures 1A, 1B) or all counties (Table 4 Panel B and Figures
1C, 1D), addressing the concern that trends in counties which never institute a comprehensive ban
over the sample period may be systematically different and thus not a valid counterfactual. 24
Second, there are no lead or “placebo” effects of the comprehensive smoking bans on infant birth
outcomes; positive health effects of the comprehensive smoking bans in all venues materialize only
after the mother has been exposed to the bans, not before. Finally, we do find some evidence of a
lag in the policy response. Interestingly, the lagged effects are generally stronger and are consistent
with a) smoking behaviors responding to the bans with a lag; and/or b) infants responding to both in
utero exposure as well as an improvement in maternal health endowment due to maternal exposure
to the bans prior to pregnancy.
To explore whether smoking bans have a larger effect in areas where smoking is more
prevalent, we stratified our analyses of infant health and children’s health by urban/rural status
(Appendix). 25 On the one hand, since smoking rates are higher among rural residents (approx. 18%
currently), smoking bans may have the capacity to result in larger (absolute) declines in smoking
rates and lead to stronger health effects for children. However, rural residents may also be less
likely to spend time in restaurants or bars, which may moderate the effects of smoking restrictions,
and the lower population density may further moderate any negative effects on smoking through
peer effects and the social multiplier. Rural and urban residents also differ in their addictive

24

When the analyses are restricted to ever-treated units, the lead effects test, for instance, whether counties that are 0-4
years away from implementing a ban exhibit a different time trend than counties that are more than four years from
implementing (but do eventually implement within our time period).
25
Stratifying based on a locality’s smoking rate would not be appropriate as the prevalence of smoking (and the change
in this prevalence) is endogenous to the smoking bans.

28

nicotine stock, which may lead to differential responses to the bans. Hence, a priori, it is unclear
whether a strict smoking ban would have stronger or weaker effects in rural vs. urban counties.
Overall, we do not find consistent differences in the estimates across the urban vs. rural samples.
Some results were larger in magnitude among the rural sample, which may be because of higher
smoking prevalence in rural compared to urban areas, and some of our estimates, notably effects on
infant health (though differences in some cases were not statistically significant) were larger among
the urban samples. A key point is that our results do not appear to be uniformly driven by children
residing in rural areas or urban areas.
Another concern relates to the possibility that the earliest smoking bans may be endogenous
if the most health-conscious communities are the early adopters. We re-estimated all models for
infant health over a restricted time period (1995-2009), following Gao and Baughman (2017),
thereby bypassing the early adopters. Truncating the end period of the sample to 2009 (and
alternately to 2007) further addresses the concern of potential bias due to a change in the
composition of births if the recession and subsequent recovery impacted fertility decisions. Our
estimates are fully robust to limiting the sample period. 26
Next, we consider the influence of prenatal alcohol consumption on birth outcomes. Given
that some studies suggest that smoking bans in bars may have reduced smoking among heavy
drinkers (Anger et al. 2011; and Carton et al., 2016), we test whether prenatal alcohol consumption

26
Gao and Baughman (2017) find that the smoking bans are not associated with any significant improvement in infant
health based on data from 1995-2009. Given that we continue to find a clinically meaningful and statistically
significant increase in birthweight and reduction in low birthweight even when we restrict the sample period, the choice
of the sample period is clearly not the primary driver of the difference in the results. The difference is likely due to how
the bans are codified. We find significantly larger improvements in infant health when comparing localities with a
combined comprehensive smoking bans in all three venues relative to localities with no bans at all. In contrast, Gao and
Baughman (2017) consider the effects of any comprehensive ban (in at least one venue) relative to all other localities
(which may have no bans or limited bans); these effects would expectedly be muted. Another factor that may have
attenuated effects in Gao and Baughman (2017) is that they do not appear to exploit the month of conception in
matching the bans to the birth records. Instead, they use a more aggregate measure, all births in year t in a giving
locality are matched with the county share of the population that is protected by a ban in that year.

29

may be mediating the effects of the comprehensive bans on infant health. 27 First, we use prenatal
alcohol use as an outcome and test whether a comprehensive smoking ban all three venues
influences maternal drinking. We find the estimate to be close to zero in magnitude and
insignificant. Second, we estimate our model for 1990-2006 (period over which prenatal alcohol
use is available in the natality files) and alternately include/exclude measures of prenatal alcohol
use. The estimated effects of comprehensive smoking bans remains robust. 28 We are not able to
test for mediating effects operating through changes in the use of other complementary substances
(for instance, prenatal marijuana or other drug use). However, if present, these effects are likely to
be secondary or tertiary, and prenatal smoking and exposure to ETS remain the most plausible firstorder channels of effects.
Finally, we test a combined index of respiratory problems and a more general index of
health problems in the NHIS, in order to boost statistical power and guard against the type I error
associated with multiple testing. 29 Following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007), we construct a
standardized index combining the past-year respiratory conditions and a broader measure that also
adds the other past-year measures of health from the NHIS (listed in Table 2). These models
indicate that a comprehensive ban in all venues significantly reduces respiratory problems and
health problems among children in low-educated households by 0.06 to 0.08 standard deviation; as
with our disaggregated results, the health improvements are magnified in children who had
previously been diagnosed with asthma (0.2 standard deviation improvement).
VII.

Discussion

27

Adult alcohol consumption would not influence child respiratory health, and hence this analysis is limited to the birth
outcomes.
28
This exercise is meant to be suggestive and should be interpreted with caution given that measures of prenatal alcohol
use in the natality data are not very reliable and only available until 2006 (and until 2002 in the case of a more detailed
measure of number of drinks consumed).
29
We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.

30

As evidence of the negative effects of environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) has mounted, an
increasingly popular public policy response has been to impose restrictions on smoking through
comprehensive smoking bans. The CDC and IOM, amidst evidence that smoking bans reduce
smoking prevalence and adult non-smokers’ exposure to ETS, recommend that states and localities
enact complete bans on smoking in all non-residential indoor locations, including worksites,
restaurants, and bars. However, a key link necessary for a comprehensive evaluation of the
effectiveness of smoking bans has been understudied in the literature including the CDC and IOM
reports. Specifically, very few studies have assessed how smoking bans impact the health of
children and infants. The rationale for smoke-free laws implicitly presumes there are public health
gains from reducing adult cigarette consumption and declines in adult ETS exposure that extend to
children. This presumption may be incorrect if smokers shift from consuming cigarettes at 100%
smoke-free work and other public places to smoking at home (when children, infants, or pregnant
women are present). Such displacement as a result of comprehensive smoking bans can potentially
increase the prevalence of smoking at home and lead to higher ETS exposures among children. On
the one hand, decreases in adult smoking prevalence as a result of the smoking bans may reduce
ETS exposure among children, infants, and pregnant women. Without information on the link
between smoking bans, potential shifts in smoking to the home, and the impact on child and infant
health, either the costs or benefits of interventions banning smoking may be understated, which in
turn may skew the proper evaluation of such policies.
Based on the most complete information on comprehensive smoking bans, which includes
both state-level bans as well as local county and city-level bans, we find robust evidence that the
health benefits of these restrictions, which prior studies have estimated for adults, also extend to
children and infants, particularly infants and children in low-educated households. 30 The effects are
30

Our estimates are qualitatively consistent with Simon (2014), who finds that tobacco control policy in the form of
higher cigarette taxes during the prenatal period imparts longer-term effects on the health of older children.

31

largest when the restrictions are the most binding and do not allow for any exemptions such as
separate designated smoking areas. We find minimal to weak effects of such limited bans which
generally have several exemptions and qualifications. The effects are also compounded when all
three comprehensive restrictions – in worksites, restaurants, and freestanding bars – are in place in a
given locality. Banning smoking in all three venues limits available options for smokers to carry on
the habit, thus increasing non-monetary costs, which in turn raises their effectiveness in reducing
smoking behaviors and thus ETS. We also find that most of the realized (about 80-85%) health
improvements in infant health are driven by a potential reduction in ETS exposure by pregnant
women, with the remainder driven by a direct reduction in prenatal smoking. The effect magnitudes
of a comprehensive smoking ban in all venues (workplace, restaurants, and bars), relative to no bans
at all, on birthweight and low birthweight are commensurate with between a $1-$2 increase in the
cigarette excise tax.
While these improvements in infant and child health are mostly driven by potentially
decreased exposure to ETS, it was also not clear whether these improvements are being moderated
by possible displacement of smoking to inside the home as more external places ban smoking. This
study provided some of the first direct estimates on displacement. We do not find any evidence that
adults are shifting their smoking behaviors to inside the home where children may be present. If
anything, we find significant evidence of a decrease in the likelihood that smoking occurs inside the
home among households with children, consistent with an overall reduction in the addictive stock
and an overall reduction in smoking behaviors.
Currently, about 60% of the population resides in localities which have completely banned
smoking in worksites, restaurants, and freestanding bars. As our estimates suggest strongest effects
for this compounded ban, there still remains considerable room for cumulative smoking restrictions
to take hold, which would have positive external spillovers on infant and child health. Our effect
32

magnitudes imply that expanding this coverage to 100% of the population can prevent between
approximately 1,110 – 1,750 low birthweight births among low-educated mothers, resulting in
potential economic cost savings of up to $111 million annually (in current dollars). 31 Health
improvements among older children would add to these economic benefits. Furthermore, given that
our estimates suggest stronger health improvements for children born in low-educated households,
cumulative smoking restrictions may play a role in flattening the socioeconomic gradient in infant
and child health.

31

See http://www.urbanchildinstitute.org/sites/all/files/databooks/07_CostOfPre-TermBirths_TUCI2008.ii.pdf for cost
estimates of low birthweight and preterm births.

33

References
Adams, Scott, Chad Cotti. 2008. “Drunk Driving after the Passage of Smoking Bans in Bars,”
Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-6): 1288-1305.
Adda, Jerome, Francesca Cornaglia. 2006. “Taxes, Cigarette Consumption, and Smoking Intensity,”
American Economic Review, 96(4), 1013-28.
Adda, Jerome, Francesca Cornaglia. 2010. “The Effects of Bans and Taxes on Passive Smoking,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(1), 1-32.
Almond, Douglas, Hilary Hoynes, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach. 2011. "Inside the War on
Poverty: The Impact of Food Stamps on Birth Outcomes" Review of Economics and Statistics,
93(2): 387-403.
Anger, Silke, Kvasnicka M, Siedler T. 2011. “One last puff? Public smoking bans and Smoking
Behavior,” Journal of Health Economics, 30(3): 591-601.
Angrist, Joshua D., Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics, Princeton, New
Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Been, J.V., Nurmatov, U.B., Cox, B., Nawrot, T.S., Van Schayck, C.P. and Sheikh, A., 2014. Effect
of smoke-free legislation on perinatal and child health: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The
Lancet, 383(9928), pp.1549-1560.
Bonnie Richard J., Kathleen Stratton, and Robert B. Wallace, 2007a, Ending the Tobacco Problem:
Blueprint for the Nation, Washington, D.C., The National Academies Press.
Bonnie Richard J., Kathleen Stratton, and Robert B. Wallace, 2007b, Committee on Reducing
Tobacco Use: Strategies, Barriers, and Consequences, Washington, D.C., The National Academies
Press.
Brauer, M. and Mannetje, A.T., 1998. Restaurant smoking restrictions and environmental tobacco
smoke exposure. American Journal of Public Health, 88(12), pp.1834-1836.
Carton, Thomas W., Michael Darden, John Levendis, Sang H. Lee, and Iben Ricket. 2016.
“Comprehensive Indoor Smoking Bans and Smoking Prevalence: Evidence from BRFSS.”
American Journal of Health Economics. 2(4):535-556.
Cesaroni G, Forastiere F, Agabiti N, Valente P, Zuccaro P, Perucci C “Effect of the Italian Smoking
Ban on Population Rates of Acute Coronary Events,” Preventive Cardiology, 2008;117:1183-1188.
Colman, G., Grossman, M. and Joyce, T., 2003. The effect of cigarette excise taxes on smoking
before, during and after pregnancy. Journal of Health Economics, 22(6), pp.1053-1072.
Colman, G.J. and Joyce, T., 2003. Trends in smoking before, during, and after pregnancy in ten
states. American journal of preventive medicine, 24(1), pp.29-35.
34

Colman, Gregory, and Dahlia Remler. 2008. “Vertical Equity Consequences of Very High Cigarette
Tax Increases: If the Poor are the Ones Smoking, How Could Cigarette Tax Increases be
Progressive?” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 27(2): 376-400.
Eisner, Mark D., Alexander K. Smith, and Paul D. Blanc. 1998. “Bartenders’ Respiratory Health
After Establishment of Smoke-Free Bars and Taverns,” Journal of the American Medical
Association. 280:1909-1914.
Evans, William N., Matthew C. Farrelly, Edward Montgomery. 1999. “Do Workplace Smoking
Bans Reduce Smoking?” American Economic Review, 89:728-747.
Evans, William and Jeanne S. Ringel. 1999. “Can Higher Cigarette Taxes Improve Birth
Outcomes?” Journal of Public Economics. 72: 135-154.
Faber, T., Been, J.V., Reiss, I.K., Mackenbach, J.P. and Sheikh, A., 2016. Smoke-free legislation
and child health. NPJ primary care respiratory medicine, 26, p.16067.
Farrelly, Matthew C., William N. Evans, and Anderw E. Sfekas. 1999. “The Impact of Workplace
Smoking Bans: Results from a National Survey,” Tobacco Control. 8(3):272-277.
Fichtenberg, Caroline M., Stanton A. Glantz. 2002. “Effect of Smoke-free Workplaces on Smoking
Behaviour: Systematic Review.” British Medical Journal. 325(7357):188.
Gao, Jiang, and Reagan A. Baughman. 2017. “Do Smoking Bans Improve Infant Health? Evidence
from U.S. Births: 1995-2009,” Eastern Economic Journal. 43(472-495).
Goodman, Patrick, Michelle Agnew, Marie McCaffrey, Gillian Paul, and Luke Clancy. 2007.
“Effects of the Irish Smoking Ban on Respiratory Health of Bar Workers and Air Quality in Dublin
Pubs.” Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine. 175: 840-845.
Hoynes, Hilary, Doug Miller and David Simon. 2015. "Income, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and
Infant Health." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1): 172-211.
Institute of Medicine. Butler, A.S. and Behrman, R.E. eds., 2007. Preterm birth: causes,
consequences, and prevention. National Academies Press.
Klepeis, Neil E., William C. Nelson , Wayne R. Ott, John P. Robinson, Andy M. Tsang, Paul
Switzer, Joseph Behar, Stephen C. Hern, and William H. Engelmann. 2001. “The National Human
Activity Pattern Survey (NHAPS): a Resource for Assessing Exposure to Environmental
Pollutants,” Journal of Exposure Analysis and Environmental Epidemiology. 11(3):231–52.
Kling, J.R., Liebman, J.B. and Katz, L.F., 2007. Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects.
Econometrica, 75(1), pp.83-119.
Kvasnicka, M., Siedler, T. and Ziebarth, N.R., 2018. The health effects of smoking bans: Evidence
from German hospitalization data. Health economics, 27(11), pp. 1738-1753.

35

Leung, Gabriel M., Lai Ming Ho, and Tai Hing Lam. 2013. “The Economic Burden of
Environmental Tobacco Smoke in the First Year of Life,” Archives of Disease in Childhood, 88(9):
767-771.
Markowitz, Sara, E. Kathleen Adams, Patricia M, Dietz, Van T. Tong, Viji Kannan. 2013.
“Tobacco Control Policies, Birth Outcomes, and Maternal Human Capital.” Journal of Human
Capital. 7:130–60.
McGeary, Kerry Anne, Dhaval Dave, Brandy Lipton, Timothy Roeper, “Impact of Comprehensive
Smoking Bans on the Health of Infants and Children,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, No. 23995, November 2017.
Meyers David G., John S. Neuberger, and Jianghua He. 2009. “Cardiovascular Effect of Bans on
Smoking in Public Places: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis,” Journal of the American
College of Cardiology. 54:1249- 1255.
Nielsen, S.S., Dills, R.L., Glass, M. and Mueller, B.A., 2014. Accuracy of prenatal smoking data
from Washington State birth certificates in a population-based sample with cotinine measurements.
Annals of epidemiology, 24(3), pp.236-239.
Northam, S. and Knapp, T.R., 2006. The reliability and validity of birth certificates. Journal of
Obstetric, Gynecologic & Neonatal Nursing, 35(1), pp.3-12.
Orzechowski and Walker. 2012. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Historical Compilation. Volume 47.
Pesko, M.F., Tauras, J.A., Huang, J. and Chaloupka IV, F.J., 2016. The influence of geography and
measurement in estimating cigarette price responsiveness (No. w22296). National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series.
Rayens, M.K., Burkhart, P.V., Zhang, M., Lee, S., Moser, D.K., Mannino, D. and Hahn, E.J., 2008.
Reduction in asthma-related emergency department visits after implementation of a smoke-free law.
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, 122(3), pp.537-541.
Seo, Dong-Chul and Mohammed Torabi. 2007. “Reduced Admissions for Acute Myocardial
Infarction Associated with a Public Smoking Ban: Matched Controlled Study,” Journal of Drug
Education. 37(3):217-226.
Shetty, Kanaka D., Thomas Deleire, Chapin White, and Jayanta Bhattacharya. 2011. “Changes in
US hospitalization and mortality rates following smoking bans,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
Management. 30(1):6-28.
Siegel, Michael, Alison B. Albers, Debbie Chang, Lisa Beiner and Nancy A. Rigotti. 2005. “Effect
of Local Restaurant Smoking Regulations on Progression to Established Smoking Among Youths.”
Tobacco Control. 14: 300-306.
Simon, D., 2016. Does early life exposure to cigarette smoke permanently harm childhood welfare?
Evidence from cigarette tax hikes. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(4), pp.12859.
36

Stillman, Francis A., Diane M. Becker, Robert T. Swank, Donald Hantula, Hamilton Moses,
Stanton Glantz, and H. Richard Waranch. 1990. “Ending smoking at the Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions. An evaluation of Smoking Prevalence and Indoor Air Pollution,” Journal of the
American Medical Association. 264(12):1565-1569.
Tong, V.T., Dietz, P.M., Farr, S.L., D'angelo, D.V. and England, L.J., 2013. Estimates of smoking
before and during pregnancy, and smoking cessation during pregnancy: comparing two populationbased data sources. Public health reports, 128(3), pp.179-188.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2006. “The Health Consequences of Involuntary
Exposure to Tobacco Smoke: A Report of the Surgeon General.” Atlanta, GA. Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Office on Smoking and Health (Atlanta). (Last Accessed July 4, 2018)
https://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/secondhandsmoke/fullreport.pdf.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2007. “Best Practices for Comprehensive Tobacco
Control Programs—2007.” Atlanta, GA. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. (Last
Accessed July 4, 2018)
https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/stateandcommunity/best_practices/pdfs/2014/comprehensive.pdf
U.S. Task Force on Community Preventive Services. 2001. “Recommendations Regarding
Interventions to Reduce Tobacco Use and Exposure to Environmental Tobacco Smoke,” American
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 20(2 Suppl):10-15.(Last Accessed July 4, 2018)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-3797(00)00300-7.
Valente, Pasquale, Francesco Forastiere, Antonella Bacosi, Giorgio Cattani, Simonetta Di Carlo,
Monica Ferri, Irene Figa-Talamanca, Achille Marconi, Luigi Paoletti, Carlo Perucci and Piergiorgio
Zuccaro. 2007. “Exposure to Fine and Ultrafine Particles from Secondhand Smoke in Public Places
before and after the Smoking Ban, Italy 2005.” Tobacco Control.16:312-317.
Wehby, George L, Dhaval Dave, and Robert Kaestner. 2016. “Effects of the Minimum Wage on
Infant Health,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, 22373.
Wehby, George L, Allen Wilcox A, and Rolv T. Lie RT. 2013. “The Impact of Cigarette Quitting
during Pregnancy on Other Prenatal Health Behaviors.” Review of Economics of the Household.
11(2):211-233. (Last Access July 4, 2018) doi:10.1007/s11150-012-9163-8.
Windham, Gayle, Barabar Hopkins, Laura Fenster, and Shanna H. Swan, 2000. “Prenatal Active or
Passive Tobacco Smoke Exposure and the Risk of Preterm Delivery or Low Birth Weight.”
Epidemiology, 11(4): 427-433.
Yousey, Yvonne K., 2006. “Household Characteristics, Smoking Bans and Passive Smoke
Exposure in Children,” Journal of Pediatric Health Care; 20(2): 98-105.

37

Figure 1A: Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues on Birthweight

Figure 1B: Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues on Birthweight

38

Figure 1C: Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues on Birthweight

Figure 1D: Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues on Birthweight

39

Table 1
Sample means
U.S. Vital Statistics Births 1990-2012
Variable

All Births

Births to mothers
with high school
degree or less

Births to unmarried
mothers with high school
degree or less

Birthweight (grams)

3333.832

3282.603

3207.640

Low birthweight (birth < 2500 grams)

0.061

0.072

0.089

Gestational age (weeks)

38.864

38.824

38.694

Preterm birth (gestation < 37 weeks)

0.101

0.115

0.134

Fetal growth (Birthweight / gestation)

85.593

84.362

82.676

Any prenatal smoking

0.123

0.188

0.230

Maternal age

27.496

25.454

23.788

Maternal race: White

0.788

0.765

0.649

Maternal race: Black

0.155

0.190

0.312

Maternal race: Other

0.056

0.045

0.039

Maternal ethnicity: Hispanic

0.174

0.257

0.265

Maternal educational attainment

13.024

11.024

10.953

Married

0.672

0.524

0.000

Comprehensive Smoking Ban: All Venues

0.108

0.089

0.109

Comprehensive Smoking Ban: Any Venue

0.196

0.168

0.200

Comprehensive Smoking Ban: Workplace

0.136

0.114

0.142

Limited Smoking Ban: Workplace

0.402

0.397

0.400

No Smoking Ban: Workplace

0.460

0.489

0.459

Comprehensive Smoking Ban: Restaurant

0.185

0.159

0.189

Limited Smoking Ban: Restaurant

0.274

0.263

0.264

No Smoking Ban: Restaurant

0.540

0.578

0.547

Comprehensive Smoking Ban: Bar

0.157

0.133

0.160

Limited Smoking Ban: Bar

0.063

0.060

0.066

No Smoking Ban: Bar

0.779
0.131

0.808
0.109

0.774
0.133

0.190

0.166

0.197

0.164

0.140

0.170

0.812

0.760

0.816

70,637,634

34,912,824

16,607,601

Comprehensive Smoking Ban Workplace:
% population exposed
Comprehensive Smoking Ban Restaurant:
% population exposed
Comprehensive Smoking Ban Bar:
% population exposed
Real state cigarette excise tax (2014 $)

Observations

Note: Sample means are reported. Observations represent maximum sample size. For some variables, notably prenatal
smoking (n=70,557,124 for all births), sample sizes are smaller due to missing information (see text).

40

Table 2
Child Health Outcome Means
Children Ages < 18
National Health Interview Surveys, 1998-2013
Outcome
Hay fever, past year

0.1007

0.2309

0.0786

0.1831

Any respiratory allergies, past year

0.1760

0.4261

0.1436

0.3611

Ever diagnosed with asthma

0.1297

---

0.1311

---

Asthma attack, past year

0.0557

0.4299

0.0535

0.4084

ER visit for asthma, past year

0.0186

0.1438

0.0210

0.1605

ER visit for any reason, past year

0.2046

0.3173

0.2258

0.3555

3 or more ear infections, past year

0.0621

0.0889

0.0645

0.1066

Excellent or very good health

0.8376

0.7063

0.7656

0.6152

Fair or poor health

0.0184

0.0597

0.0283

All children

Asthma

Low educ.

0.0887
Asthma
Low educ.

167,328

22,157

74,193

9,674

Sample
Observations

Notes: The sample includes children under age 18 (including children who have ever received an asthma diagnosis)
with complete demographic information interviewed between 1998 and 2013. Estimates incorporated population
weights available from the National Center for Health Statistics.

41

Table 3
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Mothers’ Education: High school graduate or less
Births 1990-2012
Panel A
Model

Reference Group: All others

Birthweight

(2)
Low
Birthweight

Gestation

Comprehensive Ban – All Venues

11.3873**
(4.5292)

-0.0020**
(0.0007)

0.0548**
(0.0211)

Cigarette Tax

6.0697***
(2.0876)

-0.0016***
(0.0005)

0.0309**
(0.0134)

6.5172*
(3.6550)

-0.0015
(0.0009)

0.0394*
(0.0208)

6.9733***
(2.0664)
No
34,655,278

-0.0019***
(0.0005)
No
34,673,641

Outcome

Comprehensive Ban – All Venues

Cigarette Tax
Control for Maternal Smoking
Observations
Panel B
Model
Outcome

(1)

(3)

0.0341**
(0.0131)
No
34,607,278

Reference Group: No bans in any venue
(1)
(2)
(3)
Low
Birthweight Birthweight
Gestation

Comprehensive Ban – All Venues

18.1501**
(7.5713)

-0.0030*
(0.0018)

0.0930**
(0.0393)

Cigarette Tax

5.2336**
(2.3012)

-0.0017***
(0.0005)

0.0389*
(0.0201)

Comprehensive Ban – All Venues

12.5871*
(6.3315)

-0.0024
(0.0017)

0.0841***
(0.0311)

Cigarette Tax
Control for Maternal Smoking
Observations

6.2166***
(1.9605)
No
18,156,650

-0.0021***
(0.0005)
No
18,166,551

0.0458**
(0.0181)
No
18,129,267

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
Fetal
Low
Preterm
Growth
Birthweight Birthweight
Models with State and Year Fixed Effects
-0.0007
0.1842**
10.8746**
-0.0018**
(0.0013)
(0.0748)
(4.8759)
(0.0008)
-0.0017*
0.0963**
5.3522**
-0.0015***
(0.0009)
(0.0427)
(2.1037)
(0.0005)
Models with County and Year Fixed Effects
0.0005
0.1005
5.1039
-0.0012
(0.0011)
(0.0615)
(3.6560)
(0.0009)
-0.0022**
(0.0008)
No
34,664,996

0.1126***
(0.0421)
No
34,584,285

5.7844***
(2.0789)
Yes
34,655,278

-0.0016***
(0.0005)
Yes
34,673,641

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
Fetal
Low
Preterm
Growth
Birthweight Birthweight
Models with State and Year Fixed Effects
-0.0026
0.2836**
16.6842**
-0.0027
(0.0023)
(0.1242)
(7.5967)
(0.0018)
-0.0018*
0.0591*
4.6970*
-0.0016**
(0.0010)
(0.0346)
(2.6923)
(0.0007)
Models with County and Year Fixed Effects
-0.0019
0.1652
10.5024
-0.0019
(0.0018)
(0.1077)
(6.6304)
(0.0018)
-0.0025**
(0.0009)
No
18,162,787

0.0713***
(0.0258)
No
18,118,007

4.5232*
(2.3969)
Yes
18,156,650

-0.0017**
(0.0007)
Yes
18,166,551

(8)

(9)

Gestation

Preterm

(10)
Fetal
Growth

0.0544**
(0.0211)

-0.0006
(0.0014)

0.1720*
(0.0860)

0.0303**
(0.0134)

-0.0016*
(0.0009)

0.0788*
(0.0419)

0.0383*
(0.0206)

0.0007
(0.0011)

0.0666
(0.0663)

0.0331**
(0.0132)
Yes
34,607,278

-0.0020**
(0.0009)
Yes
34,664,996

0.0839**
(0.0412)
Yes
34,584,285

(8)

(9)

Gestation

Preterm

(10)
Fetal
Growth

0.0919**
(0.0391)

-0.0024
(0.0023)

0.2482*
(0.1299)

0.0385*
(0.0202)

-0.0017
(0.0011)

0.0462
(0.0443)

0.0826**
(0.0312)

-0.0016
(0.0019)

0.1148
(0.1173)

0.0445**
(0.0183)
Yes
18,129,267

-0.0023**
(0.0010)
Yes
18,162,787

0.0304
(0.0349)
Yes
18,118,007

Note: All specifications control for maternal age, education, race/Hispanic identity, marital status, and area (as denoted) and year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are robust-clustered at the state-level.
Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

42

Table 4
Timing of Response to Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues – Event Study Analysis
Mothers’ Education: High school graduate or less
Births 1990-2012
Panel A: Ever-Treated Counties
Panel A
Model

Birthweight

4+ Years pre-policy

(Ref)

3-4 Years pre-policy

2.0506
(2.8231)
1.5784
(2.4663)
0.7941
(3.6351)
1.2857
(3.6675)

2-3 Years pre-policy
1-2 Years pre-policy
0-1 Year pre-policy

0-1 Year post-policy
1-2 Years post-policy
2+ Years post-policy
Year Indicators
Area Fixed Effects
Observations

Low Birthweight
2
3
4
Time periods pre-implementation (Lead effects)
(Ref)
(Ref)
(Ref)

1

1.8098
0.0003
0.0000
(2.5659)
(0.0007)
(0.0007)
1.2764
0.0001
-0.0003
(2.3378)
(0.0007)
(0.0008)
0.5080
0.0007
0.0002
(3.3825)
(0.0009)
(0.0010)
0.9534
0.0008
0.0003
(3.6743)
(0.0009)
(0.0011)
Time periods post-implementation (Post-policy effects)
4.5814
4.2098
-0.0004
-0.0010
(4.5289)
(4.5490)
(0.0010)
(0.0013)
6.2924
5.7430
-0.0002
-0.0009
(5.2840)
(5.1570)
(0.0014)
(0.0015)
9.4698
8.7585
-0.0005
-0.0014
(6.3525)
(5.9783)
(0.0017)
(0.0020)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
State
County
State
County
11,222,462
11,222,462
11,222,462
11,229,539

Panel B: All Counties
Panel B
Model

Birthweight

Low Birthweight
2
3
4
Time periods pre-implementation (Lead effects)
(Ref)
(Ref)
(Ref)

1

4+ Years pre-policy

(Ref)

3-4 Years pre-policy

-0.6732
(1.2408)
1.4417
(1.1080)
0.1592
(1.6209)
-0.5002
(1.6643)

2-3 Years pre-policy
1-2 Years pre-policy
0-1 Year pre-policy

-0.2636
(0.8974)
1.3588
(0.9099)
0.5995
(1.3225)
0.5354
(1.3515)

0.0004
(0.0003)
-0.0003
(0.0003)
-0.0001
(0.0004)
-0.0000
(0.0004)

0.0003
(0.0003)
-0.0003
(0.0003)
-0.0002
(0.0004)
-0.0002
(0.0004)

Time periods post-implementation (Post-policy effects)
0-1 Year post-policy
1-2 Years post-policy
2+ Years post-policy

7.4107*
(3.9071)
8.4356**
(3.8224)
11.9377**
(4.5629)

5.8898
(3.9706)
6.7607*
(3.9164)
7.2668*
(4.1082)

-0.0018*
(0.0010)
-0.0013
(0.0008)
-0.0019**
(0.0009)

-0.0017
(0.0010)
-0.0012
(0.0009)
-0.0016
(0.0011)

Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Year Indicators
State
County
State
County
Area Fixed Effects
Observations
34,655,278
34,655,278
34,673,641
34,673,641
Notes: All models control for maternal and state covariates listed in Table 3. Standard errors are robust-clustered at the
state-level.

43

Table 5
Effects of Any Comprehensive Smoking Ban (in at least one venue) on Infant Health
Mothers’ Education: High school graduate or less
Births 1990-2012
Reference Group: All others
Model

Birthweight

(2)
Low
Birthweight

Gestation

Comprehensive Ban –
Any Venue

8.9571***
(3.0211)

-0.0018**
(0.0008)

0.0441**
(0.0176)

Cigarette Tax

6.6690***
(2.0281)

-0.0017***
(0.0005)

0.0336**
(0.0135)

Comprehensive Ban –
Any Venue

7.9995**
(3.3754)

-0.0013
(0.0009)

Cigarette Tax

6.9469***
(2.0422)

Outcome

Control for Maternal
Smoking
Observations

(1)

(3)

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
Fetal
Low
Preterm
Growth
Birthweight
Birthweight
Models with State and Year Fixed Effects
-0.0011
0.1445***
7.5172**
-0.0014*
(0.0013)
(0.0509)
(3.2638)
(0.0008)

(8)

(9)

Gestation

Preterm

(10)
Fetal
Growth

0.0429**
(0.0177)

-0.0009
(0.0013)

0.1100*
(0.0582)

0.0331**
(0.0135)

-0.0016*
(0.0009)

0.0911**
(0.0408)

0.0424**
(0.0192)

-0.0017*
0.1060**
6.0557***
-0.0016***
(0.0009)
(0.0420)
(2.0375)
(0.0005)
Models with County and Year Fixed Effects
-0.0003
0.1256**
6.7576*
-0.0010
(0.0012)
(0.0563)
(3.4434)
(0.0009)

0.0415**
(0.0192)

-0.0001
(0.0012)

0.0958
(0.0599)

-0.0019***
(0.0005)

0.0346**
(0.0135)

-0.0020**
(0.0008)

0.1120***
(0.0412)

5.7021***
(2.0346)

-0.0016***
(0.0005)

0.0337**
(0.0135)

-0.0019**
(0.0009)

0.0818**
(0.0397)

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

34,655,278

34,673,641

34,607,278

34,664,996

34,584,285

34,655,278

34,673,641

34,607,278

34,664,996

34,584,285

Note: All specifications control for maternal age, education, race/Hispanic identity, marital status, and area (as denoted) and year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are robust-clustered at the statelevel. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

44

.

Table 6
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Child Health,
Mothers’ Education: High school graduate or less
Children Ages < 18
NHIS 1998 – 2013
Panel A: Reference Group - All others

Panel B: Reference Group - No bans in any venue

Outcome
Hay fever, past year

State fixed effects
0.0127
0.0318
(0.0079)
(0.0256)

County fixed effects
0.0075
0.0215
(0.0096)
(0.0274)

Any respiratory allergies, past year

0.0041
(0.0111)

-0.0112
(0.0315)

-0.0006
(0.0012)

-0.0206
(0.0371)

-0.0379**
(0.0177)

-0.1132**
(0.0434)

-0.0176
(0.0190)

-0.0539
(0.0563)

Ever diagnosed with asthma

-0.0000
(0.0081)

---

-0.0062
(0.0090)

---

-0.0125
(0.0164)

---

-0.0120
(0.0161)

---

Asthma attack, past year

-0.0088*
(0.0051)

-0.0556***
(0.0163)

-0.0127**
(0.0053)

-0.0555**
(0.0225)

-0.0173**
(0.0085)

-0.0580*
(0.0322)

-0.0181*
(0.0099)

-0.0543
(0.0464)

ER visit for asthma, past year

-0.0005
(0.0020)

-0.0023
(0.0198)

-0.0009
(0.0027)

0.0098
(0.0219)

-0.0027
(0.0065)

0.0008
(0.0319)

-0.0071
(0.0068)

-0.0247
(0.0394)

Any ER visit, past year

-0.0125
(0.0091)

-0.0194
(0.0218)

-0.0185*
(0.0094)

-0.0145
(0.0299)

-0.0486***
(0.0143)

-0.0785*
(0.0459)

-0.0521***
(0.0122)

-0.0866
(0.0621)

-0.0010
(0.0052)

0.0030
(0.0100)

-0.0032
(0.0061)

-0.0050
(0.0126)

-0.0169**
(0.0066)

-0.0056
(0.0140)

-0.0164*
(0.0081)

-0.0107
(0.0200)

Excellent or very good general health

0.0135
(0.0086)

0.0070
(0.0261)

0.0078
(0.0141)

-0.0303
(0.0331)

0.0109
(0.0125)

-0.0061
(0.0341)

0.0226
(0.0174)

0.0395
(0.0340)

Fair or poor general health

-0.0037
(0.0024)

-0.0087
(0.0131)

-0.0061*
(0.0034)

0.0116
(0.0205)

-0.0070*
(0.0039)

-0.0160
(0.0220)

-0.0108**
(0.0052)

-0.0244
(0.0189)

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

74,193

9,674

74,193

9,674

28,370

3,894

28,370

3,894

Three or more ear infections, past
year

Sample
Observations

State fixed effects
-0.0125
-0.0396
(0.0145)
(0.0451)

County fixed effects
-0.0001
-0.0219
(0.01578)
(0.0498)

Note: All specifications control for sex, age, age squared, birthweight, race/ethnicity, mother's education, mother's age, the cigarette excise tax in 2014 dollars, interview year and county fixed effects. Survey
weights were used in all analyses to produce nationally representative estimates, and standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as
follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

45

Table 7
Effects of Any Comprehensive Smoking Ban (in at least one venue) on Child Health
Mothers’ Education: High school graduate or less
Children Ages < 18
NHIS 1998 – 2013
Reference Group: All others
Outcome
Hay fever, past year

State fixed effects
0.0037
-0.0118
(0.0069)
(0.0207)

County fixed effects
0.0065
0.0172
(0.0074)
(0.0196)

Any respiratory allergies, past year

0.0005
(0.0092)

-0.0165
(0.0294)

0.0090
(0.0096)

-0.0012
(0.0303)

Ever diagnosed with asthma

0.0037
(0.0071)

---

0.0032
(0.0066)

---

Asthma attack, past year

-0.0023
(0.0035)

-0.0181
(0.0169)

-0.0029
(0.0039)

-0.0129
(0.0228)

ER visit for asthma, past year

0.0006
(0.0024)

0.0022
(0.0142)

0.0000
(0.0024)

0.0073
(0.0162)

-0.0171**
(0.0076)

-0.0126
(0.0287)

-0.0027
(0.0090)

0.0163
(0.0296)

Three or more ear infections, past year

0.0049
(0.0051)

0.0135
(0.0132)

0.0077
(0.0053)

-0.0018
(0.0166)

Excellent or very good general health

0.0000
(0.0081)

-0.0309
(0.0238)

0.0001
(0.0093)

-0.0391
(0.0271)

Fair or poor general health

-0.0014
(0.0026)

-0.0092
(0.0157)

-0.0028
(0.0028)

0.0058
(0.0165)

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

Low educ.

Asthma
Low educ.

74,193

9,674

74,193

9,674

Any ER visit, past year

Sample
Observations

Note: All specifications control for sex, age, age squared, birthweight, race/ethnicity, mother's education, mother's age, the cigarette
excise tax in 2014 dollars, interview year and county fixed effects. Survey weights were used in all analyses to produce nationally
representative estimates, and standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote
statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

46

Table 8
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars)
on Smoking At Home
Adult Education: High school graduate or less
Households with children (ages < 18)
NHIS 1998 – 2010
Outcome

Smoking inside the home on one or more days per week

Panel A

Reference Group: All others
State fixed effects

County fixed effects

Sample
All

Current
smokers

Current and
former smokers

All

Current
smokers

Current and
former smokers

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Comprehensive Ban –
All Venues

-0.0005
(0.0114)

-0.05289
(0.0318)

-0.0246
(0.0187)

-0.0175
(0.0185)

-0.0887
(0.0571)

-0.0293
(0.0333)

Cigarette Tax

-0.0228*
(0.0117)

0.0013
(0.0249)

-0.0114
(0.0168)

-0.0159
(0.0120)

0.0055
(0.0288)

-0.0056
(0.0207)

Observations

20,160

5,884

8,761

20,160

5,884

8,761

Model

Outcome

Smoking inside the home on one or more days per week

Panel B

Reference Group: No bans in any venue
State fixed effects

Sample

County fixed effects

All

Current
smokers

Current and
former smokers

All

Current
smokers

Current and
former smokers

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

-0.0163
(0.0242)

-0.1127***
(0.0301)

-0.0191
(0.0285)

-0.0480
(0.0299)

-0.2235***
(0.0387)

-0.0589*
(0.0301)

Cigarette Tax

-0.0282***
(0.0093)

-0.0322**
(0.0156)

-0.0433***
(0.0100)

-0.0212*
(0.0108)

-0.0234
(0.0252)

-0.0481***
(0.0138)

Observations

7,903

2,394

3,493

7,903

2,394

3,493

Model
Comprehensive Ban –
All Venues

Note: All specifications control for sex, age, age squared, birthweight, race/ethnicity, mother's education, mother's age, the cigarette
excise tax in 2014 dollars, interview year and county fixed effects. Survey weights were used in all analyses to produce nationally
representative estimates, and standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote
statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

47

Appendix Table 1
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Full Sample
Births 1990-2012
Panel A
Model
Outcome
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Cigarette Tax

Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Cigarette Tax
Control for Maternal Smoking
Observations
Panel B
Model

Reference Group: All others
(1)
Birthweight

(2)
Low
Birthweight

(3)
Gestation

7.9224*
(4.1813)
3.4521**
(1.5899)

-0.0012**
(0.0006)
-0.0008**
(0.0003)

0.0417**
(0.0195)
0.0238**
(0.0113)

3.4512
(3.2152)
3.9244**
(1.6823)
No
69,053,313

-.0009
(.0007)
-.0010***
(.0003)
No
69,085,073

0.0264
(0.0188)
.0266**
(.0110)
No
68,986,569

Reference Group: No bans in any venue
(1)
(2)
(3)
Low
Birthweight Birthweight
Gestation

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
Fetal
Low
Preterm
Growth
Birthweight Birthweight
Models with State and Year Fixed Effects
0.0001
0.1222*
7.3850*
-0.0011*
(0.0012)
(0.0731)
(4.3802)
(0.0006)
-0.0012
0.0422
3.0982*
-0.0007**
(0.0007)
(0.0332)
(1.6139)
(0.0004)
Models with County and Year Fixed Effects
0.0012
0.0470
2.5381
-.0007
(0.0010)
(0.0579)
(3.1705)
(.0007)
-.0015**
.0487
3.2746*
-.0009**
(.0007)
(.0353)
(1.6763)
(.0004)
No
No
Yes
Yes
69,074,498
68,944,881
69,053,313
69,085,073

(8)

(9)

Gestation

Preterm

(10)
Fetal
Growth

0.0413**
(0.0194)
0.0235**
(0.0113)

0.0001
(0.0013)
-0.0011
(0.0008)

0.1093
(0.0804)
0.0336
(0.0326)

0.0257
(0.0186)
.0261**
(.0111)
Yes
68,986,569

0.0013
(0.0010)
-.0014*
(.0007)
Yes
69,074,498

0.0251
(0.0601)
.0353
(.0339)
Yes
68,944,881

(4)

(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
Fetal
Low
Fetal
Outcome
Preterm
Growth
Birthweight Birthweight
Gestation
Preterm
Growth
Models with State and Year Fixed Effects
12.8299*
-0.0020
0.0663*
-0.0003
0.2064*
11.1824*
-0.0016
0.0650*
-0.0001
0.1667
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
(6.5769)
(0.0015)
(0.0369)
(0.0019)
(0.1071)
(6.4289)
(0.0015)
(0.0364)
(0.0018)
(0.1132)
2.8696**
-0.0009**
0.0318**
-0.0013
0.0131
2.7685
-0.0008*
0.0317**
-0.0013
0.0108
Cigarette Tax
(1.3469)
(0.0004)
(0.0153)
(0.0008)
(0.0228)
(1.7643)
(0.0005)
(0.0154)
(0.0009)
(0.0307)
Models with County and Year Fixed Effects
7.9000
-0.0013
0.0598**
0.0005
0.0996
6.2665
-0.0010
0.0586*
0.0007
0.0601
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
(5.3589)
(0.0014)
(0.0293)
(0.0016)
(0.0864)
(5.3750)
(0.0014)
(0.0292)
(0.0016)
(0.0894)
3.3148**
-.0012***
.0379**
-.0018**
.0138
2.4479
-.0010*
.0372**
-.0017*
-.0071
Cigarette Tax
(1.3573)
(.0004)
(.0143)
.0008
(.0202)
(1.6543)
.0005
(.0145)
(.0009)
(.0223)
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Control for Maternal Smoking
35,404,894
35,422,066
35,366,122
35,418,015
35,346,196
35,404,894
35,422,066
35,366,122
35,418,015
35,346,196
Observations
Note: All specifications control for maternal age, education, race/Hispanic identity, marital status, and area (as denoted) and year of birth fixed effects. Standard errors are robust-clustered at the statelevel. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

48

Appendix Table 2
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Child Health
Children Ages < 18, Full Sample
NHIS 1998 – 2013
Panel A: Reference Group All others
Outcome
Hay fever, past year

State fixed effects
-0.0043
0.0021
(0.0060)
(0.0173)

Panel B: Reference Group No Bans

County fixed effects
-0.0012
-0.0002
(0.0045)
(0.0166)

State fixed effects
-0.0104
-0.0180
(0.0084)
(0.0220)

County fixed effects
0.0027
-0.0041
(0.0098)
(0.0278)

-0.0195***
(0.0063)

-0.0472***
(0.0153)

-0.0113**
(0.0048)

-0.0395**
(0.0162)

-0.0444***
(0.0139)

-0.0877***
(0.0264)

-0.0076
(0.0135)

-0.0195
(0.0313)

-0.0067
(0.0048)

---

-0.0079*
(0.0045)

---

-0.0087
(0.0074)

---

-0.0104
(0.0086)

---

Asthma attack, past year

-0.0108***
(0.0026)

-0.0564***
(0.0113)

-0.0103***
(0.0031)

0.0480***
(0.0177)

-0.01594**
(0.0061)

-0.0797***
(0.0247)

-0.0115*
(0.0064)

-0.0332
(0.0279)

ER visit for asthma, past year

-0.0028**
(0.0012)

-0.0154**
(0.0072)

-0.0024
(0.0015)

-0.0085
(0.0124)

-0.0065***
(0.0023)

-0.0366***
(0.0128)

-0.0063**
(0.0029)

-0.0294
(0.0177)

Any ER visit, past year

-0.0050
(0.0064)

-0.0265**
(0.0126)

-0.0034
(0.0059)

-0.0222
(0.0196)

-0.0175*
(0.0088)

-0.0705***
(0.0159)

-0.0139
(0.0091)

-0.0592*
(0.0303)

Three or more ear infections, past year

-0.0045
(0.0031)

-0.0151*
(0.0077)

-0.0028
(0.0034)

-0.0048
(0.0086)

-0.0114***
(0.0036)

-0.0260**
(0.0114)

-0.0069
(0.0042)

-0.0038
(0.0173)

Excellent or very good general health

0.0041
(0.0057)

0.0111
(0.0149)

0.0040
(0.0074)

0.0032
(0.0182)

0.0114
(0.0086)

0.0362*
(0.0195)

0.0082
(0.0093)

0.0270
(0.0232)

Fair or poor general health

-0.0006
(0.0013)

-0.0059
(0.0064)

-0.0024
(0.0019)

0.0001
(0.0090)

-0.0058***
(0.0018)

-0.0228***
(0.0082)

-0.0058**
(0.0028)

-0.0227**
(0.0101)

All children

Asthma

All children

Asthma

All children

Asthma

All children

Asthma

167,328

22,157

167,328

22,157

63,535

8,645

63,535

8,645

Any respiratory allergies, past year

Ever diagnosed with asthma

Sample
Observations

Note: All specifications control for sex, age, age squared, birthweight, race/ethnicity, mother's education, mother's age, the cigarette excise tax in 2014 dollars, interview year and county fixed effects. Survey
weights were used in all analyses to produce nationally representative estimates, and standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses. Asterisks denote statistical significance as
follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

49

Appendix Table 3
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Differential Effects by Urban and Rural Residence
Mothers’ Education Level: High school graduate or less
Births 1990 – 2012
Reference Group: All Others
(1)
Reference: All Others
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Medium Metropolitan
Non-Metropolitan
Comprehensive Ban*
Medium Metropolitan
Comprehensive Ban*
Non-Metropolitan
Other controls from main spec.
Maternal Smoking
Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Birthweight
9.0262**
(3.5319)
-11.5004*
(6.6151)
-14.2320**
(6.0931)
8.9309
(7.0146)
1.1285
(5.1481)

(2)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0025***
(0.0008)
0.0022**
(0.0009)
0.0021**
(0.0010)
0.0007
(0.0017)
0.0024
(0.0015)

(3)
Birthweight
5.6531
(4.3360)
-5.7667
(6.6629)
-5.5538
(6.2044)
14.7693*
(8.2092)
12.0556
(8.1344)

(4)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0017***
(0.0006)
0.0009
(0.0009)
0.0001
(0.0009)
-0.0007
(0.0012)
-0.0002
(0.0010)

Yes
No
State
Yes

Yes
No
State
Yes

Yes
Yes
State
Yes

Yes
Yes
State
Yes

(5)
Birthweight
9.6130**
(3.6854)
_

(6)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0028***
(0.0010)
_

(7)
Birthweight
6.7171*
(3.8657)
_

(8)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0021**
(0.0009)
_

_

_

_

_

-6.7212**
(3.0495)
-11.4315***
(2.0807)

0.0031***
(0.0008)
0.0042***
(0.0009)

-4.8181*
(2.7816)
-3.3288*
(1.8548)

0.0027***
(0.0008)
0.0024**
(0.0009)

Yes
No
County
Yes

Yes
No
County
Yes

Yes
Yes
County
Yes

Yes
Yes
County
Yes

34,655,278
34,673,641
34,655,278
34,673,641
34,655,278
34,673,641
34,655,278
34,673,641
Observations
Note: The reference category, “Large Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 1 and 2 of the NCHS 2013 Urban-Rural Classification Scheme (MSA above 1 million). “Medium
Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 3 and 4 (Metropolitan area below 1 million), and “Non-Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 5 and 6 (area population below 50,000)

50

Appendix Table 4
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Differential Effects by Urban and Rural Residence
Mothers’ Education Level: High school graduate or less
Births 1990 – 2012
Reference Group: No Bans in any Venue
(1)
Reference: All Others
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Medium Metropolitan
Non-Metropolitan
Comprehensive Ban*
Medium Metropolitan
Comprehensive Ban*
Non-Metropolitan
Other controls from main spec.
Maternal Smoking
Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects

Birthweight
13.4808**
(5.8740)
-13.4275**
(6.3534)
-17.3610***
(5.9828)
9.9309
(7.5004)
7.0821
(5.1976)

(2)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0032*
(0.0017)
0.0022***
(0.0007)
0.0024**
(0.0010)
0.0006
(0.0017)
0.0014
(0.0015)

(3)
Birthweight
9.9774*
(5.7880)
-6.9384
(7.2358)
-9.3650
(6.0970)
15.2852*
(8.4358)
19.1834**
(7.7406)

(4)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0023
(0.0017)
0.0007
(0.0008)
0.0006
(0.0009)
-0.0006
(0.0011)
-0.0014
(0.0009)

Yes
No
State
Yes

Yes
No
State
Yes

Yes
Yes
State
Yes

Yes
Yes
State
Yes

(5)
Birthweight
17.3177**
(6.5255)
_

(6)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0040**
(0.0019)
_

(7)
Birthweight
13.6930**
(6.7651)
_

(8)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0032*
(0.0019)
_

_

_

_

_

-10.6073**
(4.1748)
-17.1183***
(3.1858)

0.0041***
(0.0011)
0.0052***
(0.0012)

-9.3001***
(3.2958)
-7.2347***
(2.6241)

0.0038***
(0.0011)
0.0029**
(0.0011)

Yes
No
County
Yes

Yes
No
County
Yes

Yes
Yes
County
Yes

Yes
Yes
County
Yes

18,156,650
18,166,551
18,156,650
18,166,551
18,156,650
18,156,551
18,156,650
18,156,551
Observations
Note: The reference category, “Large Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 1 and 2 of the NCHS 2013 Urban-Rural Classification Scheme (MSA above 1 million). “Medium
Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 3 and 4 (Metropolitan area below 1 million), and “Non-Metropolitan” corresponds to codes 5 and 6 (area population below 50,000)

51

Appendix Table 5
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Mothers’ Education Level: High school graduate or less
Results Using 1995-2009 Sample of Births
(Gao and Baughman 2017)
Reference Group: All Others
(1)
Reference Group: All other
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Mother's Age
Mother's Education
Black
Race Other
Hispanic
Married
Cigarette Tax

Maternal Smoking
Year Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects
Observations

Birthweight
12.1025***
(4.3736)
2.9723***
(0.3504)
3.9997**
(1.6468)
-175.9045***
(5.7330)
-67.4238***
(14.2741)
18.5058***
(6.6067)
82.9175***
(4.6869)
3.9495*
(2.1934)

(2)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0021***
(0.0007)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0009***
(0.0003)
0.0466***
(0.0016)
0.0027*
(0.0016)
-0.0130***
(0.0018)
-0.0237***
(0.0015)
-0.0011**
(0.0005)

No
Yes
State
23,123,958

(3)
Birthweight
11.1675**
(4.8263)
3.1339***
(0.3194)
1.6690
(1.3630)
-211.9432***
(6.6917)
-97.6485***
(15.0332)
-30.1871***
(4.7348)
56.3731***
(2.1565)
3.6833
(2.4422)

(4)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0018**
(0.0008)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
-0.0004
(0.0002)
0.0551***
(0.0017)
0.0099***
(0.0016)
-0.0015
(0.0013)
-0.0174***
(0.0009)
-0.0010*
(0.0005)

No
Yes
State

Yes
Yes
State

23,123,958

23,123,958

(5)
Birthweight
7.6775**
(3.3479)
2.8166***
(0.3318)
4.6836***
(1.3475)
-173.7000***
(6.8598)
-75.7623***
(13.2895)
23.1276***
(4.5138)
81.8728***
(4.3850)
4.7928**
(1.9495)

(6)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0017**
(0.0008)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0010***
(0.0003)
0.0455***
(0.0017)
0.0037**
(0.0015)
-0.0134***
(0.0016)
-0.0232***
(0.0014)
-0.0013**
(0.0005)

(7)
Birthweight
5.7312
(3.4734)
3.1039***
(0.2916)
2.1979**
(1.0210)
-204.4912***
(8.3666)
-102.3112***
(13.3970)
-20.4416***
(3.1577)
55.8356***
(2.0231)
3.9983**
(1.9858)

(8)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0012
(0.0008)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0005**
(0.0002)
0.0527***
(0.0019)
0.0100***
(0.0015)
-0.0032***
(0.0010)
-0.0170***
(0.0009)
-0.0011**
(0.0005)

Yes
Yes
State

No
Yes
County

No
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
County

23,123,958

23,123,958

23,123,958

23,123,958

23,123,958

Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

52

Appendix Table 6
Effects of Comprehensive Smoking Bans in All Venues (Workplace, Restaurants, and Bars) on Infant Health
Mothers’ Education Level: High school graduate or less
Results Using 1995-2009 Sample of Births
(Gao and Baughman 2017)
Reference Group: No Bans in any Venue
(1)
Reference Group: All other
Comprehensive Ban – All Venues
Mother's Age
Mother's Education
Black
Race Other
Hispanic
Married
Cigarette Tax

Maternal Smoking
Year Fixed Effects
Fixed Effects
Observations

Birthweight
9.2221**
(3.5563)
3.0172***
(0.3790)
3.8021**
(1.7511)
-175.3561***
(6.0826)
-73.7237***
(13.4753)
17.3087**
(6.6349)
84.2092***
(4.9000)
4.5853**
(2.1303)

(2)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0020**
(0.0008)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0009**
(0.0003)
0.0465***
(0.0017)
0.0036**
(0.0014)
-0.0127***
(0.0018)
-0.0240***
(0.0015)
-0.0012**
(0.0005)

20863132

20863132

No
Yes
State

No
Yes
State

(3)
Birthweight
7.8431*
(4.0172)
3.1787***
(0.3463)
1.4567
(1.4464)
-211.8615***
(7.1751)
-104.8950***
(14.0053)
-31.6472***
(4.6899)
57.1260***
(2.1204)
4.4103*
(2.3703)

(4)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0016*
(0.0009)
0.0009***
(0.0001)
-0.0003
(0.0003)
0.0550***
(0.0019)
0.0109***
(0.0013)
-0.0012
(0.0012)
-0.0176***
(0.0009)
-0.0012**
(0.0005)

20863132

20863132

Yes
Yes
State

Yes
Yes
State

(5)
Birthweight
8.7424**
(3.6035)
2.8435***
(0.3590)
4.5590***
(1.4320)
-173.7890***
(7.3271)
-82.5045***
(12.0550)
22.0665***
(4.2149)
83.4083***
(4.5458)
4.8645**
(1.9898)

(6)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0020**
(0.0008)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0010***
(0.0003)
0.0456***
(0.0018)
0.0046***
(0.0014)
-0.0131***
(0.0015)
-0.0235***
(0.0015)
-0.0014**
(0.0005)

Birthweight
6.6477*
(3.7144)
3.1373***
(0.3158)
2.0512*
(1.0782)
-204.9080***
(8.9944)
-109.8076***
(11.7563)
-21.6659***
(2.9660)
56.8536***
(1.9121)
4.0603*
(2.0290)

(8)
Low
Birthweight
-0.0015*
(0.0009)
0.0010***
(0.0001)
-0.0005**
(0.0002)
0.0528***
(0.0021)
0.0110***
(0.0012)
-0.0029***
(0.0009)
-0.0173***
(0.0009)
-0.0012**
(0.0005)

20863132

20863132

20863132

20863132

No
Yes
County

No
Yes
County

(7)

Yes
Yes
County

Yes
Yes
County

Notes: Coefficients from OLS models are reported. Standard errors are clustered at the state level and reported in parentheses.
Asterisks denote statistical significance as follows: *** p-value≤0.01; ** 0.01<p-value≤0.05; * 0.05<p-value≤0.10.

53

