NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CITY EQUILIBRIUM WITH BORROWING CONSTRAINTS:
STRUCTURAL ESTIMATION AND GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM EFFECTS
Amine Ouazad
Romain Rancière
Working Paper 23994
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23994

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank Patrick Bayer, Jan Brueckner, Morris Davis, Gilles Duranton, Matthew Kahn, Scott
Page, Stuart Rosenthal, Holger Sieg, the audiences of the CEPR Conference in Urban and
Regional Economics conference in Philadelphia, INSEAD, Ecole polytechnique, University of
Southern California, University of Virginia, and World Bank seminar series for fruitful
comments. Marton Varga provided research assistance. The authors acknowledge financial
support from INSEAD, the International Monetary Fund, the Chaire Banque de France The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Amine Ouazad and Romain Rancière. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

City Equilibrium with Borrowing Constraints: Structural Estimation and General Equilibrium
Effects
Amine Ouazad and Romain Rancière
NBER Working Paper No. 23994
November 2017
JEL No. G21,R21,R31,R51
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a general equilibrium model of location choice with social interactions where
mortgage approval rates determine household-specific choice sets that differ across
neighborhoods and years in observable and unobservable dimensions. Existence and local
uniqueness of city equilibria enable comparative statics estimates of the impact of changes in
borrowing constraints on neighborhood-level prices and demographics. Estimation the model
using micro data on property transactions, household demographics, neighborhood amenities,
mortgage applications, and bank liquidity for the San Francisco Bay area, reveals that the price
sensitivity of borrowing constraints explains about two-thirds of the price elasticity of
neighborhood demand. General equilibrium estimates of the impact of the relaxation of lending
standards on prices and neighborhood demographics bring two out-of-sample predictions for the
period 2000-2006: (i) an increase in house prices accompanied by a compression of the price
distribution and (ii) a reduction in the isolation of Whites in line with evidence of gentrification in
the San Francisco Bay. Both predictions are supported by empirical observation.

Amine Ouazad
HEC Montreal
3000, Chemin de la Cote Sainte Catherine
H3T 2A7, Montreal, QC
Canada
aouazad@gmail.com
Romain Rancière
Department of Economics
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90097
and NBER
ranciere@usc.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23994

1

Introduction

The ability to secure mortgage credit is a key determinant of households’ decision to purchase
housing. Changes in lending standards contribute to the dynamics of cities by aﬀecting housing
decisions and house prices. This paper proposes and estimates a novel structural model of city
equilibrium under borrowing constraints. The estimated model explains the role played by mortgage
approval constraints in determining housing demand and its price elasticity. The model is then used
to estimate how changes in lending standards aﬀect the city equilibrium, the distribution of house
prices, and the distribution of households across neighborhoods.
Structurally estimated models of consumer demand for diﬀerentiated goods have been widely
used to characterize the market for durable goods such as cars (Berry, Levinsohn & Pakes 1995) or
houses (Bayer & Timmins 2007, Bayer, Ferreira & McMillan 2007). While these papers are able
to characterize the full set of price and demand elasticities on their respective markets, they do
not explicitly account for financial frictions, and do not focus on measuring the general equilibrium
eﬀects associated with changes in such frictions. Credit constraints are important in housing markets
– more than 80% of purchases involve mortgage financing.1 Price changes impact households through
both preferences and borrowing constraints; and as neighborhood-level housing supply is largely
inelastic, changes in lending standards can have a sizable eﬀect on the distribution of housing
prices.
The paper estimates a structural housing choice model which accounts for the eﬀect of endogenous borrowing constraints on household demand. The model structure stresses the equilibrium
relationships between mortgage market conditions, location decisions, and house prices. Comparative statics of the estimated model allow to measure, in general equilibrium, the impact of a change
in lending standards set by mortgage credit suppliers, on the distribution of house prices across the
city, and on the spatial segregation of households.
Borrowing constraints are introduced in the location choice model by endogenizing housing
choice sets, whose probabilities can be estimated using loan applications data. The model yields
a novel decomposition of the own-price demand elasticity into two distinct terms: (i) an elasticity
term that reflects the impact of a price increase on utility, and (ii) an elasticity term that reflects
1

81% in 2013 according to data provided by RealtyTrac.

2

the impact of a price increase on mortgage approval rates. Both own-price demand elasticity terms
diﬀer across households and neighborhoods. The second term reflects diﬀerences in the intensity of
borrowing constraints across households with diﬀerent characteristics, and financing purchases in
diﬀerent neighborhoods.
The model yields estimates of household’s preferences and willingness to pay for housing amenities for the 4,416 neighborhoods (census blockgroups) of the San Francisco Bay area between 1990
and 2010. The estimation combines data on the entire universe of mortgage credit applications
and transaction prices, with exhaustive census blockgroup characteristics and individual characteristics for a sample of 120,029 households (1% census). Individual mortgage approval probability
estimates are based on the observation of lenders’ discrete approval or denial choice, which results
from screening borrowers’ application based on information on loan amount and leverage (loan-toincome ratios) and a range of borrower and neighborhood characteristics such as property value,
and observable and unobservable neighborhood prospects. When mortgage origination constraints
are taken into account, households exhibit a higher willingness to pay for schools with higher test
scores. Furthermore a large fraction of house price elasticity can be attributed to the sensitivity of
mortgage approval rates to changes in prices.
A comparative statics analysis of the estimated model, based on a change in lending standards of
the magnitude experienced between 2000 and 2006, shows that the model predicts well key moments
of the actual distribution of house price changes in the San Francisco Bay area, and replicates the
compression of the price distribution. The model also predicts, in line with the data, a reduction
in the isolation of Whites, a pattern in line with the evidence of gentrifications in several areas of
the San Francisco Bay.
Estimating the model and running the general equilibrium comparative statics analysis requires
addressing a number of novel methodological and empirical challenges.
Berry et al. (1995) have shown how observed demand maps one-to-one with neighborhood utilities. This paper extends this key result to the case in which each household demand is conditional
on the set of neighborhoods for which households’ mortgage applications can be approved with some
probability. In addition to proving the existence of a city equilibrium under borrowing constraints,
we show that such equilibrium is locally unique under general conditions, and globally unique in the
absence of social preferences. Existence and local uniqueness allow us to run comparative statics
3

analyses of the eﬀects of changes in lending standards.
The structural parameters of the model, which include household preferences for a vector of key
observable amenities and location-specific unobservable fixed eﬀects are estimated using a simulated
method of moments estimator with panel data.2 The probability of approval for a loan application
is estimated using Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, which includes both the income
and race of the applicant, and is matched to longitudinal data on neighborhood time-varying characteristics – including geocoded transaction prices. In estimating approval probabilities, we exploit
the very unique characteristics of HMDA data which is to provide information on the universe of
mortgage applications and their associated approval decisions, rather that inferring the intensity of
borrowing constraints from the information about successful applicants only.3
The model’s mortgage approval specification flexibly estimates how banks’ lending standards
depend on the rich heterogeneity in observable and unobservable individual, property, and neighborhood dimensions. Lending standards constrain households’ neighborhood choice set, likely affecting household demand. The estimation of mortgage approval probabilities is subject to potential
endogeneity biases due to unobservable borrowers’ characteristics. We estimate the impact of borrower and mortgage characteristics using a set of instruments combining information on banks’
balance sheet liquidity, at the national level, with information on the location of their branches
across neighborhoods. Bank liquidity, derived from national balance sheets, predicts local loan
characteristics, and is unlikely to be confounded by neighborhood-level unobservable demand factors. Finally, house prices are typically endogenous with respect to local unobservables, an issue
shared with prior consumer choice models; this leads to an upward bias in the estimated impact of
prices on neighborhood utility. We use the set of characteristics of two-step adjacent neighborhoods
as instruments for neighborhood price, in a similar way as Bayer & Timmins (2007).
The model yields estimates of household preferences under borrowing constraints along seven
broad dimensions: house price, neighbors’ observables, housing quality, distance to the central
business district, and school test scores as measured by California’s Academic Performance Index. The model also estimates household preference heterogeneity using data from the 1% Census’
2
The total number of potential choice sets leads to our use of Simulated GMM: 2 to the power of the number of
neighborhoods is a very large number, leading to computationally intractable estimation when using non-simulated
demand.
3
Other datasets (e.g. loan performance data, corelogic) include additional informations on originated loans but
they do not include approval decisions on applications or the characteristics of denied applications.

4

120,029 households: preferences for neighborhoods vary according to the household’s race, income,
and unobserved heterogeneity. In contrast with a model ignoring borrowing constraints, our model
estimates stronger preferences for neighborhoods with high-performing public schools. Importantly,
when the eﬀect of a price change on mortgage approval rate is controlled for, the estimated price
sensitivity of base utility is three times lower for a median income household.
The empirical decomposition of the estimation of total price elasticity between the conditional
demand elasticity (assuming constant mortgage approval probabilities) and the borrowing elasticity
(capturing the eﬀect of a price change approval probabilities) reveals that borrowing elasticity
accounts on average for about 70 percent of total price elasticity (the mean ratio of borrowing
elasticity over total elasticity is 0.69). Borrowing elasticity exhibits a large degree of heterogeneity
reflecting considerable diﬀerences in the intensity of the borrowing constraints across households,
and displays a correlation with house prices that is more than twice that of conditional demand
elasticity ( 0.54 vs.

0.24).

Using the estimated structural model, we can measure the eﬀect of lending standards on house
prices and spatial segregation in general equilibrium. Our first comparative statics result shows that
a relaxation in lending standards, as observed in the Bay area between 2000 and 2006, leads to a
compression of the price distribution: both in the model and in the data, neighborhoods that were
less expensive in 2000 saw a larger increase between 2000 and 2006 than initially more expensive
neighborhoods.4 Without using any information on the period 2001-2006 other than the realized
change in lending standards, the model is able to approximate key moments of the 2000-2006 price
change distribution, and yields a negative correlation between price changes and initial price change
that is about 40 percent of the actual correlation (0.29 vs. 0.75). We also analyze the eﬀect of the
same change in lending standards on spatial segregation. Regarding changes in segregation, the
model replicate qualitatively well several features of the data such as the reduction in the isolation
of Whites, in line in line with evidence of gentrification in the San Francisco Bay.
We test the robustness of our comparative statics results to the introduction of an option to
rent, to the introduction of a neighborhood-specific supply elasticity (constructed using satellite
data from the U.S. Geological Survey on land development combined with local measures of land
4

A similar cross-sectional dispersion in house price changes has been documented for San Diego by Landvoigt,
Piazzesi & Schneider (2015).

5

slope and ruggedness), and to changes in population size and racial composition due to migration
flows in and out of the San Francisco Bay. The robustness tests yield results that are similar to our
baseline findings.
This paper contributes to the literature along several dimensions.

Our general equilibrium

comparative statics analysis is, to our knowledge, the first attempt in the literature to measure
the eﬀects of changes in lending standards on the distribution of prices and households within an
estimated structural framework of a city equilibrium. Such analysis is particularly useful in the
case of housing (as opposed to consumer products) because housing supply elasticity is very far
from perfectly elastic, and therefore demand shocks typically lead to substantial changes in the
price distribution. By using an estimated general equilibrium approach, this paper complements
the literature linking changes in credit conditions to changes in house prices based on regression
discontinuity design frameworks (Favara & Imbs 2015, Adelino, Schoar & Severino 2012) or on
calibrated models (Glaeser, Gottlieb & Gyourko 2012, Landvoigt et al. 2015).
We introduce borrowing constraints, modeled as household’s choice sets, in the workhorse model
of the consumer choice literature developed in Berry, Levinsohn & Pakes (1995) and Petrin (2002)
for consumer products, in Bayer & Timmins (2007) and Bayer, Ferreira & McMillan (2007) for
housing.5 While the approach bears similarity with the modeling of incomplete product availability
(Conlon & Mortimer 2013) or limited information on products (Goeree 2008), it diﬀers from it in two
very important ways. First, the reduction of the choice set in our model is due to the endogenous
decision of banks to approve mortgage loan applications. Second, the reduction of the choice set in
our model comes from the (housing) demand side rather than from the supply side.
The paper focuses on estimating the eﬀect of a change in lending standards on city equilibrium
over a medium run horizon (e.g. between 2000 and 2006). Running comparative statics in a static
framework keeps the general equilibrium analysis tractable and computationally manageable with
a large number of neighborhoods, and a rich structure of heterogeneity in preferences as well as in
mortgage approval decisions. In doing so we leave aside the short-run dynamics of housing markets
(e.g. the role of vacancies and moving costs). The dynamic aspects of housing demand decision are
treated by Bayer, McMillan, Murphy & Timmins (2016) using a structural framework estimated at
annual frequency.
5

See Holmes & Sieg (2015) for a comprehensive survey of structural estimation in urban economics.

6

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the economic model of location choice with
borrowing constraints and its equilibrium properties. Section 3 introduces the empirical approach for
identifying (section 3.1) and estimating (section 3.2) the model by simulated generalized method of
moments. Empirical findings are described in Section 4. Section 5 presents the general equilibrium
analysis of a change in lending standards. Section 6 extends to the general equilibrium analysis to
incorporate the impact of local housing supply elasticity and the role of tenure choice. Section 7
concludes.

2

The Model

We model a metropolitan area as made of a finite number of neighborhoods, each composed of
housing units, and inhabited by a corresponding population of households. Time is discrete and
there is a finite number of time periods t = 1, 2, . . . , T . In year t, the metropolitan area has a number
Nt of households indexed by i = 1, 2, . . . , Nt . There is a fixed number of J

2 neighborhoods

and each neighborhood j = 1, 2, . . . , J in year t = 1, 2, . . . , T has a number sjt of housing units.
Household i in year t chooses a neighborhood j(i, t) 2 {1, 2, . . . , J} ⌘ J, where j(i, t) is constrained
to belong to the choice set Cit ⇢ J of household i in year t. The choice set Cit is a subset of J and
is equal to J if and only if household i is unconstrained in year t.

(i) Neighborhood Choice j(i, t) Conditional on Credit Availability
Household i derives utility Uijt from neighborhood j in year t. Household i’s neighborhood choice
j(i, t) is based on maximizing utility within the choice set Cit , i.e. j(i, t) = argmaxj2Cit Uijt . Utility
Uijt is allowed to vary across neighborhoods, across individuals, and to vary across neighborhoods
according to individual characteristics. Thus:

Uijt =

0
+ x0it ⌦zjt + ˜ it zjt +"ijt
|
{z
}
jt

(1)

uijt

where uijt is the explained part of household utility. All throughout the paper, bold symbols denote
vectors. Household i’s observable characteristics are stacked in a vector xit of size K1

7

1. Similarly,

neighborhood j’s observable characteristics are summarized by a vector zjt of size K2
specification (1),
t. The vector

t

jt

1.6 In utility

is the base utility that all households derive from living in neighborhood j in year

thus captures variation in utility across neighborhoods independently of individual

characteristics. The term x0it ⌦zjt captures the observable heterogeneity of neighborhood utility
across households. It is a series of interaction terms between the K1 household characteristics xit
and the K2 neighborhood characteristics zjt , where ⌦ is the matrix of K1 K2 interaction coeﬃcients.
Therefore x0it ⌦zjt captures how neighborhood utility varies according to households’ observable
0
characteristics. Additionally, the term ˜ it z jt captures the unobservable heterogeneity of households’

preferences for neighborhood amenities. ˜ it is a normally-distributed vector of household-level
heterogeneity with mean 0 and with variance-covariance matrix ⌃. The standard deviation of ˜itk ,
k,

i.e. the k-th diagonal element of ⌃, is noted

k = 1, 2, . . . , K2 . Normalizing each random

coeﬃcient ˜itk by the corresponding standard deviation
of a standard normal random term bitk = ˜itk /

k.

k

allows utility to be written as a function

Following Berry et al. (1995), the explained utility

uijt of one neighborhood, say neighborhood 1, is set to zero by convention, so that Ui1t ⌘ "i1t .
In turn, base utility

jt

is decomposed into the impact of the log price, of observable local

amenities z0jt , and of unobservable neighborhood heterogeneity ⇠j :

jt

=

↵ log(pjt ) + z0jt + ⇠j + ⇣jt

(2)

In utility specification (1), the random term "ijt is extreme-value distributed. Following McFadden
(1973), household i’s probability of choosing neighborhood j in year t, within his choice set Cit , is:
⇣

P Uijt

Uikt , 8k 2 Cit

˜
·t , z·t , xit , it , Cit

⌘

= 1(j 2 Cit )· P

0
+ x0it ⌦zjt + ˜ it zjt )
(3)
0
exp( kt + x0 ⌦zkt + ˜ zkt )

exp(
k2Cit

jt

it

it

where 1(j 2 Cit ) = 1 whenever j 2 Cit , and 0 otherwise. Integrating over the vector of random
coeﬃcients ˜ it obtains the probability conditional on observables and on base utility:
P (j, t|

·t , z·t , xit , Cit ) =

Z

˜

P (j, t|

·t , z·t , xit ,

˜ , Cit ) · f (⌃

1/2 ˜

) · d˜

(4)

6
zjt can also include the characteristics of loans for location j for household i in year t. This is discussed in
Section 4.3.

8

where f is the density function of the standard i.i.d. multivariate normal of dimension K2 .

(ii) Endogenizing the Choice Set Cit ⇢ J
This paper focuses on constraints on the choice set driven by mortgage credit approval decisions.
Lending standards vary flexibly across individuals, locations, and years, and thus there does not
typically exist a ranking of neighborhoods by increasing approval rates independently of household characteristics. A neighborhood j belongs to the choice set Cit of household i in year t if
a mortgage lender approves household i’s application in neighborhood j.7 The probability that a
neighborhood j belongs to household i’s choice set is thus the probability that a mortgage lender
approves household i’s application.
The probability of a choice set Cit ⇢ J = {1, 2, . . . , J} is the product of banks’ approval probabilities for the applications of household i.

ijt

is the probability that household i is approved for a

mortgage in neighborhood j in year t. With independent draws, the probability that household i’s
choice set Cit is exactly C is the binomial probability:

P (Cit = C) = ⇧j2C P (j 2 C)⇧j 2C
/ [1

P (j 2 C)] ⌘ ⇧j2C

ijt ⇧j 2C
/ (1

ijt )

(5)

Such formula assumes independent and identically distributed decisions, and an extension of the
model allows for non-zero correlation in banks’ decisions across neighborhoods for a given household i.8
The probability

ijt

of approval is the outcome of banks’ benefit-cost analysis of originating a

mortgage loan for household i for a house in neighborhood j. Such benefit-cost analysis is summarized in a latent variable approves⇤ijt . Household i’s application in neighborhood j is approved if
and only if approves⇤ijt

0. The benefit-cost approves⇤ijt depends on household observables xit and

neighborhood characteristics zjt .

j2C

whenever approves⇤ijt = x0it

7

+ z0jt + x0it zjt

eijt > 0

(6)

The endogeneity of households’ choice of mortgage lender when applying is addressed in Section 4.2.
Results available from the authors. An updated formula 5 features the correlation of binomial draws across neighborhoods. Assuming independent approval probabilities gives a lower bound of the impact of borrowing constraints:
with uncorrelated outcomes, an individual who applies to multiple neighborhoods obtains a higher approval rate for
at least one application.
8

9

Neighborhood characteristics zjt include a neighborhood fixed eﬀect that captures location-specific
underwriting unobservables. There will be spatial variation in lending standards if, for instance,
expected trends in the value of the housing collateral diﬀer across locations. The neighborhood’s
log price either enters directly in zjt , or enters as the log of the loan-to-income ratio in both xit
(log household income) and zjt (log house price). In both cases, a change in log price aﬀects the
probability of the choice set.

is the matrix of interaction terms: neighborhood characteristics aﬀect
P
the probability of approval non-monotonically as the sign of @approves⇤ijt /@zjtl = l + K
k=1 kl xitk
depends on household characteristics.

eijt is an i.i.d. logistically distributed random heterogeneity with cumulative distribution function ⇤(·).9 The probability of approval in neighborhood j for household i is therefore simply a
⇣
⌘
logistic function of individual and household observables P (j 2 Cit ) = ⇤ x0it + z0jt + x0it zjt .

Combining (5) and such logit specification, the probability of the choice set depends on the vector
of all neighborhood and household covariates:
P (Cit = C|xit , z·t ) = ⇧j2C ⇤ x0it

+ z0jt + x0it zjt ⇧j 2C
1
/

⇤ x0it

+ z0jt + x0it zjt

(7)

(iii) Neighborhood Demand
Total demand for neighborhood j in year t is the weighted average of the conditional demand for
neighborhood j, conditional on each possible choice set. The set of choice sets C is the set of all
possible subsets of J = {1, 2, . . . , J}. The probability of a choice set C has been derived above.
P (j, t|

·t , z·t , xit )

=

X

C2C

P (C|xit , z·t , j, t)
|
{z
}

· P (j, t|
|

·t , z·t , xit , C)

{z

}

(8)

probability of choice set C demand conditional on set C

As the set of all possible choice sets C has 2J elements, total demand for neighborhood j in year
t is the sum of 2J conditional demands. Equation (8) is the total demand of households with
characteristics xit with a given income, race, education, age, and other characteristics. The last
step in obtaining total demand is to integrate over the distribution of individual demographics. We
9
The paper’s section 4.2 also considers a normal distribution for eijt when instrumenting the covariates. Results
are similar.

10

note D(j, t) such total demand for neighborhood j in year t:

D(j, t) ⌘ P (j, t | , z·t , f (·) ) =

XZ

C2C x

P (C|z·t , xit ) · P (j, t| , z·t , xit , Cit ) · f (xit )dxit

(9)

And f (xit ) is the city-level distribution of household characteristics. Such distribution depends on
time t and thus allows for changes in the demographic make-up of the city between t and t + 1, e.g.
driven by migrations in and out of the metropolitan area.

(iv) Demand Elasticities
Changes in prices aﬀect both household utility and choice set probabilities. Hence demand elasticities conditional on the choice set diﬀer from total demand elasticities. The first kind of (own-price)
demand elasticity ⌘|C is equal to the eﬀect of a change in the log price on demand while keeping
the choice set probabilities P (Cit ), i = 1, 2, . . . , N , t = 1, 2, . . . , T constant. For a fixed probability
distribution P (C) over choice sets, we note ⌘jt|C the own-price demand elasticity for neighborhood
j in year t conditional on P (C).

⌘jt|C

=
=

@D(j, t)
1
D(j, t) @ log(pjt ) P (C) f ixed
XZ
1
↵(xit , ˜ it ) · P (C|z·t , xit )P (j, t| , z·t , xit , C) (1
D(j, t)
X
C2C

(10)
P (j, t| , z·t , xit , C)) f (xit )dxit

where ↵(xit , ˜ it ) is the impact of log price on base utility for a household with characteristics xit
and random coeﬃcient ˜ it (Equation (2)). In the simplified case where the model does not feature
random coeﬃcients, and when there is a large number of neighborhoods so that P (j) ⌧ 1, such
conditional demand elasticity is well approximated by

↵.

Prices also aﬀect the probabilities P (C|z·t , xit ) over choice sets C 2 C. Total demand elasticity
⌘ is equal to the sum of two eﬀects: the price eﬀect on demand due to utility changes, and the price
eﬀect on demand due to changes in choice set probabilities,

⌘jt = ⌘jt|C +

XZ 

C2C x

@
P (C|z·t , xit ) · P (j, t|
@ log(pjt )

·t , z·t , xit , C)

· f (xit )dxit

(11)

The second term of this expression (11) is the borrowing elasticity. An increase in house price in
11

neighborhood j causes a decline in demand because of (i) the lower utility value of the neighborhood
and (ii) the lower approval rate in neighborhood j.
The impact of a log price change on the choice-set probability is simply derived from the individual approval probabilities.
@
P (C|z·t , xit ) =
@ log(pjt )
=

@
{⇧k2C
@ log(pjt )
a · (1(j 2 C)
|
{z
⌘

where

ijt (C)

ijt ⇧k2C
/ (1

ijt )}

ijt ) P (C|z·t , xit )

}

(12)

a is the coeﬃcient of log price in the approval specification (6). The closed-form expression

of the borrowing elasticity follows by plugging (12) into (11).

(v) City Equilibrium
Households choose their location based on the set of amenities that includes neighbors’ demographics
– households may exhibit preferences for neighbors’ education, income, and race. Therefore, two
sets of conditions need to be satisfied at equilibrium.
The first set of equilibrium conditions is the equality of the demand and supply of housing
units for each neighborhood. Subsections (i)–(iv) above have introduced household demand and
its properties. The supply of housing in neighborhood j depends on the log price of housing in
neighborhood j such that the supply of housing Sj (pjt ) in neighborhood j is an increasing and
concave function of pjt . In this paper’s empirical analysis, Sections 4–5, the supply of housing units
is initially assumed perfectly inelastic, so that Sj (pjt ) = sjt for every j, t.10
Households have preferences for neighborhood demographics whenever the vector zjt of neighborhood characteristics includes other households’ demand for the same neighborhood. Neighborhood
characteristics zjt = (wjt , vjt ) thus comprise a set wjt of exogenous characteristics (e.g. the age of
structures in the neighborhood) and a set of endogenous neighbor demographics vjt (e.g. fraction
of households with a college degree in neighborhood j). Note vjt (x) the fraction of households with
characteristic x in neighborhood j in year t. Write X + the finite set of neighbors’ characteristics
(e.g. neighbors’ income and race) that aﬀect household utility, then vjt = (vjt (x), x 2 X + ).
10

Supply elasticity is introduced and estimated in Section 6.2.

12

Definition 1. Given the distribution of household observables f (xit ) in the city, given the vector
of neighborhood observables zjt , excluding log price, and neighborhood-level unobservables ⇠ j , ⇣ jt ,
for each neighborhood j = 1, 2, . . . , J, in each year t = 1, 2, . . . , T , a city equilibrium is a vector of
⌘
⇣
⇤
such that:
prices and neighborhood demographics (p⇤ , v⇤ ) = p⇤jt , vjt
j=2,...,J;t=1,2,...,T

8j 2 J\ {1} , 8t 2 {1, 2, . . . , T },

D (j, t; p⇤ , v⇤ ) = Sj p⇤jt

8x 2 X + ,

vjt (x) =

(13)

D(j, t|x; p⇤ , v⇤ )

Nx
·
N
D(j, t; p⇤ , v⇤ )

(14)

where Nx is the number of households with characteristics x. Condition (13) expresses the equality
of the demand and supply of housing. Condition (14) expresses the equality of households’ neighborhood demographics and the demand of each demographic group. D(j, t|x; p⇤ , v⇤ ) is the demand for
neighborhood j in year t of a household with characteristic x.

D(j,t|x;p⇤ ,v⇤ )
D(j,t;p⇤ ,v⇤ )

is the fraction of such

households as derived from equilibrium neighborhood demand.
The Appendix’s lemma 1 proves equilibrium existence using Brouwer’s theorem. An equilibrium
is locally unique as in Debreu (1970), proven in Lemma 2. Local uniqueness enables comparative
statics analysis of lending standards around the observed equilibrium (Section 5). A stronger result
of global uniqueness is obtained in Lemma 3 when households do not exhibit preferences for peers’
demographics, using an argument of gross substitutability. The three equilibrium properties are
grouped in the following proposition:
Proposition 1. (Equilibrium properties) The city equilibrium exists, i.e. there exists an equilibrium vector of prices and neighborhood demographics (p⇤ , v⇤ ). The city equilibrium is locally unique
almost surely: with probability 1, the Jacobian

@D
@(p,v)

of the demand vector w.r.t. (p, v) is of full

rank. Equivalently, with probability 1, there exists an open set ! that contains (p⇤ , v⇤ ) such that,
(p⇤ , v⇤ ) is the unique equilibrium vector in !. The city equilibrium is globally unique if households
do not exhibit preferences for peers’ demographics.
While the city typically exhibits multiple, locally unique, equilibria, the next section shows that
observations of neighborhood characteristics and mortgage approvals leads to the identification of
a unique set of structural preference parameters and lending standards.

13

2.1

Discussion of the set-up

The introduction of mortgage approval constraints through endogenous choice set probabilities is
the key innovation of the model presented above. The rest of the model is a general equilibrium
framework of location choice with social interactions. In the baseline model, the utility that a
household i derives from living in neighborhood j depends on the log price. An alternative, following
Berry et al. (1995), is to make it depend on of the log non-housing consumption, i.e. the log of
the diﬀerence between household income and mortgage payments. We derive and estimate this
alternative set-up in Section 6 of the online appendix. The main additional advantage of this
framework is to introduce a role for mortgage payments, thus capturing another dimension of
lending standards. In the baseline model, we also choose ignore the option to rent and focus instead
on alternative choices for buying a house. Such rental option is introduced in an extension of
the model discussed in Section 6.1. In another extension of the model, presented in Section 6.2,
we introduce housing supply elasticity (in the basic model housing supply is inelastic). The goal
of introducing these extensions is both to show the flexibility of the model and of its structural
estimation procedure, and to assess the robustness of the estimation and general equilibrium results.

3

Identification and Estimation

This section presents the empirical approach for the identification (section 3.1) and estimation
(section 3.2) of borrowing constraints and of households’ preferences for neighborhood amenities
and neighborhood demographics.

3.1

Identification Strategy

The model includes three sets of parameters to estimate, which we identify using three sets of corresponding moments. The first set of parameters pins down the probability of approval for a mortgage
application, given the characteristics of borrower, lender, and houses, as in the lending standards’
specification (6). This paper identifies such parameters using an instrumental variable strategy.
The second set of parameters measures the impact of neighborhood observable and unobservable
characteristics on base utility (specification (2)). Log house prices are typically positively correlated
with unobservable amenities. The paper presents a set of IV moments as in by Berry et al. (1995)
14

and Bayer & Timmins (2007) that use both neighborhood-specific fixed eﬀects and the exogenous
characteristics of second-degree adjacent neighborhoods. Finally, the third set of estimated parameters measures how the valuation of neighborhood amenities depends on household characteristics.
We identify such preference heterogeneity using micromoments as in Imbens & Lancaster (1994)
and Petrin (2002).
This paper’s identification strategy relies on the use of mortgage approval data for the estimation
of choice set probabilities. Abaluck & Adams (2017) proposes an alternative approach: endogenous
choice sets are estimated without the requirement of auxiliary data such as mortgage approval
data. Such methodology would yield estimates of the sensitivity of choice sets to price changes.
It would not allow however identify the full relationship between choice sets and observables, that
is, in our case, the mortgage approval rule. By contrast, this paper’s methodology, while staying
computationally tractable, builds on direct evidence of mortgage approval constraints, and thus
allows for policy experiments of changes in lending standards.
Note that the potential multiplicity of equilibrium in the model does not prevent point identification. Following the same logic of Brock & Durlauf (2001) we show that the linearity (or polynomial
nature) of social preferences, together with logit demand, implies identification of the model. The
detailed, step by step proof of identification of this paper’s model is provided in Section 2.1 of the
online appendix.

(i) Lending Standards
The approval specification (6) predicts the probability of approval based on the characteristics of
the household, the time-varying characteristics of the neighborhood, neighborhood fixed eﬀects,
and interactions between individual and neighborhood characteristics. The neighborhood fixed
eﬀect captures non time-varying unobservables that are correlated with the unobservable collateral
(house) value for the loan and have an impact on the probability of approval.
The identification challenge lies at least (i) in the lack of observability of the full range of timevarying household and house covariates that mortgage originators consider in the underwriting
process, (ii) in the endogeneity of households’ decision to apply for a mortgage, and (iii) in the
endogeneity of the choice of a specific mortgage lender.11 Empirical Section 4.2 below presents
11

Such endogeneity concerns are formalized in Section 2.5 of the Online Appendix.

15

a set of instrumental variables ⇥ijt based on banks’ national balance sheets that are arguably
uncorrelated with the unobservables eijt of specification (6); determine banks’ lending standards
and thus the probability of approval; and predict the characteristics xit of mortgage applicants. Such
instrumental variables, used in the context of a logit, provide the first set of moment conditions:

E [G0 (

0 , 0 , !0 )]

⇤
⇥
= E ⇤ x0it + z0jt + x0it zjt ⇥ijt = 0

(15)

(ii) Base Utility
The second set of moments aims at identifying the impact of neighborhood amenities and neighborhood demographics on neighborhood base utility (Specification (2)). Identification and estimation
of such parameters (↵, , ⇠) encounters at least three challenges (i) neighborhood utility Uijt and
base utility

jt

in specification (1) are not directly observable; (ii) demand, defined in equation

(9), is the sum of a large number of 2J terms, one for each potential choice set Cit 2 2{1,2,...,J} ,
(iii) unobservable neighborhood amenities ⇣jt may be correlated with the price of housing and with
observable neighborhood amenities (e.g. school quality).
On the first issue, Berry et al. (1995) has shown that, given the interaction parameters ⌦, and the
variance of the random coeﬃcients ⌃, there is a one-to-one mapping between the vector of observed
demands D = (Djt )j2J\{1},t2{1,2,...,T } and the vector of base utilities
whenever households are unconstrained, i.e.

ijt

= (

jt )j2J\{1},t2{1,2,...,T } ,

= 1 for all households, all neighborhoods and all

years. The Appendix’s Proposition 3 shows that a similar one-to-one mapping exists when demand
is the weighted average of demands conditional on each choice set. The unique vector

is obtained

by iterating the following sequence:
ˆk = ˆk

1

+ log (Djt )

⇣ ⇣
k
log D j, t| ˆ

1

⌘⌘

(16)

⇣
⌘
k
k
and at the limit ˆ = limk!1 ˆ of such sequence, predicted demand D j, t| limk!1 ˆ is equal to

observed demand Djt .

⇣
⌘
In the contraction mapping (16) , demand D j, t| ˆ is the sum of demand for all possible choice

sets C ⇢ {1, 2, . . . , J}, weighted by the probability of that choice set P (C). With J neighborhoods,
there are 2J choice sets. In our empirical application where households choose among more than
16

4000 neighborhoods, computing demand over a sum of 24000 choice sets is unfeasible. We proceed by
⇣
⌘
simulating D j, t| ˆ . A set of S sets noted Cits , s = 1, 2, . . . , S, is drawn for each household i in each
⇣
⌘
ˆ
1
year t, where the probability of drawing the set C ⇢ J of neighborhoods is ⇧j2C ˆijt ⇧j 2C
ijt .
/
⇣
⌘
Estimation of demand D j, t| ˆ given base utilities, and observables thus is the average of the

demands based on the simulated choice sets Cits :
⇣

N
S
⌘ X
⌘
1X ⇣
ˆ
D̂ j, t| =
D j, t| ˆ, Cits
S
i=1

(17)

s=1

⇣
⌘
with D j, t| ˆ, Cits the demand conditional on the choice set Cits . We apply Train’s (2009) simulated

method to obtain a consistent estimate of demand. Furthermore, we rely on Monte Carlo integration
R
following Geweke (1996) to integrate over household characteristics x f (·)dx and over the random
R
coeﬃcients ˜ f (·)d ˜ . The simulated demand D̂ thus replaces the actual demand D in the sequence
(

k

) specified in (16).

The contraction mapping method provides an estimate ˆjt for each neighborhood in each year.
The next step is to identify the impact of neighborhood amenities on base utility. Least squares
applied to regression (2) typically yields a positive coeﬃcient on log price, while consumer theory suggests a negative coeﬃcient

↵. Higher prices are positively correlated with unobservable

amenities, leading to an upward bias on the log(price) coeﬃcient in households’ utility function.
Empirical section 4.3 introduces L0 time-varying instruments ⌅ = ⌅jt arguably orthogonal to the
unobservable neighborhood amenities ⇣jt , providing a set of moment conditions for the estimation
of the impact of observable neighborhood amenities, house value, neighbors’ demographics zjt on
base utility

jt .

As the specification is estimated in panel, specification (2) relating base-utility to house and
neighborhood characteristics zjt is first-diﬀerenced. The first moment condition expresses the orthogonality of

⌅ with

⇣:
(18)

E( ⌅ ⇣) = 0
where the change in unobservable amenities
istics:

⇣jt =

jt

0

zjt , whose estimator

⇣jt depends on observable neighborhood character⇣ˆjt =

estimated vector of base utilities ˆ .

17

ˆjt

z0jt

follows from the previously

⇣ depends on lending standards ( , , ) and on preference parameters (↵, , ⇠, ⌦, ⌃) as the
contraction mapping depends on predicted approval probabilities ˆijt and on the non linear parameters (⌦, ⌃). We write the moment condition (18) as a function E [G1 (✓)] = E [ ⌅ ⇣(✓)] = 0 of
the vector ✓ = ( , , , ↵, , ⇠, ⌦, ⌃) of lending standards and preference parameters.
Moment condition (18) together with demand simulation (17) and the contraction mapping (16)
allows for the estimation of common households’ preferences

for neighborhood amenities; house-

holds’ preference heterogeneity is estimated in the next subsection.

(iii) Preference Heterogeneity
The matrix of interaction coeﬃcients ⌦ in utility specification (1) measures observable heterogeneity
i
h
0
in household preferences. The variance covariance matrix ⌃ = E ˜ it ˜ it captures unobservable

heterogeneity in household preferences. Identification of the parameters ⌦ and ⌃ in (1) is provided by a third set of micro moment conditions following Imbens & Lancaster (1994) and Petrin
(2002). Specifically, the third set of micro moments ensures that the predicted spatial distribution of
households, e.g. by race and income, matches the observed distributions of such households across
neighborhoods.
Two data sources provide moment conditions useful for such identification. First, Census micro data provides the characteristics xit of a sample of size Nt where i = 1, 2, . . . , Nt . Second,
neighborhood-level data provides elements of the distribution of household characteristics xit in
each neighborhood j 2 J. For instance, the Census provides log median family income per neighborhood (blockgroup in the empirical section). Such information provides a third set of moments
that matches the predicted demand by demographic subgroup for each neighborhood to the actual
demand by this same subgroup. If X is a subset of households such as, for example, the set of households with income above $50,000, then the following moment states that the number of households
with characteristics X predicted by the model must be equal to the number of such households in
each neighborhood.

0

E@

X

xit 2X

1

⇣

⌘

D j, t| ˆ ·t , z·t , xit , Cit A

X
=0
Djt

(19)

X the observed number of such households in neighborhood j in year t.
with Djt
⇣
⌘
P
The sum xit 2X D j, t| ˆ ·t , z·t , xit , Cit is the demand for neighborhood j from individuals with

18

characteristics in X as predicted by the model. A number L0 of subsets X1 , . . . , XL0 of households
provides a set of L0 moment conditions, E [G2 (✓)] = 0.

(iv) Structural Estimation
Lending standards ( , , ) are estimated jointly with preferences (↵, , ⇠, ⌦, ⌃). We stack the L
instrumental variable moment conditions of the approval specification, the L0 moment conditions of
base utility analysis, and the L00 moment conditions for subpopulations. Writing G as (G0 , G1 , G2 ),
parameters satisfy:
E (G ( , , , ↵, , ⇠, ⌦, ⌃)) = 0

(20)

A consistent and asymptotically normal estimator of household preferences and banks’ lending
⇤
0 ⇤
ˆ = argmin
standards follows from Hansen (1982) as the minimand ✓
✓2⇥ G (✓) G (✓), where ✓ =

˜ Ĝ(✓), and A is a consistent estimate of the square root
( , , , ↵, , ⇠, ⌦, ⌃) and G⇤ (✓) = A(✓)
˜ a
of the inverse of the asymptotic variance-covariance matrix of the moments,12 obtained using ✓,
preliminary consistent estimate of ✓. Ĝ(✓) is the simulated sample analogue of G(✓).

3.2

Estimation Steps

The model is estimated using three sources of data: the mortgage application and approval data,
the neighborhood data, and the household micro data. As the first set of moments is taken from a
diﬀerent sampling process than the two other moments, estimating the lending standards ˆ , ˆ , ˆ
can be performed separately in a first step. We then proceed in the following way for the estimation
ˆ ⌦,
ˆ ⌃:
ˆ
of household preferences ↵
ˆ , ˆ , ⇠,
1. For each observation i, t of the household sample:
(a) Predict the probability of approval ˆijt for each neighborhood j using the estimate
⌘
⇣
⇤ x0it ˆ + z0jt ˆ + x0it ˆ zjt .

(b) Draw S choice sets for individual i by drawing a dummy variable for each neighborhood
j equal to 1 with probability ˆijt . This defines a matrix of 0s and 1s, noted Cijt .
12

Section 2.4 of the Online Appendix discusses the implication of correlations between the lending standards’
moments and moments identifying households’ preferences for amenities.

19

(c) Draw a vector of i.i.d. multivariate standard normal random coeﬃcients b̃it .13
2. Then we minimize the GMM objective function G⇤ (✓)0 G⇤ (✓). To obtain Ĝ(✓) for a given
vector of parameters ✓:
(a) Estimate the vector ˆ t of base utilities using the contraction mapping (16) in each period
t = 1, 2, . . . , T .
(b) At each iteration of the contraction mapping, simulated total demand is D̂(j, t) =
1 P Nt
ˆ ˜
i=1 D̂(j, t|xit , zjt , ·t , it ), the average of individual demands. And simulated indiNt
vidual demand is D̂(j, t|xit , zjt , ˆ·t , ˜it ) = 1(Cijt = 1) ·

The ˜ it are obtained by multiplying b̃it by ⌃1/2 .

P

0
˜0
jt +xit ⌦zjt + it zjt )
0
˜0
k,s.t.Cikt =1 exp( kt +xit ⌦zkt + it zkt )

exp(

.

(c) Perform the panel instrumental variable regression of base utilities ˆ = ( ˆ·t ; t = 1, 2, . . . , T )
on neighborhood covariates instrumented by the vector ⌅, to obtain the panel residuals
ˆ
⇣(✓)
and compute the second empirical moments, i.e. the orthogonality of instruments
and residuals

ˆ
⌅ ⇣(✓).

(d) For each demographic subgroup X1 , . . . , XL , estimate the demand of that subgroup Xl
for each neighborhood j using step (b)’s individual demands. This gives the second set
of moment conditions.
(e) Steps (c) and (d) together give the last two moments G1 and G2 of the objective function
Ĝ(✓). The weighting matrix is diagonal in the first step estimation, and, in the second
step, equal to an estimate of the inverse of the variance covariance matrix of the moments
ˆ
based on the first step estimate ✓.
Further details of the optimization algorithm are presented in Appendix section 2.2. Standard errors
for GMM estimates are computed as described in Section 2.3 of the Online Appendix.
13

We use antithetic acceleration as in Geweke (1988) and Goeree (2008). Antithetic acceleration enables the use
of simulated GMM standard errors.

20

4

Empirical Findings

4.1

Data

The model is estimated for the 9 counties that are contiguous to the San Francisco Bay: Alameda,
Contra Costa, Marin, Napa, San Francisco, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Solano, and Sonoma. Data is
gathered for three decades: in 1990, 2000, and 2010.14
Mortgage Application and Property Transaction Data
Mortgage application and approval data derives from data collected in accordance with the Home
Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA). The act mandates reporting of mortgage application data by
most depository and non-depository lending institutions.15 Thus, HMDA disclosure requirements
apply to more than 90% of all mortgage applications and originations (Dell’Arriccia, Igan & Laeven
2009). We focus on credit standards for first lien mortgages on homeowner occupied houses.16 Each
mortgage lender reports the loan amount, the applicant’s income, the applicant’s race and gender,
the census tract of the house, and the approval decision.17 Such geographical information allows
this paper to present lending standards that vary across locations and across the distribution of
household income and across races.
HMDA data are geographically matched to data on individual property transactions. Data
on individual property transactions was obtained from the mortgage company FNC Inc.,18 which
compiles transaction data based using public records and real estate sales. FNC data reports the
transaction price and the street address for the complete universe of transactions. Street addresses
are geocoded using the transaction’s street address and linked to each of our census tracts.19
14
As the borders of geographies such as blockgroups and tracts change over time, we use constant 2000 borders
throughout the analysis, i.e. for the three decennial waves of 1990 to 2010.
15
Specifically, HUD regulates for-profit lenders that have combined assets exceeding $10 million and/or originated
100 or more home purchase loans (including refinancing loans) in the preceding calendar year.
16
HMDA data contains information on the seniority of mortgage liens only starting in 2004. To eliminate second
lien mortgages, also known as piggyback loans, throughout the sample, the dataset includes applications with a
minimum LTI of 1.8; such threshold, according to the 2004 HMDA data, eliminates about 96 percent of second lien
mortgages, while discarding only 5 percent of first lien mortgages.
17
HMDA filings also report some information on whether or not loans have been pre-approved but only for some
years (post 2004 inclusive) and for a subset of originators covering only 18 percent of applications (2004). The
approval rate in that (potentially biased) sample was 70 percent for pre-approved loans vs. 68 percent for loans that
have not been pre-approved.
18
FNC Inc., headquartered in Oxford Mississippi, collects data that provides collateral information to the mortgage
industry.
19
Geocoding was performed using Texas A&M’s geocoding services, with a higher than 90% success rate.

21

Housing and Amenities Data
Households choose dwelling location based on the quality of housing structures, local amenities, and
neighborhood demographics.
Neighborhood-level data is derived from Census block-group data of the 1990 Summary Files 1
and 3, the 2000 Census Summary File 1, and the 2010 Summary File 1.20 There are 4,418 block
groups covering the San Francisco Bay area, with a median of 486 housing units per block group,
and a median land area of 0.57 square mile. The block group is the smallest geographical unit for
which the Census provides housing stock and demographic characteristics across three decades. As
the borders of block groups may change across the three decennial census waves, we keep constant
2000 block group borders by building new block group-level census relationship files. Neighborhood
characteristics are thus made comparable across the three waves.
The housing and amenities data comprises information on three dimensions that aﬀect households’ choice: characteristics of the housing structures (age of structure, median number of rooms,
price), school test score data, and neighborhood demographics (race, ethnicity, household median
income, fraction with college or associate degree, fraction with high school or more).
California’s Department of Education provides Academic Performance Index (API) test score
data for each school of the Bay area, for the last two waves, 2000 and 2010 of our neighborhood
data. We use school district borders from the Census Bureau to match a block group to each of
the 141 elementary or unified school districts, and assign the elementary school API to each block
group. APIs are standardized by year to a mean of 0 and a standard deviation of 1.
For the distribution of house values, we choose to use FNC transaction price data rather than
Census house values because, unlike the former, the latter are upper-censored and self-reported,
with the upper-censoring threshold depending on the census year.21 We verify that the distribution
of FNC transaction prices matches well the distribution of Census house values up to the censoring
points. With 126,104 transactions in 2000, a typical blockgroup of the San Francisco Bay Area has
about 27.6 transactions in 2000. Thus, each block group has a house value measure that is FNC’s
20

We thank the National Historical Geographic Information System at the University of Minnesota for providing
formatted Census files.
21
Census values comprise the entire universe of houses, while FNC transaction data only measures prices for the
subset of houses that transact. However, census values are self-declared and may thus be subject to non-classical
measurement error.

22

median transaction price22 for each year of observation.
Block group data also includes a measure of the distance to either the San Francisco Central
Business District or the San Jose C.B.D. as a proxy for access to retail and employment,23 and land
area in square miles to account for varying land surfaces across block groups.
Household data
This paper’s third data source is the 1% Census sample in 1990 and 2000, and the American
Community Survey in 2010, which are representative samples of households of the San Francisco
Bay area.24 Household-level data provides an empirical estimate of the San Francisco Bay area
distribution f (xit ) of household characteristics. It thus allows for the estimation of household-level
observable preference heterogeneity x0it ⌦zjt , as the third set of identifying moments (20) matches
the predicted and the observed neighborhood demands according to xit . Individual characteristics
include race (White, Black, Hispanic, Asian),25 and income as measured by total money income of
all household members aged 15 or above during the previous year.
The representative sample of households that the 1% Census provides also allows us to predict
approval probabilities for all households and all neighborhoods, using the estimated lending standards, regardless of whether they applied for a mortgage in a given year or not (first moment of
the model’s identifying conditions (20)). In such prediction exercise, household-level data comes
from the 1% Census and neighborhood-level data comes from FNC (for transaction prices) and
from the Census and the California department of Education (for neighborhood amenities). This
typically yields mortgage approval probabilities that are substantially below the observed approval
probabilities, as the subset of applicants is a self-selected subset of households.
22

We also estimated the 25th percentile and the 75th percentile of transaction prices. Although the heterogeneity
of housing within a neighborhood could be a potential identification issue, estimation including such moments in base
utility regression did not reveal that such heterogeneity plays a substantial role in determining utility.
23
Census tracts of the two CBDs are set according to the 1982 Census of Retail Trade as in Glaeser, Gottlieb
& Tobio (2012). Results can also use the population- or employment-weighted center of each metro area, with no
significant diﬀerence in results.
24
We acknowledge support from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series center at the University of Missouri
for providing comparable micro series across three decades.
25
We use consistent definitions for races, from the 2000 Census and as defined by the Oﬃce of Management and
Budget’s 1997 Revisions to the Standards for the Classification of Federal Data on Race and Ethnicity. Thus a
household is either “White, non-Hispanic,” “Black, non-Hispanic,” “Hispanic, of any race,” “Asian, non-Hispanic,” or
of “Any other race, non-Hispanic.”

23

4.2

Estimation of Approval Probabilities

This section’s goal is to estimate the approval regression model (6) using actual mortgage approval
decisions. These estimates are then used to predict approval probabilities for each household of the
micro household data, across all 4,418 neighborhoods. HMDA (described in the previous section)
is, to our knowledge, the only data source that informs approval decisions for the universe of
mortgage applications in the metropolitan area. HMDA data report, for each application, the
approval decision, the income and the race of the applicant, the size of the loan,26 the tract-level
location of the application, and the financial institution where the application was filed. Other
mortgage data sources, such as Dealogic or Black Box, report more information such as the loanto-value ratio, the credit score, or the transaction price, but only for the universe of originated
mortgages loans.
Identification Strategy
A regression of lenders’ approval or denial decisions on mortgage loan, household, and housing
characteristics will typically not yield causal estimates of the impact of such characteristics on
the mortgage lender’s decision. A key reason for the lack of a causal interpretation is that observed mortgage approval decisions are driven by both households’ application behavior and by
mortgage lenders’ standards. Two endogenous selection mechanisms bias the estimates based on
observational data: first, unobservable characteristics of loan and of households drive both lenders’
approval decision and households’ application decision; such characteristics include, the applicant’s
creditworthiness, and the house’s unobservable quality dimensions. Second, households tend not
to choose randomly the financial institutions to which they apply. They could, for instance, select banks endogenously so as to maximize the likelihood of obtaining the type of mortgage loan
they need.27 Therefore unobservable drivers of lenders’ approval decisions are correlated with the
observable loan, household, and housing characteristics.
We propose here an IV approach in order to isolate the component of mortgage approval rates’
changes that is driven by shifts in banks’ lending standards rather than by households’ application
26

Post 2004 HMDA data also report the interest rate of the loan.
Households could also file multiple applications for the same house. In practice however the observed number
of applications per household is small. According to the estimates of Ouazad & Rancière (2016), the average U.S.
household that changes house files between 2 and 3 applications.
27

24

decisions. Appropriate instruments provide sources of variation in household and mortgage characteristics that are independent of households’ decision to apply for a mortgage. Such identification
strategy is formalized in Section 2.5 of the online appendix (equation 12).
We build on on previous work by the authors (Ouazad & Rancière 2016) as well as on Loutskina
& Strahan (2009) and Loutskina (2011) to construct an instrument to predict the loan-to-income
ratio of mortgage applicants. In these papers, a more favorable liquidity position of the national
bank leads to an increase in their capacity to extend credit at the local level. The key innovation in
this paper, compared to the papers cited above, is to use, for each loan application, the geographical
information of the loan’s corresponding neighborhood to match it to the five geographically closest
bank branches.28 Each of those five closest bank branches’ mortgage characteristics is strongly
correlated with the liquidity ratio of the corresponding national banks. The idea underlying this
approach is that liquidity, measured as the ratio of liquid assets over total assets, on the national
balance sheet of a bank, is exogenous to households’ local decision to apply for a mortgage, but is
a significant predictor of the mortgage’s characteristics.

29

Given that households’ purchasing in a given neighborhood may select the corresponding branch
endogenously, we use the five closest bank branches rather than the bank branch of the loan itself.
The bank closest to the property is arguably more likely to be independent of approval unobservables
than the bank chosen by the household itself. A key channel through which the liquidity conditions
of neighboring bank branches aﬀect the lending standard of a given bank branch is competition.
Neighboring branches of diﬀerent banks are competing between themselves to attract borrowers.
They do so by balancing the benefits of lowering lending standards, thus increasing market share,
and its costs, in terms of increased default risk. When a neighboring branch become more aggressive
in cutting lending standards (because the national bank it belongs to is improving its liquidity
position), then other branches are induced to also reduce their lending standards to a certain extent
to maintain market share. In other terms, through the competition channel, the lending standard of
28
In order to do so we pair each bank branch with the five geographically closest bank branches. The location
of bank branches and the date of their opening is from the Summary of Deposits, which includes the branches of
banks regulated by the Federal Reserve System, the Oﬃce of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC). Appendix Figure A shows, in 1994, the distribution of bank branches for
a specific subarea of the San Francisco Bay Area, the distance between a census tract and bank branches uses the
centroids of census tracts and the latitude and longitude of bank branches.
29
Note that such liquidity mechanism also deals with the potential lending capacity constraints of banks: banks
which are facing tighter liquidity constraint are likely to be more sensitive to the need to diversify their lending
portfolio, and thus impose lending limits on their local branches.

25

a given bank is exogenously shifted by a change in liquidity position of neighboring bank branches.
This causal chain leads to the first stage of the IV. The liquidity of the five closest bank branches
predicts the loan-to-income ratio of each mortgage application, which is this paper’s measure of
lending standards.30
We deal with the endogenous unobserved drivers of the match between applicants and banks in
two ways.31 First, averaging information over the five closest bank branches helps dealing with some
unobserved reason for which some applicants are systemically paired with some banks at which they
might receive a preferential treatment (e.g. imagine a credit union that has been formed to service
the specific banking needs of a sub-segment of the population). Second, in constructing a variant
of our instrument, excluding the branches that opened after 1985, i.e. five years before our first
observation. In doing so, we wish to control for demand-driven endogenous branching development
through which new branches are opened as a response to changes in the pool of potential applicants.
A final endogeneity concern is due to the heterogeneity of mortgage lending standards across
households. As households self-select into the pool of applicants for observable and unobservable
reasons, the estimated coeﬃcients of the lending standards equation might not be a meaningful
average of lending standards coeﬃcients for individual households.32 In order to compare lending
standards between 2000 and 2006, we weigh the likelihood by the distribution of observable applicants to obtain comparable pools. Such balancing is achieved by running a pre-estimation logit
regression that regresses the probability that an observation is in the 2006 pool on the set of applicant characteristics. Then the IV probit estimation of the probability of approval on applicant and
mortgage characteristics is weighted by the prediction of the pre-estimation logit.
30

Appendix Figure A pictures bank branches according to their banks’ liquidity. Liquidity is derived following
Loutskina & Strahan (2009) and Loutskina (2011) as the ratio of securities over total assets obtained from the
Federal Reserve of Chicago’s Reports of Income andCondition (the Call Reports). Red dots indicate branches whose
national bank has low levels of liquidity while blue squares indicate branches whose national bank have high levels of
liquidity. The map suggests that bank branches with high or low liquidity levels are not specifically located in highor low-income neighborhoods, or white, African-American, Hispanic, or Asian neighborhoods.
31
We use here the matching terminology rather that the endogenous selection of banks by applicants because the
selection can also go the other way with some banks specifically targeting some potential clients.
32
That is, the estimate is not a weighted average of treatment eﬀects with positive weights that sum to 1. A related
discussion of policy relevant parameters is presented in Heckman, Urzua & Vytlacil (2006).

26

Results
In the baseline logit specification,33 we predict the decision of mortgage approval, for the panel
of mortgage applications filed in 1990, 2000, and 2010, based on a number of borrower and loan
characteristics, including the loan-to-income ratio (LTI), the race of the applicant, the type of loan
(Conventional, FHA insured, VA insured, FSA-RHS insured34 ), time eﬀects, and census-tract fixed
eﬀects. Results are presented in Table 1. The first column of the upper part of the table shows
results with census-tract fixed eﬀects in the logit specification. We use probit for the instrument
variable estimation (bottom part of Table 1). Probit instrumental variable moment conditions follow
equation (15) and IV probit estimation is more convenient than IV logit.35 For each estimation,
the marginal probabilities, computed at the means, and standard errors computed using a delta
method, are presented next to the logit coeﬃcients. The coeﬃcients of the race dummies (resp., the
type of loan) should be interpreted as relative to the dummy for white households (resp., relative
to the dummy for conventional loans). Standard errors are clustered at the census tract level.
In the uninstrumented logit specification, the coeﬃcients for the LTI Ratio and for race dummies
are significant at one percent. As expected, the LTI ratio coeﬃcient is negative: applying for a larger
loan relative to the applicant’s income reduces the chances of obtaining approval. A one-standard
deviation increase in LTI (+1.28) is associated in a reduction in the probability of approval ranging
from 2.7 to 3.7 percentage points, depending on the specification. Conditional on the observable
characteristics included, black and hispanic applications face a lower probability of approval.
The second column of the upper panel of Table 1 presents the results of the probit estimation
when instrumenting the loan-to-income ratio of the application. The column presents the results
where the loan-to-income ratio is instrumented by the average liquidity of the corresponding national
banks, for the five geographically-closest branches. The lower panel, first column, presents the results
obtained by constructing the same instrument but restricting bank branches that were set up prior to
1985 (first two columns), thus alleviating the potential endogeneity of branching decisions, produces
33
Using linear instrumental variable regression (with or without fixed eﬀect) yields coeﬃcients that are similar to
the marginal probability eﬀects of the probit and logit specification. However linear methods’ predictions typically
fall outside the [0, 1] interval with non zero probability and cannot be used to estimate choice probabilities.
34
FHA: Federal Housing Administration; VA: Veteran Administration; FSA-RHS: Farm Service Agency or Rural
Housing Service.
35
The instrumental variable probit model is presented in Newey (1987). The IV probit likelihood has a closed form
explicit expression unlike IV logit.

27

comparable results. The sample is made of observations for which we can obtain liquidity measures
for banks and for which the geographic identifier (census tract) can be matched to corresponding
census data. The second column of the lower panel presents a robustness test of the IV strategy
in which we also instrument the race of the applicant (indicator variables for asian, black, Hispanic
applicant) by the racial composition of neighboring tracts (last two columns).
In all IV regressions (i.e for the regressions of the second column of the upper panel, and both
columns of the bottom panel of Table 1), the F statistics for each first stage, for both the loanto-income and race indicator variables, are well above 10. In the corresponding IV estimators in
the linear probability model, Cragg Donald finite sample bias F statistics are substantially above
the threshold for a maximum 5% finite sample bias; this suggests that finite sample bias and weak
instrument issues are unlikely to aﬀect the IV estimates.36
The IV results of Table 1 indicate that an increase of the loan-to-income ratio by 1 standard
deviation (+1.28) lowers the probability of approval by 15 to 28 percentage points. IV results thus
suggest that the magnitude of non-instrumented estimates is substantially downward biased. This
is consistent with a case where more creditworthy households tend to choose higher loan-to-income
ratios. In such a scenario, unobservable characteristics of the applicant are positively correlated with
the loan-to-income ratio and have a positive impact on the approval rate, leading to an upward bias
on the coeﬃcient.
Such approval regression estimates (coeﬃcient vector and estimated neighborhood fixed eﬀects)
are then used to predict the probability of approval for all households in each census block group.
In this out-of-sample estimation, the race of the household comes from the Census, and the loan-toincome ratio is computed using FNC housing prices and the total household income of the Census.
Predictions are made under an assumption of a loan-to-value of 0.8, that is, the norm for conforming
loans used for home purchase (Adelino, Gerardi & Willen 2013).37 The mean (median) approval
rates for all households is 15 percentage points lower than when considering the population of
applicants observed in HMDA only. Such diﬀerence suggests that many households do not apply
for loans because they either expect not to be approved or because they have not been pre-approved.
In other terms, the intensity of borrowing constraints appears much more severe when we consider
36
37

Statistics available from the authors.
Results are robust to the inclusion or exclusion of loans above the conforming loan limit.

28

the overall population rather than the sample of loan applicants.

4.3

Estimated Preferences and Willingness to Pay for Amenities

This section presents estimated preferences with and without approval origination constraints. Estimated household preferences are the outcome of the optimization of the moment conditions (Equation 20). Preferences are allowed to vary across neighborhoods (this utility component defines the
base utility ), across individuals, and to vary across neighborhoods according to individual characteristics (Equation 1). Base utility depends on the neighborhood characteristics (Equation 2)
which include: log median transaction price log(pj ), the neighborhood’s demographic composition
(race, median income, and residents’ education), school test scores (California’s Academic Performance Index), and the quality of housing construction (age structure and number of rooms). As
discussed in Section 3, the estimation of the relationship between base utility, log price, and neighborhood characteristics requires an IV approach as observable variables are likely to be correlated
with unobserved determinants of neighborhood utility.
The instrumental variable strategy is as follows. First, the regression includes a location-specific
blockgroup fixed eﬀect, so that the impact of housing characteristics, local amenities, and neighbors’
characteristics are estimated in changes across time rather than in cross section. Second, we use
time-variation in the observable characteristics of two-step geographically adjacent block groups
as instruments for the decennial change in log price.38 Such instrumental variable strategy, in
the spirit of Berry et al. (1995), is based on the assumption that neighboring blocks’ changes in
observable characteristics are less confounded by changes in unobservables than the block’s own
characteristics. Neighbors also sort endogenously in unobservable and observable dimensions across
neighborhoods. Finally, we also instrument the demographic composition (% black, % Hispanic,
% Asian, log(median household income), % college educated), by the demographic composition of
two-step geographically adjacent blockgroups as in Bayer & Timmins (2007).
Selection of neighborhood characteristics of interest for inclusion in the utility regressions (1) and
(2) builds on existing literature. The racial composition of neighborhoods and its interaction with
household race allows to test for heterogenous racial preferences (Bayer, McMillan & Rueben 2004,
38
Two-step adjacent block groups are adjacent to neighboring blockgroups. We thus exclude the characteristics of
the immediately adjacent blockgroups in the calculation of the instrument.

29

Bayer et al. 2007, Becker & Murphy 2009). The emphasis on the age of dwellings and its interaction
with income is stressed in filtering theory (Rosenthal 2014). The inclusion of the number of rooms,
as a proxy for the size of the dwellings, and its interaction with the distance to the metropolitan
area’s Central Business District, relates to the monocentric model, in which households sort at
a particular distance from the CBD according to the relative importance of their taste for either
larger houses, or for closer proximity with the city center and shorter commutes (Fujita 1989). The
preference for more educated neighborhoods, in addition to more aﬄuent neighbors, is linked to the
literature on parents’ involvement in school and education neighborhood peer eﬀects (Durlauf 2004,
Goux & Maurin 2007). Several of the neighborhood characteristics are interacted with individual
characteristics such as race and income, thus allowing for a multidimensional sorting.
Tables 2 and 3 present estimation results for social preferences (first panel, Table 2), neighborhood income, education level and school quality (top panel, Table 3), and price-sensitivity (bottom
panel, Table 3). For the sake of clarity, the variables capturing housing characteristics, e.g. the
structure’s median age, the number of rooms or the distance to the Central Business District are
included in the estimation but the coeﬃcients are not reported.39
In each panel, the first two columns present the estimated coeﬃcient and the willingness to pay
according to the model with borrowing constraints. The next two columns present the corresponding
estimates for the model without borrowing constraints. In that latter model, the probability that
any neighborhood j belongs to the choice set of any household i in year t is set equal to one. In both
models, the willingness to pay is the change in price that oﬀsets a given change in the quality of
amenities. Formally for a given amenity k change

zjtk , the willingness to pay is the log price change

log(pjt ) that maintains utility constant. Such log price change satisfies
where

i

↵i

log(pjt ) =

ik ·

zjtk ,

is the individual-specific preference for amenity zjtk , and ↵i is the individual-specific log

price coeﬃcient. This yields an individual-specific willingness-to-pay
For each dimension, we report the median willingness to pay M ediani
to an inter-quartile increase IQR(zk ) in the amenity zjtk .

h

log(pjt )i =
ik

↵i

(
i

ik /↵i )·

zjtk .

· IQR(zk ) corresponding

Estimates of the preferences for neighborhoods’ racial composition reveal, in both models, a
similarly strong preference for same-race neighbors. Such same-race preference can also partly
39

Unsurprisingly these coeﬃcients indicate that households have a preference for larger and newer homes, and
trade-oﬀ their preference larger home against the proximity to the central business district .

30

reveal preferences for unobservable individual characteristics strongly correlated with neighbors’
race (Bayer et al. 2004). Regarding other social preferences, the two models diﬀer significantly in
only one dimension, that is the preference of non-Hispanics to live in a neighborhood with a higher
fraction of Hispanics. The willingness to pay of Non-Hispanics to move into a neighborhood with
an interquartile range increase in the fraction of Hispanics is 25 percent lower in the model with
than in the model without borrowing constraints.
The two models do not significantly diﬀer with respect to the preference for neighborhoods
with higher median income and a higher fraction of college educated individuals. However, the
model estimated with borrowing constraints exhibits a significantly larger willingness to pay for
neighborhoods with better performing public schools. The willingness to pay for an interquartile
increase in the Academic Performance Index is $22,877 for the average household in the model with
borrowing constraints, and $8,552 in the model without borrowing constraints. The existence of
approval constraints mitigates how preferences gets reflected into demand diﬀerences. Accounting
for approval constraints can thus reveal sharper underlying diﬀerences in school quality preferences.
The bottom panel of Table 3 presents the price-sensitivity of the base utility in both models.
We allow for the price-sensitivity of base utility to be heterogeneous in two dimensions. First,
we allow for a price-sensitivity coeﬃcient to vary according to a random coeﬃcient specification,
as in specification 2. Second, we allow for the price-sensitivity to vary according to the level of
household’s income. The estimation results reject the first type of heterogeneity by estimating a nonstatistically significant variance of the coeﬃcient distribution, but does not reject the second type
of heterogeneity: there is negative and strongly significant interaction term between log(price) and
log(income) of similar magnitude in both models. Since log(price) is interacted with standardized
log income, the coeﬃcient on log prices captures the price-sensitivity of a median income household.
This coeﬃcient is about three times lower in the model with than in the model without borrowing
constraints ( 0.089 vs

0.299) and the diﬀerence is highly significant. Such large diﬀerence means

that accounting for sensitivity of the approval rate to a price change leads to a dramatic downward
revision of the sensitivity of the base utility to price changes. This result suggests that borrowing
constraints are a key driver of price elasticity as we shall see next.

31

4.4

Price Elasticity

The model with borrowing constraint allows separate estimation of two additive components of the
price elasticity of demand. By price elasticity of demand, we refer here to the elasticity of the
demand for a neighborhood with respect to its own price but we shall emphasize that the model
provides estimates for the complete set of cross-price and income elasticities.40 The first component,
the conditional elasticity of demand, is computed at given approval-based choice sets, i.e. assuming
that approval probabilities are not aﬀected by a change in house prices. Absent heterogeneity, the
conditional elasticity is simply computed as one minus the market share of a given neighborhood
times the price-sensitivity of the base utility, and given the large number of neighborhoods (4,416),
can be well approximated by the log price coeﬃcient. As before, conditional price elasticity has
a non-degenerate distribution made possible by the impact of the interaction of household income
with the log price. The second component, the borrowing elasticity, captures the fall in demand
associated with a fall in approval rates following an increase in housing prices and is heterogeneous
in all the variables relevant for mortgage approval decision. The sum of the two components gives
the total (unconditional) price elasticity. Figure 1 illustrates the elasticity decomposition with the
distribution of elasticities across neighborhood (top panels of the figure) and their sensitivity to the
initial log price (bottom panels of the same figure). The top panel suggests that borrowing elasticity
is an important driver of total elasticity. Indeed the ratio of borrowing elasticity to total elasticity
has a mean of 0.69, and a median of 0.55. The bottom panel show that both conditional elasticity
and borrowing elasticity are negatively correlated with log price. The negative correlation between
borrowing elasticity and log price is however much lower than the correlation between conditional
demand elasticity and log price ( 0.54 vs.

0.24). This diﬀerence shall play a role in the general

equilibrium analysis that comes next.

4.5

Robustness

The Online Appendix’s Table E (Section 6) presents estimation results when neighborhood utility
depends on log non-housing consumption rather than log price, that is log of income minus mortgage
payments. Table G in the online appendix presents estimates of the relationship between the base
40

The full matrix of total demand derivatives is used in the general equilibrium analysis of Section 5.

32

utility of rental and amenities. In this specification the log rent replaces the log price, and households
have an option to rent in each neighborhood (Online Appendix Section 6.1). In both case signs of
the impact of amenities on base utilities are the same as the signs of the base utility regressions
of the baseline model but with some variations in the magnitude of the coeﬃcients. As expected,
non-housing consumption has a positive impact on utility, the log rent a negative one, and the
demand for rental is substantially more elastic than the demand for homeownership.

5

General Equilibrium Impact of Lending Standards

In this section we use the model, estimated with borrowing constraints, to run a general equilibrium analysis of the impact of a change in lending standards on the distribution of prices across
neighborhoods, and on households’ spatial segregation.
The model predicts that relaxing lending standards in the credit market typically leads to an
increase in housing demand, at initial house prices, for most neighborhoods. This generally leads
to excess demand that outstrips housing supply. The general equilibrium price response in each
neighborhood reduces excess demand to the point where each neighborhood’s demand equals each
neighborhood’s housing supply. Even when total neighborhood housing demand remains unchanged,
which must be the case at equilibrium when housing supply is fixed, the composition of neighborhood
demand changes by race, ethnicity, and income. Thus the model predicts substantial reallocation
of households across space and changes in segregation.
We use here the estimated model here to run a general equilibrium analysis of a change in lending
standards. In Section 7 of the online appendix, we show and give examples on how the model could
be used, in partial equilibrium, to study the eﬀects of policy programs targeting a subpopulation
small enough to avoid the price impacts of lending supply policies.

5.1

Comparative Statics: Price Impacts of Lending Standards

This section derives the impact of lending standards ( , , ) on neighborhood log prices log(p).
We start by focusing on one specific coeﬃcient, say, the coeﬃcient of the log loan-to-income ratio
in the approval specification, noted as a scalar

. A change in the coeﬃcient

of the approval

specification causes three diﬀerent demand eﬀects: first, a change in neighborhood demand at
33

given prices. Second, the change in lending standards causes a change in each neighborhood’s
price (the general equilibrium change in prices) that in turn causes a change in demand. Third,
the change in lending standards causes a change in neighborhoods’ racial composition (the general
equilibrium change in neighborhood demographics), which aﬀects households’ preferences for these
specific neighborhoods. Such three eﬀects formally translate into:
@D
@
|{z}

dD
=
d

+

Direct Impact

d log(p)
@D
·
+
@ log(p)
d
{z
}
|

Impact due to price changes

@D @v
·
@v @
| {z }

(21)

Impact due to social pref erences

@S
= 0),
For the sake of clarity, we consider here the case of perfectly inelastic housing supply ( @ log(p)

and extend the analysis to the non-perfectly inelastic housing supply case in Section 6.2.41 The
price change that maintains demand equal to supply in each neighborhood is such that:

@
d log(p)
=
D(log(p); )
d
@ log(p)
a vector of size

P

t Jt ,

1

@S
@ log(p)

@
D(log(p); )
@

@D @v
·
@v @

(22)

i.e. one vector of log price changes per year of analysis. The vector of prices

log(p) aﬀects demand through its impact on the base utility vector

and the interaction terms ⌦

and ˜ it .

(i) Impact of Lending Standards on Demand, at Given Prices
We start with the impact of lending standards on demand at given prices. Lending standards aﬀect
both the probability of each choice set, and the choice of the household within the choice set. We
start by focusing on the impact of lending standards on the probability of the choice set.
XZ  @
@
D(j, t| , z·t ; ) =
P (C|z·t , xit ; ) · P (j, t| , z·t , xit , C) · f (xit )dxit
@
X @

(23)

C2C

Empirically the sum

P

C2C

is taken over the set of simulated choice sets. The derivative of the prob-

ability of the choice set P (C|z·t , xit ; ) is the derivative of a product of J terms ⇧j2C
w.r.t. lending standards. Each individual probability
41

jt

jt ⇧k2C
/ (1

kt )

has a simple binomial derivative, and thus

The evidence presented in Section 6.2 suggests indeed that housing supply is fairly inelastic in most neighborhoods
of San Francisco. Data from Saiz (2010) suggests that the metropolitan-area wide housing supply elasticity is 0.66
for the entire San Francisco metropolitan area and 0.76 for the entire San Jose metropolitan area.

34

the impact of lending standards on choice set probabilities:
@P (C|z·t , xit , )
@

= P (C|z·t , xit , ) ·

X

|

j

wijt · {1(j 2 C)

where wijt is the value corresponding to the coeﬃcient

jt (zjt , xit ;

{z

⌥ijt (C)

)}

(24)

}

. The impact of lending standards on the

probability of approval in any one neighborhood (a single term in the sum ⌃j ) is of the sign of
wijt . For instance, if wijt corresponds to the loan-to-income ratio, wijt is positive, the coeﬃcient
of the loan-to-income ratio in the approval specification is negative. An increase in
to an increase in the probability

ijt

will lead

for all households i and all neighborhoods j of the city. And

the probability P (C) of all choice sets C increases. The Monte Carlo simulated estimate of (23) is
obtained by averaging (23) over simulated choice sets.

(ii) Impact of Prices on Demand, at Given Lending Standards
We then turn to the impact of log prices on demand. The matrix of demand derivatives

@D
@ log(p)

is

considered for year t. log(p) is a line vector of size Jt while D(p; ) is a column vector of size Jt . We
distinguish diagonal elements, which are derivatives of demand w.r.t.42 its own price (proportional
to own-price demand elasticity), and oﬀ-diagonal elements, which are derivatives of demand w.r.t.
another neighborhood’s price (proportional to cross-price demand elasticity).
The derivation of the cross-price demand elasticity yields a decomposition between borrowing
elasticity and conditional price elasticity, which is the analog to the one presented in 2 for the
own-price demand elasticity:
@D(j, t| ·t , z·t ; )
@ log(pk )

=

XZ

@
P (C|z·t , xit ; ) · P (j, t| ·t , z·t , xit , C)f (xit )dxit
@ log(pk )
C2C X
|
{z
}
Shift
in
choice
set
XZ
@
+
P (j, t| ·t , z·t , xit , C)f (xit )dxit (25)
P (C|z·t , xit ; ) ·
@ log(pk )
C2C X
|
{z
}
Shift in utility

Appendix Section 3 provides closed-form derivations for both demand derivative terms.
42

We note “with respect to” as w.r.t. in the remaining parts of this paper.

35

(iii) Impact of Lending Standards on Social Preferences
We derive the impact of lending standards on neighborhood composition. Neighborhood composition aﬀects neighborhood demand as long as households have preferences for particular neighbor
demographics (e.g. education, race, ethnicity). Getting such social interaction eﬀects is the last
step in completing the calculation of general equilibrium eﬀects on prices. Formally, such social
interaction eﬀect is a first-order impact on households’ demand
impact of lending standards on neighborhood demographics,

@v
@

@D
@v

·

@v
@ .

The second factor, the

is simply the vector of demands

scaled by the total demand for the neighborhood.
@v
=
@

✓

nk
·
n

✓

@Dk
/D
@

◆

Dk
·
D

✓

@D
/D
@

◆◆

(26)

k=1,2,...,M

where nk /n is the fraction of population k in the overall population of the metropolitan area. The
first factor is the impact of neighborhood demographics on demand.
derived. For a group k, say Hispanics,
vidual with characteristics xit .

k (x

it )

k (x

it )

@D
@v

is also straightforwardly

is the coeﬃcient of social interactions for an indi-

depends on xit as Asians, Blacks, Hispanics, Whites do not

necessarily exhibit similar preferences. Then:
@
D(j, t|
@vk

k (x

it )

·t , z·t )

=

XZ

P (C|z·t , xit )
C2C X
· k (xit )P (j, t| ·t , z·t , xit , C)

· (1

P (j, t|

·t , z·t , xit , C))f (xit )dxit

(27)

varies across individuals: for instance, results suggest households’ preferences for same-race

neighbors.

(iv) Empirical Results:
General Equilibrium Impacts of Lending Standards on Prices
The general equilibrium impact of lending standards on prices is the shift in prices that keeps demand
for each neighborhood constant. We combine the analytic formulas of (i)–(iii) above to derive the
following: first, the impact of lending standards on demand at constant prices; second, the impact
of prices on demand; and third, the impact of lending standards on neighborhood racial and income
composition. All three eﬀects lead to the general equilibrium impact of lending standards on prices,
36

following equation (22) above.
The derivations presented in the previous subsections (i)–(iii) were done by looking at the
marginal change of one arbitrary coeﬃcient of the approval specification. Table C estimates the
change in lending standards between 2000 and 2006. The regression keeps the distribution of
applicant characteristics constant in 2000 and 2006, by weighting 2006 observations by the share
of 2000 observations with identical characteristics. The results suggests that there were significant
changes in underwriters’ sensitivity to the log(price) of the house, the log(income) of the applicant,
and to the race of the applicant. The regression is a panel logit regression combining data from the
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 2000 and 2006. The specification is similar to the main baseline
analysis of approval rates (Table 1), with added interactions between the 2006 year dummy and
respectively: the log(price), the log(income) of the applicant, and the applicant’s race. Results
suggest a relaxation of lending standards in each of those dimensions. We combine the comparative
statics in each of these dimensions to simulate a marginal change in lending standards comparable
to the 2000–2006 relaxation.43
Figure 2 illustrates the general equilibrium impact of the simulated change in lending standards
on house prices changes as resulting from the three component of housing demand changes according
to equation (21): partial equilibrium eﬀects, price eﬀects, and social preferences eﬀects.
Figure 2 (c) plots the implied partial equilibrium eﬀect, where the increase in demand (vertical
axis) at constant prices is plotted against the initial log(price) in 2000. While a relaxation of
lending standard leads to an increase in housing demand across all neighborhoods, such demand
shifts displays almost no correlation with initial log prices. Partial equilibrium demand eﬀects
cannot explain the negative correlation between price changes and initial log prices that arise in
our general equilibrium simulations (Figure 2 (a)) as well in the data (Figure 3). The housing
demand shifts resulting from social preferences (Figure 2 (d)) display a negative correlation with
initial log prices, and thus contributes to explain the greater increase in prices in neighborhoods
43
This section estimates the impact of a change in lending standards d on prices. The theoretical derivation is
done for a small change in lending standards. The impact of a large shift in lending standards such as the one observed
between 2000 and 2006 is then estimated by extrapolating the impact of the small shift around the initial equilibrium.
This method does not account for the shift in lending standards driven by the equilibrium change, and in particular
driven by equilibrium price and demographic changes. Section 5 in the online appendix shows the robustness of the
results to a methodology estimating of the impact of a large change in lending standards
= 2006
2000 and
the equilibrium shifts for each small shift along the path from the 2006 lending standards coeﬃcients 2000 to 2006 .
Section 4 in the online appendix deals with the robustness of our comparative statics results to a possible shift in
unobservable fixed eﬀects between 2000 and 2006.

37

with lower prices. The remaining change in the distribution of price changes result from the impact
of prices on neighborhood demand associated with shifts in choice sets and shifts in utility. In that
dimension, the negative correlation between price changes and initial log price is consistent with
negative correlation between (own-) price elasticity and initial log prices (Figure 1f), which is mostly
driven by the negative correlation between borrowing elasticity and initial log prices.44
House Price Changes: Model vs. Data
Next, we compare the prediction of the model on log(price) changes, computed according to equation 22, to actual price changes during the same the period computed from property transaction
data. While the change in lending standards is taken as realized in the data, the estimation of
households’ preferences for neighborhoods, and estimation of initial lending standards did not use
annual information for the boom years of 2001-2006. The last observation in our decennial panel is
2010; in 2010 the Case-Shiller price index for the San Francisco MSA was almost back to its 2000
level (136.99 vs. 130.06).
Figure 3 plots the actual log price change in the model (red dots) and in the data (black dot)
as a function of the initial log price in 2000. The bottom panel of Figure 3 summarizes the key
moments of the distribution of price changes in the model and in the data. In Figure 2 we use
the average annual log(price) change over 2000-2006. Figure 3 shows that the negative correlation
between price changes and initial log prices predicted by the model is also a feature of the data. The
model predicts a correlation of price changes with initial log(price) of

0.286, which is slightly less

than 40% of the correlation observed in the data 0.748. The model’s predictions matches rather
closely other moments of the actual distribution of price changes: the mean (0.101 in the model vs
0.111 in the data), the standard deviation (0.045 vs 0.055), the median (0.087 vs. 0.110), the lower
quantile (0.076 vs. 0.072), and the upper quantile (0.131 vs 0.149)
The predicted compression of the price distribution has also been observed in San Diego by
Landvoigt, Piazzesi & Schneider (2015). Appendix Figure C uses additional transaction-level data
from Los Angeles and Washington DC to document such compression of the price distribution in
two other major metro areas. Each figure depicts the diﬀerence between the upper and the lower
quartile of the log(price) distribution and suggests that such diﬀerence has decreased over 30% in
44

Recall however that price eﬀects depend not only on own price elasticities but also on cross-price elasticities.

38

Los Angeles and San Francisco, 17% in San Jose, and 18% in Washington DC between 2000 and
2006.

5.2

Impacts of Lending Standards on Spatial Segregation

The general equilibrium price change maintains demand in each neighborhood constant. However,
the demand of particular racial or other demographic subgroups for each neighborhood is typically
aﬀected by changes in lending standards.
Consider, for example, the demand Drjt of racial group r 2 {asian, black, hispanic, white, other}
for a specific neighborhood j in year t. The total change in demand caused by a change in lending
standards is decomposed into a partial equilibrium eﬀect, an eﬀect due to social preferences, and a
change due to shifts in the distribution of prices:
dDrjt
=
d

@Drjt
@
| {z }

+

partial equilibrium

where the price change d log(p)/d
general dDrjt /d

@Drjt d log(p)
·
+
@ log(p)
d
{z
}
|
general equilibrium

@Drjt @v
·
@v
@
|
{z
}

(28)

pref erences f or same race neighbor

was obtained in the earlier general equilibrium analysis. In

6= 0, while dDjt /d

= 0. Given racial groups’ changing demand, the model

gives a structural estimate of how changes in lending standards aﬀect racial segregation across
neighborhoods within the metro area.
As measure of Bay Area-wide racial segregation we use the exposure indices, as in Massey &
Denton (1988) and Cutler, Glaeser & Vigdor (1999). The exposure index of a given racial subgroup
(say, Blacks) to another (say, Whites) measures the average fraction of white neighbors for an
average black resident. Thus:

Exposure(W hites|Blacks)t =

J
X
Blackjt
j=1

Black

·

W hitejt
P opulationjt

(29)

where the first factor Blackjt /Black is the share of black population living in neighborhood j in
year t; and the second factor W hitejt /P opulationjt is the fraction white in neighborhood j in year t.
The isolation of Blacks is the exposure of Blacks to their own racial group. Therefore an increase
in black isolation is due to a decline in black exposure to other races.

39

Definition (29) can be simply tied to the structural model: black population Blackjt is simply
the total black population count in the metro area multiplied by black neighborhood demand for
that area, i.e. Blackjt = Black·Dblack,jt , as Dblack,jt 2 (0, 1). Similarly, W hitejt = W hite·Dwhite,jt .
Thus the model provides a structural prediction of the impact of lending standards on racial
isolation and exposure. For instance, deriving black exposure to Whites with respect to the lending
standard parameter

:

d
Exposure(W hites|Blacks)t =
d

2

d 4
W hite
·
P opulation d

J
X
Dblack,jt · Dwhite,jt
j=1

Djt

3
5

(30)

The change in exposure is driven by both white and black demand changes.
The results of the analysis of the impact of lending standards on neighborhoods’ racial composition and on racial segregation are presented in Figure 4, Figure 5, and in Table 4a. The starting
point of such comparative statics is the spatial distribution of racial groups in the Bay area in 2000.
In both Figure 4 and Figure 5, black dots are demand changes at given prices, as a percentage of
initial demand. The red dots are the neighborhoods’ predicted change in white demand accounting
for the general equilibrium change in prices. In Table 4a the diagonal of each table is the impact on
the isolation of Whites, Blacks, Hispanics, Asians (the exposure of a racial group to itself), while
oﬀ-diagonal elements present the impact on the exposure of a racial group to another. All estimates
are in percentage points, as isolation and exposure measures are expressed in percentages.
Figure 4 presents, for each racial group, partial and general equilibrium housing demand changes
(top panels) and price changes (bottom panels) as a function of the initial fraction of the same racial
group in each neighborhood.
Since we have estimated for each group a strong preference for having more same-race neighbors,
we are expecting for their partial equilibrium demand to be increasing in the fraction of same-race
population. This is actually the case for all the four racial groups. They are however substantial
diﬀerences across racial groups in how partial equilibrium demand changes translate into general
equilibrium demand changes.
For Whites, general equilibrium demand changes for mostly whites neighborhoods tend to be
smaller than the corresponding partial equilibrium demand changes. The reason is that mostly
white neighborhoods are generally more expensive neighborhoods which, as we have seen in sec40

tion 4.4 (Figure 1f), display a larger price elasticity of demand. Therefore a fraction of white
households shift their demand towards more mixed neighborhoods, which are initially less expensive, thus contributing to the price increase in such neighborhoods. Indeed the correlation between
neighborhood price changes and the initial fraction of Whites is negative, and similar in magnitude
to the negative correlation between initial prices and price changes (Figure 4). A consequence of
such general equilibrium price eﬀect pushing a fraction of Whites towards more mixed neighborhoods is a (limited) reduction in the isolation of Whites as shown in Table 4a ( 0.63 percentage
points).
By contrast, general equilibrium demand changes of black, African-American households are
generally larger than their partial equilibrium counterparts in neighborhoods with 40 percent of
more of black households in 2000. This reflects the fact that neighborhoods with a large fraction
of Blacks tend to be initially less expensive neighborhoods and display a lower price elasticity. As
a consequence the general equilibrium demand by Blacks for such neighborhoods has increased
far beyond their partial equilibrium demand, pushing prices up, and contributing to an increase
in the isolation of blacks (+2.84 percentage points) as shown in Table 4a. General equilibrium
demand changes for Asian and Hispanics are more or less in line with partial equilibrium demand
changes. For those two groups, the increase in isolation reflect therefore their preference to live in
neighborhoods with a larger fraction of same-race neighbors, Table 4a indicates an increase in the
isolation of Hispanics (+1.04 percentage points) and in the isolation of Asians (+1.15 percentage
points).
Figure 5 enables a better understanding of the change white exposure to other groups. The
top panels shows the demand of Whites for neighborhoods ranked according to their fraction asian,
Hispanic and black. A reduction of Whites’ demand for neighborhoods with a low fraction of Asians
and Hispanics coexists with an increase in Whites’ demand for neighborhoods with a moderate fraction of Hispanics and Asians. There is also a increase in the demand of Whites for neighborhoods
with a moderate share of Blacks coexisting with a reduction in the demand of Whites for neighborhoods with a large fraction of blacks. As a consequence the exposure of Whites to Hispanics (+0.29
percentage points), to Asians (+0.2 percentage points) and to Blacks (+0.15 percentage points)
exhibit a moderate increase. These changes in Whites demand appear related to the gentrification
observed in some parts of the San Francisco Bay during the credit boom.
41

Segregation: Model vs. Data
How do these model results compare with actual changes in segregation (Table 4b)? Note that such
comparison is not straightforward as changes in the racial demographics of the metropolitan area
also aﬀect measures of exposure and isolation.45 The model reproduces however qualitatively well
the reduction in the isolation of Whites, a finding in line with evidence of gentrification in the San
Francisco Bay, as well as the increase in the isolation of Hispanics and Asians.
Overall the ability of the estimated model to simultaneously predict, out-of-sample, observed
changes in the house price distribution and observed changes in the spatial distribution of households
provides considerable support to the view that general equilibrium eﬀects of changes in credit
standards play an important role in the medium-run dynamics of cities.

6

Extensions

We introduce here extensions to take into account the option to rent, the role of local housing
supply elasticity, and of demographic changes (population growth and changes in metro-level racial
composition).

6.1

The Role of Rental

The relaxation of lending standards may aﬀect both neighborhood choice and tenure choice. Changes
in lending standards, by aﬀecting the probabilities to obtain credit, are also likely to change the
relative demand for ownership vs. rental housing both within and across neighborhoods.
Tenure choice features in the model as follows. In each neighborhood j, household i can choose
either homeownership s = ownership or rental, s = rental. The utility of neighborhood j with
tenure s is noted Uijst , as in equation (1), and the corresponding base utility is noted
diﬀerence Uij,ownership,t

jst .

The

Uij,rental,t is partly driven by unobservable quality diﬀerences between the

45

A way to see the importance of city-wide demographic changes is to look at the relationship between the change
in the exposures of Whites to Blacks to that of the exposure of Blacks to Whites:
w
) + log E(Blacks|W hites)
(31)
b
Where w/b is ratio of the Whites-to-Blacks population in the metropolitan area. In absence of any demographic
change in the racial composition of the metropolitan area ( log( wb ) = 0), the log change in both measures are
identical. When they are demographic changes however, the evolution of the two exposure measures can diverge as
it is the case for several exposure measures on Table 4, which reports change in actual exposure measures between
2000 and 2006.
log E(W hites|Blacks) =

log(

42

rental housing stock and the owner-occupied housing stock; and driven by households’ preference
for homeownership vs. rental. Such model with neighborhood and tenure choice reduces to the
paper’s baseline model of Section 2 whenever (i) a uniform arbitrage relationship ties the price
of owner-occupied units and rental values, such as the the price of owner-occupied units equal to
the discounted value of rental payments with a constant discount factor; and (ii) households are
indiﬀerent between homeownership and rental.
The model with neighborhood choice, tenure choice, and borrowing constraints relaxes those two
assumptions. Rents and the number of renter-occupied housing units are observed in neighborhoodlevel Census files. Also, by estimating a diﬀerent base utility for rental and homeownership in the
same neighborhood (backed out by contraction mapping on the population of households that rent
and own), the model allows for a neighborhood- and time-specific value of homeownership. Estimates of the relationship between the base utility of rental and amenities have been discussed
in Section 4.5. General equilibrium results, presented in Online Appendix Figure F, suggest no
economically significant diﬀerence between the two models in the predicted magnitude of the compression of the price distribution. Both models predict a similar (and not statistically diﬀerent)
correlation between log price changes and the initial log price in 2000.

6.2

The Role of Housing Supply Elasticity and of Demographic Shifts

Housing Supply
The general equilibrium analysis of Section 5 assumed that the supply of housing units was constant
during the period. We relax here this assumption and check whether the compression of the price
distribution, observed between 2000 and 2006, could be due to the heterogeneity in housing supply
elasticities across neighborhoods rather than to the diﬀerential impact of lending standards changes.
We build neighborhood- (i.e. blockgroup-) level estimates of housing supply elasticities by
combining satellite data on land cover and elevation in order to measure the share of each blockgroup
that is not developed in 1992 and can likely be developed given the geographic features of the land.
Then, in a similar fashion as in Saiz (2010), but in our case at the blockgroup level, we perform the

43

following regression of log housing units on log price:

log(housing unitsj,t ) = a + (b + c · U ndeveloped Sharej + d · Ruggednessj ) · log(pricej,t )
+Blockgroupj + Residualj,t

(32)

where j is a neighborhood index, t is either 2000 or 2010; U ndeveloped Sharej is the undeveloped
share of the blockgroup’s surface in 1992, 8 years prior to the first cross section used in the general
equilibrium analysis. The measure of undeveloped share of land corresponds to the share of the
surface of the blockgroup (in squared meters) that is not developed and that is not covered by
water. The measure is derived from satellite data of the United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.)
database. The landcover data set of 1992 measures, in each 30m⇥30m cell, whether the cell is
developed (low, medium, or high intensity) and the nature of the land (forest, water, barren, rock,
grass, wetland, crops and pasture). Appendix Figure Ba illustrates the construction of our underdeveloped share measure by mapping the underlying satellite landcover data in the city of San
Jose.
Then we use a set of set of elevation measures (Ruggednessj ) based on the slope and the
ruggedness of the blockgroup to proxy for the cost of building on undeveloped cells.46 Such elevation
measures come from a second satellite data set, the U.S.G.S.’s digital elevation model (D.E.M.),
which measures elevation for each 30m⇥30m cell. Such blockgroup-level ruggedness is the average
of ruggedness across cells, as illustrated in Appendix Figure Bb.
Blockgroupj is a blockgroup fixed eﬀect. Neighborhood-level housing supply elasticity is proxied
by the coeﬃcient ⌘j = b + c · U ndeveloped Sharej + d · Ruggednessj in specification 32 above.
Appendix Figure Bc presents the distribution of estimated supply elasticity across neighborhoods.
About half of the neighborhoods exhibit a supply elasticity inferior to 0.1, and about 82% percent
an elasticity below 0.2. As expected neighborhood housing supply elasticity is positively correlated
with the distance to the Central Business District.47 These elasticities are typically lower than those
estimated at the metro-area level (Saiz 2010). Section 8 of the online appendix explores this issue
46
The ruggedness index measures terrain irregularity and was initially developed by Riley, DeGloria & Elliot (1999)
and used in economics by Nunn & Puga (2012). The ruggedness at a given cell (30mx30m) is the square root of the
sum of the squared diﬀerences of the elevation of the cell with its eight adjacent cells.
47
Results available from the authors.

44

further, building up on Imbs & Mejean (2015) who shows that, when micro-level elasticities have
both an observed and an unobserved component, the average of micro-elasticities does not typically
match macro-estimated elasticities. The estimation of the variance of the unobserved component
proceeds as in Swamy (1970), which shows that micro-level unobservable coeﬃcient heterogeneity
can lead to upward biases in aggregate regressions.
We then replace each neighborhood housing supply change dSjt /d log(pjt ) = Sjt ⌘j by its empirical counterpart in the general equilibrium price change equation 22. This allows a robustness check
for the estimates of Section 5, i.e. the robustness of estimated general equilibrium price eﬀects to
the introduction of neighborhood-level housing supply elasticity (⌘j ).
Demographic Shifts
Between 2000 and 2006 the San Francisco Bay area experienced both an increase in population
and a change in its racial demographics. Comparison of data from the 2000 Census with estimates
from the 2005–2009 American Community Survey suggests the the number of households increased
3.6%, and that, within that population, the fraction of Asian households increased 2.6 percentage
points, the fraction of Black households increased 0.6 percentage points, and the fraction of Hispanic
households increased 2.3 percentage points, with a corresponding decline in the fraction of white
households ( 5.5 percentage points). Both population growth and changes in the racial make up
of the Bay area are likely impacting the distribution of house prices and segregation levels.
We simulate the impact of population growth first. At the initial 2000 equilibrium, the model
assumes that demand and supply are equal, where N · D = Nhu · s. The right-hand side factor Nhu
is the total number of housing units in the Bay area in 2000. An increase in population dN causes
an increase in demand D + N ·
@D
@ log(p)

Nhu ·

·

@ log(p)
@N .

@s
@ log(p)

·

@D
@ log(p)

·

@ log(p)
@N ,

where

dD
dN

includes the impact of prices on demand

Such population growth also causes an increase in supply driven by price changes,

d log(p)
dN .

Hence the general equilibrium impact of population growth on prices:
d log(p)
=
dN



@D
@ log(p)

where @D/@ log(p) is the Jacobian of demand,

@s
@ log(p)

@s
@ log(p)

1

·

1
·D
N

(33)

is the supply response to price changes,

Thus population growth typically leads to non-linear increases in prices, which can lead to shifts
45

in racial exposure. Similarly, a change in the Bay area’s racial composition, where the fraction ⇡k
P
of each racial group k = 1, 2, . . . , K changes by d⇡k such that k d⇡k = 0, leads to the following

price change:

d log(p)
=
d⇡



@D
@ log(p)

@s
@ log(p)

1

·



@D @D @v
+
·
@⇡
@v @⇡

(34)

Appendix Table A displays the estimated moments of log price increases and the magnitude of
the compression of the price distribution Corr(

log(p), p) as predicted by the data (first line), the

baseline model (last line), and by all possible combination of extensions incorporating local housing
elasticity, population change, and racial composition change. Extensions are either incorporated
one at a time or in combination. The extended model yield results that are rather similar to those
obtained with the baseline model. The correlation capturing the compressions of the house price
distribution ranges between

0.2 and

0.38. The most comprehensive extension which combines

local elasticity, population growth, and change in racial demographics of the SF Bay, yields the
same price compression as the baseline model, and produces a similarly good match with the data
on the key moments of the distribution of house price changes.

7

Conclusion

This paper’s goal was to improve our understanding of the equilibrium relationships between lending
standards, location choices, house prices and segregation. We do so by designing and estimating a
model of neighborhood choice that explicitly takes into account the role of borrowing constraints.
A key estimation result is that borrowing elasticity, the component of price elasticity associated
with price-induced changes in mortgage approval probabilities, explains a larger share of demand
elasticity than conditional demand elasticity, the component of price elasticity that reflects priceinduced changes in utility. Such result validates the idea that diﬀerences in probability of mortgage
approval across neighborhoods strongly shape the choice set of prospective home buyers.
The comparative static analysis of the model provides measures of the general equilibrium effects of a change in lending standards on the distribution of prices and households. The model’s
predictions are well in line with the data regarding the key moments of the distribution of house
price changes and the compression of the price distribution between 2000 and 2006. The model also
predicts key changes in the observed patterns of segregation such as the reduction in the isolation of
46

Whites. The ability of the estimated model to jointly predict observed changes in the distribution
of prices and in the distribution of households strengthens the view that general equilibrium eﬀects
associated with changes in credit conditions play an important role in the dynamics of cities.
The estimated model could be used to understand other important dimensions of city dynamics.
For example, the model could be informative about the eﬀects of a change in the level or distribution
of income, or the eﬀects of a change in the spatial distribution of amenities such as schools or access
to transportation. This paper looks at the causal eﬀect of changes in lending standards on city
outcomes. The model could also be used “in reverse” in order to trace down the fundamental causes
of salient city transformations such as the gentrification of some neighborhoods.

References
Abaluck, J. & Adams, A. (2017), What do consumers consider before they choose? identification from asymmetric demand responses, Working Paper 23566, National Bureau of Economic
Research.
Adelino, M., Gerardi, K. & Willen, P. S. (2013), ‘Why don’t lenders renegotiate more home mortgages? Redefaults, self-cures and securitization’, Journal of Monetary Economics 60(7), 835–
853.
Adelino, M., Schoar, A. & Severino, F. (2012), Credit supply and house prices: evidence from
mortgage market segmentation, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bayer, P., Ferreira, F. & McMillan, R. (2007), ‘A unified framework for measuring preferences for
schools and neighborhoods’, Journal of Political Economy .
Bayer, P., McMillan, R., Murphy, A. & Timmins, C. (2016), ‘A dynamic model of demand for
houses and neighborhoods’, Econometrica 84(3), 893–942.
Bayer, P., McMillan, R. & Rueben, K. S. (2004), ‘What drives racial segregation? new evidence
using census microdata’, Journal of Urban Economics 56, 514–535.
Bayer, P. & Timmins, C. (2007), ‘Estimating equilibrium models of sorting across locations’, The
Economic Journal 117(518), 353–374.
47

Becker, G. S. & Murphy, K. M. (2009), Social economics: Market behavior in a social environment,
Harvard University Press.
Berry, S., Levinsohn, J. & Pakes, A. (1995), ‘Automobile prices in market equilibrium’, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 841–890.
Brock, W. A. & Durlauf, S. N. (2001), ‘Discrete choice with social interactions’, The Review of
Economic Studies 68(2), 235–260.
Conlon, C. T. & Mortimer, J. H. (2013), ‘Demand estimation under incomplete product availability’,
American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 5(4), 1–30.
Cutler, D. M., Glaeser, E. L. & Vigdor, J. L. (1999), ‘The rise and decline of the american ghetto’,
Journal of Political Economy 107(3), 1–52.
Debreu, G. (1970), ‘Economies with a finite set of equilibria’, Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 387–392.
Dell’Arriccia, G., Igan, D. & Laeven, L. (2009), ‘Credit booms and lending standards: Evidence
from the subprime mortgage market’, European Banking Center Working Paper pp. 1–44.
Durlauf, S. N. (2004), ‘Neighborhood eﬀects’, Handbook of regional and urban economics 4, 2173–
2242.
Favara, G. & Imbs, J. (2015), ‘Credit supply and the price of housing’, The American Economic
Review 105(3), 958–992.
Fujita, M. (1989), Urban economic theory: land use and city size, Cambridge university press.
Geweke, J. (1988), ‘Antithetic acceleration of monte carlo integration in bayesian inference’, Journal
of Econometrics 38(1), 73–89.
Geweke, J. (1996), ‘Monte carlo simulation and numerical integration’, Handbook of computational
economics 1, 731–800.
Glaeser, E. L., Gottlieb, J. D. & Gyourko, J. (2012), Can cheap credit explain the housing boom?,
in ‘Housing and the Financial Crisis’, University of Chicago Press, pp. 301–359.
48

Glaeser, E. L., Gottlieb, J. D. & Tobio, K. (2012), ‘Housing booms and city centers’, The American
Economic Review 102(3), 127.
Goeree, M. S. (2008), ‘Limited information and advertising in the us personal computer industry’,
Econometrica 76(5), 1017–1074.
Goux, D. & Maurin, E. (2007), ‘Close neighbours matter: Neighbourhood eﬀects on early performance at school’, The Economic Journal 117, 1–23.
Hansen, L. P. (1982), ‘Large sample properties of generalized method of moments estimators’,
Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 1029–1054.
Heckman, J. J., Urzua, S. & Vytlacil, E. (2006), ‘Understanding instrumental variables in models
with essential heterogeneity’, The Review of Economics and Statistics 88(3), 389–432.
Holmes, T. & Sieg, H. (2015), ‘Structural estimation in urban economics’, Handbook of Urban and
Regional Economics 5.
Imbens, G. W. & Lancaster, T. (1994), ‘Combining micro and macro data in microeconometric
models’, The Review of Economic Studies 61(4), 655–680.
Imbs, J. & Mejean, I. (2015), ‘Elasticity optimism’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
7(3), 43–83.
Landvoigt, T., Piazzesi, M. & Schneider, M. (2015), ‘The housing market(s) of San Diego’, American
Economic Review 105(4), 1371–1407.
Loutskina, E. (2011), ‘The role of securitization in bank liquidity and funding management’, Journal
of Financial Economics 100(3), 663–684.
Loutskina, E. & Strahan, P. E. (2009), ‘Securitization and the declining impact of bank finance on
loan supply: Evidence from mortgage originations’, The Journal of Finance 64(2), 861–889.
Massey, D. S. & Denton, N. A. (1988), ‘The dimensions of residential segregation’, Social Forces
67(2), 281–315.
McFadden, D. (1973), ‘Conditional logit analysis of qualitative choice behavior’, Frontiers in Econometrics pp. 105–142.
49

Newey, W. K. (1987), ‘Eﬃcient estimation of limited dependent variable models with endogenous
explanatory variables’, Journal of Econometrics 36(3), 231–250.
Nunn, N. & Puga, D. (2012), ‘Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in Africa’, Review of
Economics and Statistics 94(1), 20–36.
Ouazad, A. & Rancière, R. (2016), ‘Credit standards and segregation’, Review of Economics and
Statistics 98(5), 880–896.
Petrin, A. (2002), ‘Quantifying the benefits of new products: The case of the minivan’, Journal of
political Economy 110(4), 705–729.
Riley, S. J., DeGloria, S. D. & Elliot, R. (1999), ‘A terrain ruggedness index that quantifies topographic heterogeneity’, Intermountain Journal of Sciences 5(1-4), 23–27.
Rosenthal, S. S. (2014), ‘Are private markets and filtering a viable source of low-income housing?
estimates from a “repeat income” model’, The American Economic Review 104(2), 687–706.
Saiz, A. (2010), ‘The geographic determinants of housing supply’, The Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 1253–1296.
Swamy, P. A. (1970), ‘Eﬃcient inference in a random coeﬃcient regression model’, Econometrica:
Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 311–323.
Train, K. (2009), ‘Discrete choice models’, pp. 1–42.

50

−0.4

−0.2
0.0

Conditional Demand Elasticity

0.2

10

●

●

●

●●

0.4

11

●

12

13
log(Price)

●
●

14

15

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●● ●
● ●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●●●
●●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●●●● ● ●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●● ●
● ●
●● ●
●● ●● ●●
●●
●
●●●
●● ●●
● ●●●●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●●●●●
●
● ●
●● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●●●●●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●●● ●●● ●
●
●●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
● ● ●●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●● ●●● ●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●

(d) Conditional Elasticity vs. Price

−0.6

(a) Conditional Demand Elasticity

10

●
●
●

−0.5

−0.3

−0.2

Borrowing Elasticity

−0.4

−0.1

●

●

●
●●

11

●
●
●
●

●

●
● ●

0.0

12

13
log(Price)

14

15

●
●

●●
●●
● ●●
● ●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●● ●●●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●●●●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●● ●●● ●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●●
●
●●●●●●
●● ● ●
●●●●● ●●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●● ●● ●
●● ●
●●●
●●●
●
● ● ●●
●●
● ●●●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ● ● ●●●●●●● ●●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
●● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●● ● ●● ●●●
●●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ● ● ● ●
●●● ● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
● ●●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●

(e) Borrowing Elasticity vs. Price

−0.6

(b) Borrowing Elasticity

5
10

●

●

●

−0.6

−0.4

−0.2
Total Demand Elasticity

0.0

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

11

12

13
log(Price)

14

15

●●
●
●

●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
● ● ●●●● ●
● ●
●
●●
● ●●
● ●●● ●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●●● ●
●
●
● ●
●● ●● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ● ●●●●●●
●●●
●●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●● ●●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●● ●
●● ●●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
● ●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
● ●●●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●● ● ●
●● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
●
●● ●●
● ●●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●●●●
●●
● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●●●●
● ● ●●● ●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●● ●●
● ●
●●
●
● ● ●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●

●

(f) Total Elasticity vs. Price

−0.8

(c) Total Elasticity

These figures present the total own-price demand elasticity ⌘j (panel (c)) for each of the 4,416 neighborhoods, which is the sum of the conditional own-price
demand elasticity ⌘|C,j (panel (a)) and the borrowing elasticity ⌘j ⌘|C,j (panel (b)). The conditional demand elasticity is the elasticity at given borrowing
constraints, i.e. at given choice set.

Figure 1: Demand Elasticity Distributions – Model with Borrowing Constraints

6
5
4

4

3

2

1

0

0.4

Density

Conditional Elasticity

0.2

0.0

−0.2

−0.4

−0.6

Density
Borrowing Elasticity

3
2
1
0
0.0
−0.1
−0.2
−0.3
−0.4
−0.5
−0.6

Density
Total Elasticity

4
3
2
1
0
0.0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
−0.8

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

11

●
●

●●
●

13

log(Price), 2000

12

14

10

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

@D
/D
@

15

●

11

12

● ●●
●

13
log(Price), 2000

●

14

15

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●●●●
● ●●
●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
● ●
●
●● ● ●● ●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●
● ●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
● ●●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●●●
● ●●●
●
● ●● ●●●
●●● ●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●● ●●
●
●●
● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●●● ●
●●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●
●●●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●● ●
●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●● ●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●● ●●●● ● ●●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●

●

●

(c) Partial Equilibrium Demand Eﬀects

10

●

●

●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●●●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●●● ● ●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ● ● ● ●●● ●
● ●●
●
● ●●●● ● ●● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●● ● ●●
●●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●●
●
●●● ●●●●
●●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●● ●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●●
● ●

●

(a) G.E. Eﬀect and Initial log(Price)

0.10

0.20

0.25

0.30

Predicted log(Price) increase

0.15

0.35

0.40

10

●

●●

●

●
●●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

11

12

13
log.price

●

14

15

●
●
●
●
● ●●●● ●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●
●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●● ● ●●● ●
●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●●● ● ● ● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●●
●
●●● ●
●
● ● ●●
● ●● ●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●●
●●●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●
●●●●
●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●●●● ●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●●
● ● ●●
●
● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

(d) Social Interaction Impacts (@D/@v·@v/@ )/D

0.05

(b) Distribution of log(Price) Changes

These figures illustrate the general equilibrium compression of the price distribution caused by the relaxation of lending standards. The relaxation of lending
standards d is estimated in Appendix Table C. Figure (a) shows the relation between initial log(price) in 2000 and general equilibrium log(price) growth.
Figure (b) shows the distribution of general equilibrium log price changes d log(p)/d . Figure (c) shows the partial equilibrium eﬀects @D/@ of lending
standards on demand at constant prices, in percentage of initial demand D. Figure (d) shows the social interaction impact of lending standards on demand
@D/@v · @v/@ , in percentage of initial demand D. Notations as in Section 5.

Figure 2: General Equilibrium Eﬀects of Lending Standards on the Price Distribution

Predicted log(Price) Increase, 2000−2006
Partial Equilibrium Impact on Demand

Density
dDdtheta.v.ratio

0.05
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

20
15
10
5
0
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Figure 3: Compression of the Price Distribution – Comparison of General Equilibrium Predictions and the Actual 2000–2006 log(Price) Change

0.25
0.20

●

0.10

0.15

●

●
●

0.00

0.05

●

−0.05

Actual (black) and Predicted (Red) log(Price) Increase, 2000−2006

Black points below plot the actual average annual change in the log(price) from our propertylevel transaction data against the initial log(price) in 2000. Red points plot the log(price) change
as predicted by the model’s general equilibrium comparative statics against the initial log(price)
in 2000. Each point is a blockgroup.

●

10

●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
● ● ●
●
●●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●● ●●●
● ● ●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●● ●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●●●● ● ●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●● ●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ●●●● ● ●●●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
● ● ●
● ●●
● ●●●
●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
● ●● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●● ●
● ● ● ●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●● ●●●● ● ● ●
●
●●●
● ●●
●●
●●
●
●●● ●
●●●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●●●●
●●●
●
● ●● ●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●● ●●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

11

12

13

14

●

●

●

●

15

log(Price), 2000

Actual log price change
1st Qu.
0.076

Median
0.110

Mean
0.111

S.D.
0.055

3rd Qu.
0.148

Corr( log(pjt ), log(pjt ))
-0.748

Predicted log price change
1st Qu.
0.072

Median
0.087

Mean
0.101

S.D.
0.045

3rd Qu.
0.116

Corr( log(pjt ), log(pjt ))
-0.286

0.2

●

●

●●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●●
●● ●

●

●
● ●

●
●●
●●
●

●●

● ●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.4

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●●●

●

●

●

●
●
●● ●
●●

0.8

●

●
●
●
●
●

0.0

0.2

0.6

Fraction white, 2000

0.4

0.8

1.0

1.0

● ●
●●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●● ● ● ● ● ● ●
●●●
● ●●
● ●
● ●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●●●●● ● ●●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ● ●●
● ●
●
● ●●● ● ●●● ●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●● ●
●●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●●●●
●●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●
●●
●●●●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●●
●●● ●●
●● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●● ● ●●● ●
● ● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●

●●

●

0.6

Fraction white, 2000

●

(e) Price Change and
Initial Fraction White

●
●

●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●● ●
●●● ●
● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●● ● ● ●● ● ●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●● ● ●●
●●●● ●●●
●
●
● ●●●
●●● ●●
● ● ●● ● ●
●●● ●● ●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
● ●● ●
●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●●
● ●
● ● ● ●●●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●
● ●● ●
●
● ● ●
●●
● ● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●●
●● ●●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
● ●
●●●●●●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●● ●● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●●
●●●●● ●
● ● ●●
●●● ●
● ● ● ●● ●●
● ●● ●
● ●
●●●●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●● ● ● ●●
●●●●●
●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●● ●
●●
●
● ●
●●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●●●
●●●
●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●● ●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●● ●
●●●
●●● ●● ●●● ● ●
●
●●●
● ●●
●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
● ●●●●●●
●●●
●
●●● ● ●●
●●●
●●
●
● ●●●● ●● ●● ●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●●●●●●
●● ●
● ●
● ●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●
●●
●● ● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
● ●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●

0.0

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●

●
●

●

●

● ●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

0.2

0.4

●

0.6

Fraction hispanic, 2000

0.0

●●

● ●
●

●

●

●
●
●●

●

●●

●

●

●

●

0.2

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.8

0.6
Fraction hispanic, 2000

0.4

0.8

● ●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●
●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●● ● ●●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
● ● ● ●●● ●
●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●● ● ●●
● ●●
●●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
● ●● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ● ● ●●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ●● ●
●● ●
●●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●
●● ●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●●
●●●●●●
●●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●●●●
● ●●● ●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●● ●●
●●
●●●●●
●
●● ● ●● ●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●● ●
● ● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●
● ●●
● ● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●●
● ● ● ● ●
●●
●● ●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●●●●
●●●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●● ●●●●
●●●
●● ●
●●●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●

●

●

(f) Price Change and
Initial Fraction Hispanic

0.0

● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
● ● ●●
● ●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●●●● ● ● ●● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●●●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
● ●●●●●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●● ●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●● ● ●
● ●● ●●●
● ●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●●
● ●●● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●●
● ●● ●
● ●●●● ●●● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ● ●●
●●●
●
● ●
● ●● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ● ●● ● ● ●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●● ●
●● ● ● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●●●● ● ●● ●●
●● ●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
● ● ●●
●●● ● ● ● ●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●●●
●●
● ● ●
● ●
●●● ●●● ● ●
● ●
● ●●●●● ● ●● ● ●●
●●
●●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●● ● ● ● ●●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●●● ●●●
●● ● ● ●
● ● ●
● ●●
● ●●●●●●
●
●
●●●●●● ●
●●●● ● ●
● ●●●●
●
●●●● ●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●●● ●● ●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●●●
●●
●●
●●●●
●●●
●
●●●
● ●●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ●●● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●●●
●● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●● ●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●● ●●●
● ●
● ●●●● ●● ●● ● ● ● ●● ●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●● ●● ●
●●●●
●
●●●●●●●● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●●●
●●
●●● ●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●
●●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●●
●●●●● ●● ●● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
● ● ●● ● ●
●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

(b) Hispanic Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Hispanic

●
● ●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●●
●

●

●
●
●●
●● ●
●

●●

0.2

0.4

●
●
●
●

●●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
● ●

●

●
●

●

●
● ●
●

0.0

0.2

Fraction black, 2000

0.4

●
●

●

●

●

●

0.6

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

0.8

●

●
●●
●

●

●
●

●
●

0.8

●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●
● ●
●
●
●

●

●

●

0.6

●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ● ●
●
● ●● ● ●
● ●● ● ● ●●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●●
● ●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●●
● ●●
●● ●●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ● ●● ●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●●
●● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

Fraction black, 2000

(g) Price Change and
Initial Fraction Black

0.0

●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●● ●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
● ●
● ●● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●
● ● ●●
●● ●
●●
● ● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●● ● ● ● ●●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●● ●
●●
● ●●● ● ● ●●●
●●●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
●●●
●●
● ● ●●
● ● ●●
● ● ●● ● ●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●● ● ●●
●
● ●
●● ●
●● ● ●
●
● ●● ●●● ● ● ●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●●
●●●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●●●
●
●●●
● ● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●
● ●●● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●●●●● ● ●● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●●●●●
●
● ● ●
●●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●● ●
●
●● ●
● ●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●
● ●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●● ●
●●
● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
● ●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●● ●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

(c) Black Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Black

●

●

0.0

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.4

●

●●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

0.6

●●
●
●
●
●

●

●
● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

Fraction asian, 2000

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
● ●
●● ● ●
●●
●
● ●
●● ● ●
●
●
●● ● ●● ●
● ●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●●● ●●
●
● ● ●
● ●● ●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●●
● ● ●
● ●● ●●
● ●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●
●● ● ● ●
●●
●●●●● ●●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●
●●●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●●●● ●●
●● ●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●
●● ●● ●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●●●
●●
●
●● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●●●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●●●●
● ●●
●
●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●● ●● ●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●●●●
●●●●●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●●
●
●● ● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
● ●
●●

●

(h) Price Change and
Initial Fraction Asian

0.2

●

●●

0.8

●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●●
● ● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●●
●●● ● ●
●●●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
● ●●●
● ●●
●●
●● ●
● ● ●● ● ●
● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●●
●● ●●●●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●● ●
● ●● ●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●●●
●● ●
●●
●
● ● ●
●●●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●● ●●●●
●
●
●●●●
● ●●●
●●●●●●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●●●● ●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
●● ●●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●● ●●
● ●●●
● ●
●●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
● ●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●● ●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

(d) Asian Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Asian

D asian Pop / Population

(a) White Demand Change and
Initial Fraction White

1.0

●

The four top figures (a)–(d) illustrate the impact of lending standards on segregation as predicted by the model’s comparative statics. The
red dots are the demand changes accounting for the general equilibrium change in prices and demographics. The black dots are the partial
equilibrium demand changes, i.e. at given prices and demographics. The bottom four panels (e)–(h) display the correlation between general
equilibrium price changes and initial neighborhood-level racial demographics.

Figure 4: General Equilibrium Eﬀects of Lending Standards on Segregation (1/2)

0.08
0.06

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

−0.005

0.40

0.35

D hispanic Pop / Population
log(Price) Change

D white Pop / Population

log(Price) Change

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

D black Pop / Population
log(Price) Change

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

0.04
0.02
0.00
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
0.15
0.10
0.05

54

D white Pop / Population

0.030

0.025

0.020

0.015

0.010

0.005

0.000

−0.005

●
●
●

●
●●
●

0.0
●

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

D white Pop / Population

●●
●● ●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

0.0 ●

0.2

●
●
●

●

0.0

0.2

●

Fraction black, 2000

0.4

0.6

0.8

●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●● ●● ●
●●
●
●● ●● ●
●● ● ● ●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ● ● ● ●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ● ●● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●● ●● ● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ● ●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●●●●
●
●●
●● ●●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●●●●
●●●● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
● ●● ● ●
●●●
● ●●●●●●
●
●●
●
●●● ● ●●
●
●●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●●● ●
●●
●● ●●●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●●●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●● ●
●● ● ●
●● ●
●● ●●● ●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●● ● ●
● ●● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●

●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●

●
●

0.4

0.6

0.8

●

●

●● ●
●
●●

●

●
●

●

●●
●

0.2

●

●

0.4

●

●

●

●
● ●

●●

●
●●
●

0.0

Fraction black, 2000

0.6

0.8

●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●● ●●
●● ● ●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●●
●●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●●● ●

●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

0.2

●
●

0.4

●

0.6

Fraction asian, 2000

0.8

●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●● ● ● ●
● ●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●●
●● ●● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●●●●●●●● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
● ●● ● ●● ●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
● ●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●●●●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ● ● ●
●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●●●● ●
●●●●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●● ●
●
●●●
● ●● ●
●●●
●
● ●●
●
● ● ●●
● ●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●

0.0

●

●

●
●●

(e) Asian Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Black

Fraction hispanic, 2000

●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●●● ● ●
●●●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●●●● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●● ● ● ●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ● ●
● ●● ● ●●
●● ● ●●●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●● ●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●● ● ● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●● ● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●●
●
● ●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●●●●●●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●●●●
●●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●
●●●

●
●
●

●

(d) Hispanic Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Black

Fraction black, 2000

●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●● ●
●●● ●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
● ●●●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ● ● ●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
● ● ●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●● ●
●
● ●● ●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●● ● ●
● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
● ● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●●●
●●

●
●
●

0.030
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000

●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●

(c) White Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Asian

D white Pop / Population

(b) White Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Hispanic

D asian Pop / Population

−0.005

0.030
0.025
0.020
0.015
0.010
0.005
0.000
−0.005

(a) White Demand Change and
Initial Fraction Black

1.0

●
●

Figures (a)–(e) illustrate the impact of lending standards on segregation. The red dots are the demand changes accounting for the general
equilibrium change in prices and demographics. The black dots are the partial equilibrium demand changes, i.e. at given prices and
demographics.

Figure 5: General Equilibrium Eﬀects of Lending Standards on Segregation (2/2)

D hispanic Pop / Population

0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.00

55

Table 1: Mortgage Approval Equation – Logit and IV Estimation – 1990–2010
The table presents the estimation of the approval model (Specification 6). In the top panel,
column (1) presents the regression with tract fixed eﬀect and no instrument. Column (2) presents
the IV logit regression that uses the the liquidity of the nearest branches as IV. The top panel also
includes VA and FSA-RHS indicators. The bottom panel presents two additional IV approaches.
Tract
Fixed Eﬀect

Loan to Income Ratio
Black
Asian
Hispanic
Other Race
Year 2000
Year 2010
FHA Insured Loan
Observations
Census Tracts
Pseudo R Squared

Specification:

IV Liquidity of
Nearby Branches

Logit
Coeﬃcients

Marginal
Probabilities

Logit
Coeﬃcients

Marginal
Probabilities

0.252***
(0.008)
0.718***
(0.031)
0.066***
(0.021)
0.331***
(0.029)
0.410***
(0.024)
0.026
(0.024)
0.031
(0.031)
0.150***
(0.029)

0.028***
(0.001)
0.080***
(0.003)
0.007***
(0.002)
0.037***
(0.003)
0.046***
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.017***
(0.003)

0.791***
(0.183)
0.461***
(0.054)
0.012
(0.044)
0.199***
(0.046)
0.159***
(0.058)
0.022
(0.070)
0.388**
(0.173)
0.062
(0.061)

0.132***
(0.025)
0.077***
(0.009)
0.002
(0.007)
0.033***
(0.007)
0.026***
(0.009)
0.003
(0.011)
0.065**
(0.026)
0.010
(0.010)

208,206
1,606
0.0436

208,206
1,606
0.0436

41,153
1,606
159.84

41,153
1,606
159.84

IV Specification:
Liquidity of
Branches IV
Nearby Branches
and Racial Composition
Set Up before 1985
of Adjacent Neighborhoods

Loan to Income Ratio
Black
Asian
Hispanic
Other Race
FHA Insured Loan
VA-guaranteed
FSA-RHS
Year 2000
Year 2010
Observations
Census Tracts
Wald 2

Probit
Coeﬃcients
1.049***
(0.209)
0.364***
(0.056)
0.038
(0.044)
0.121**
(0.049)
0.064
(0.063)
0.004
(0.057)
0.025
(0.081)
0.446
(0.318)
0.075
(0.051)
0.686
(0.203)

Marginal
Probabilities
0.225***
(0.042)
0.078***
(0.011)
0.008
(0.009)
0.026**
(0.010)
0.013
(0.013)
0.001
(0.012)
0.005
(0.017)
0.095
(0.067)
0.016
(0.011)
0.147***
(0.042)

Probit
Coeﬃcients
1.037***
(0.205)
1.247***
(0.266)
0.320**
(0.153)
0.713***
(0.222)
0.080
(0.086)
0.170***
(0.060)
0.097
(0.098)
0.466
(0.297)
0.118***
(0.038)
0.545***
(0.193)

Marginal
Probabilities
0.228***
(0.044)
0.274***
(0.056)
0.070**
(0.035)
0.156***
(0.046)
0.017
(0.018)
0.037***
(0.013)
0.021
(0.022)
0.102
(0.064)
0.026***
(0.008)
0.119***
(0.042)

41,153
1,606
150.25

41,153
1,606
150.25

41,153
1,606
152.37

41,153
1,606
152.37

***: Significant at 1%, **: Significant at 5%, *: Significant at 10%.
Robust standard errors clustered at the census tract level in parenthesis.

Table 2: Household Preferences and Willingness to Pay for Neighborhood Amenities:
Neighborhoods’ Racial Demographics (1/2)
The table reports household preferences for neighborhoods’ racial demographics. We consider the
model with borrowing constraints (columns (1)–(2)), and the model without borrowing constraints
(columns (3)–(4)). Columns (1) and (3) report the utility coeﬃcient ik andhthe interactioni terms.
Columns (2) and (4) report the median willingness to pay (WTP) M ediani ↵iki · IQR(zk ) for an
interquartile range (IQR) change in the value of the amenity zk , where ↵i is the (conditional) price
elasticity coeﬃcient.
Model
with borrowing constraints without borrowing constraints
Utility
Median WTP
Utility
Median WTP
Coeﬃcient
for one IQR
Coeﬃcient
for one IQR
Frac. Asian

0.278
(0.063)

Standard deviation

0.072
(0.931)

0.006
(1.112)

x Asian

4.510
(0.187)

4.476
(0.121)

Frac. Black

1.698
(0.079)

Standard deviation

0.105
(1.281)

0.043
(0.972)

x Black

6.217
(0.107)

6.298
(0.082)

Frac. Hispanic

0.350
(0.077)

Standard deviation

0.127
(1.150)

0.085
(1.404)

x Hispanic

3.470
(0.145)

3.414
(0.131)

Frac. White
x White

Ref.

9.090
$39,984

21.930
$96,463

12.880
$56,655

Ref.

2.933
(0.090)

0.189
(0.062)

1.732
(0.078)

0.413
(0.077)

Ref.
2.967
(0.085)

Standard errors clustered by block group in parenthesis.

57

6.96
$30,615

20.83
$91,624

17.34
$76,273

Ref.

Table 3: Household Preferences and Willingness to Pay for Local Amenities (2/2)
The table reports household preferences for neighborhoods’ education, income, and school test
scores. We consider the model with borrowing constraints (columns (1)–(2)), and the model without borrowing constraints (columns (3)–(4)). Columns (1) and (3) report the utility coeﬃcient
Columns (2) and (4) report the median willingness to pay (WTP)
i and the
i
h interaction terms.
ik
M ediani ↵i · IQR(zk ) for an interquartile range (IQR) change in the value of the amenity zk ,
where ↵i is the (conditional) price elasticity coeﬃcient.
(a) Neighborhood Education, Income, and School Performance Index
with borrowing constraints

Model
without borrowing constraints

Utility
Coeﬃcient

Median WTP
for one IQR

Utility
Coeﬃcient

Median WTP
for one IQR

log(median household Income)

0.093
(0.018)

11.510
$50,629

0.094
(0.018)

11.48
$50,497

x log(household income)

0.465
(0.007)

Frac. College Educated

0.322
(0.048)

24.070
$105,876

0.322
(0.048)

23.73
$104,380

Standardized API

0.023
(0.005)

5.201
$22,877

0.008
(0.005)

1.944
$8,552

Standard deviation

0.009
(0.070)

0.436
(0.006)

0.001
(0.097)

The table reports conditional price elasticity estimates, interacted with household log income. This
conditional price elasticity measure is the coeﬃcient of log price in the utility specification equation 1.
Including a random coeﬃcient for log(price) yields similar results.
(b) Price Elasticity Measures
Model
with borrowing constraints w.o. borrowing constraints
log(Price)

0.086
(0.032)

0.299
(0.046)

x Standardized log(Income)

0.363
(0.008)

0.324
(0.011)

Standard errors clustered by block group in parenthesis.

58

Table 4: General Equilibrium Eﬀects of Lending Standards on Racial Segregation
The table presents the comparative statics impact of the marginal change in lending standards on
racial segregation. The numbers presented are the general equilibrium impacts, accounting for price
and demographic changes, on racial exposure (Section 5.2). The tables read as follows: the cell in
the second row and the first column is the impact of lending standards on the exposure of Blacks to
Asians, in percentage points. The diagonal of each table is the impact on isolation, i.e. the exposure
of a racial group to same-race neighbors.
(a) Predicted Segregation Changes

Exposure Of
Asian
Black
Hispanic
White

Asian
+1.15 ppt
0.51 ppt
0.11 ppt
+0.15 ppt

Exposure to
Black
Hispanic
0.05 ppt
0.02 ppt
+2.84 ppt
0.25 ppt
+0.07 ppt +1.04 ppt
+0.20 ppt +0.29 ppt

White
1.08 ppt
2.07 ppt
1.00 ppt
0.63 ppt

(b) Actual Segregation Changes

Exposure Of
Asian
Black
Hispanic
White

Asian
+5.34 ppt
+1.29 ppt
+0.87 ppt
+1.91 ppt

Exposure to
Black
Hispanic
0.95 ppt +0.42 ppt
2.59 ppt +2.54 ppt
0.83 ppt +4.48 ppt
0.09 ppt +1.54 ppt

59

White
4.19 ppt
0.56 ppt
3.76 ppt
3.04 ppt

