                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                         UNIFORM PRICING IN US RETAIL CHAINS

                                       Stefano DellaVigna
                                       Matthew Gentzkow

                                       Working Paper 23996
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23996


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2017, Revised April 2019



We thank Nicholas Bloom, Liran Einav, Benjamin Handel, Mitch Hoffman, Ali Hortacsu, Emir
Kamenica, Kei Kawai, Carl Mela, Emi Nakamura, Peter Rossi, Stephen Seiler, Steven Tadelis,
Sofia Villas-Boas. We thank seminar participants at Columbia University, MIT (Sloan), New
York University, the San Francisco Federal Reserve, Stanford University (GSB), the University
of Bonn, the University of Chicago (Department, Booth, Harris), UC Berkeley, UCLA, the
University of Toronto, and conference participants at the NBER Summer Institute, the SITE
Conference in Psychology and Economics, and the Berkeley-Paris con- ference in Organizational
Economics for helpful comments. We thank Angie Acquatella, Sahil Chinoy, Bryan Chu,
Johannes Hermle, Christopher Lim, Ammar Mahran, Akshay Rao, Sebastian Schaube, Avner
Shlain, Patricia Sun, and Brian Wheaton for outstanding research assistance. Gentzkow
acknowledges funding from the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research (SIEPR).
Researcher(s) own analyses calculated (or derived) based in part on data from The Nielsen
Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets at the Kilts
Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of Business. The
conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researcher(s) and do not reflect the
views of Nielsen or the National Bureau of Economic Research. Nielsen is not responsible for,
had no role in, and was not involved in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23996.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains
Stefano DellaVigna and Matthew Gentzkow
NBER Working Paper No. 23996
November 2017, Revised April 2019
JEL No. D9,L1,L2,M31

                                           ABSTRACT

We show that most US food, drugstore, and mass merchandise chains charge nearly-uniform
prices across stores, despite wide variation in consumer demographics and competition. Demand
estimates reveal substantial within-chain variation in price elasticities and suggest that the median
chain sacrifices$16m of annual profit relative to a benchmark of optimal prices. In contrast,
differences in average prices between chains are broadly consistent with the optimal benchmark.
We discuss a range of explanations for nearly-uniform pricing, highlighting managerial inertia
and brand-image concerns as mechanisms frequently mentioned by industry participants. Relative
to our optimal benchmark, uniform pricing may significantly increase the prices paid by poorer
households relative to the rich, dampen the response of prices to local economic shocks, alter the
analysis of mergers in antitrust, and shift the incidence of intra-national trade costs.


Stefano DellaVigna
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
sdellavi@econ.berkeley.edu

Matthew Gentzkow
Department of Economics
Stanford University
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
gentzkow@stanford.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w23996
1    Introduction

The adjustment of local retail prices to local economic conditions is central to a range of economic
policy questions. Differences in local retail prices across poor and rich areas may exacerbate or
moderate real income inequality (Allcott et al., 2018a). The response of local prices to consumer de-
mand is a key input to understanding business cycles (Stroebel and Vavra, forthcoming). Standard
antitrust analysis of retail mergers depends critically on the way local prices respond to changes in
local competitive conditions (Federal Trade Commission, 2010). Variation in prices as a function
of intra-national trade costs determines the distribution of gains from globalization (Atkin and
Donaldson 2015). Analysis in all these areas typically starts from models in which local prices are
set optimally in response to local costs and demand.
    In this paper, we show that most large US food, drugstore, and mass merchandise chains in
fact set uniform or nearly-uniform prices across their stores, resulting in a significant loss of profits.
This fact echoes uniform pricing “puzzles” in markets such as soft drinks (McMillan, 2007), movie
tickets (Orbach and Einav, 2007), rental cars (Cho and Rust, 2010), and online music (Shiller and
Waldfogel, 2011), but is distinct in that prices are fixed across separate markets, rather than across
multiple goods in one market. We also show that limited within-chain variation applies not just to
prices but to product assortment as well. These findings have important implications for the policy
areas mentioned above.
    Our main analysis is based on store-level scanner data from the Nielsen-Kilts retail panel for
sales of 1,365 products in 9,415 food stores. In addition, we extend some results to a sample of 9,977
drugstores and 3,288 mass merchandise stores from the same data source. We use the standard
price measure in these data, defined to be the ratio of weekly revenue to weekly units sold.
    Our first set of results in Section 3 highlights the extent of uniform pricing. The price variation
within chains is small in absolute terms and far smaller than the variation between stores in
different chains. This is true despite substantial variation in consumer demographics and levels
of competition within chains. Consumer income per capita ranges from $23,100 at the average
chain’s 10th-percentile store to $41,600 at the average chain’s 90th-percentile store, and the number
of competing stores within 10 km varies from 0.7 at the 10th-percentile store to 8.9 at the 90th-
percentile store. Prices are highly similar within chains even for store pairs that face very different
income levels and are in geographically separated markets. A corollary is that the relationship
between prices and consumer income within chains is limited: prices increase by only 0.47 log
points (≈ 0.47 percent) for each $10,000 increase in the income of local consumers. In contrast,
the price-income relationship between chains is an order of magnitude larger. Chain average prices
increase instead by 4.2 log points (≈ 4.2 percent) per $10,000 of chain average income. These results

                                                    1
are similar for various alternative sets of products, including store brands, high-revenue products,
and low-revenue products. We find similar evidence of nearly-uniform within-chain pricing for drug
and mass-merchandise chains.
       We then show that the way prices are measured in the Nielsen data means that the degree
of uniform pricing is likely even greater than these results would suggest. If not all consumers
pay the same price within a given week, the weekly ratio of revenue to units sold will yield the
quantity-weighted average price. For example, even if posted prices are uniform across stores on
any given day of the week, stores facing more elastic demand (e.g., lower income) sell a larger
share of units on days with relatively low prices, leading the weekly average price to be lower in
such stores. Thus, compositional differences can create apparent correlation between measured
prices and income, even if posted prices are actually uniform.1 We assess the importance of this
compositional effect using data from a major grocer studied in Gopinath et al. (2011). These data
provide additional information that allows us to adjust for compositional effects, and once we do
so the price-income relationship is essentially zero.
       Our second set of results shows that the pattern of chain-level uniformity extends beyond pricing
to other dimensions including product assortment. We define an assortment index based on the
average national-level prices of the products sold by a store. This is high when the store carries
relatively expensive products but does not depend on the prices charged by the store itself. We
show that both overall variation in this index and its correlation with income are minimal within
chains and much larger between chains. We find similar, though less extreme, patterns for the share
of products that are organic, the share of generic products, and the number of products carried.
       Our third set of results compares the prices we observe to an optimal benchmark based on a
simple constant-elasticity model of demand. We address price endogeneity using a novel instru-
mental variables strategy broadly related to those in Hausman (1996) and Nevo (2001). The model
fits the data well, with an observed relationship between weekly log quantity and weekly log price
very close to linear. The store-level estimates of elasticity vary in an intuitive way with store-level
demographics and competition.
       Our model implies that the ratio of optimal price to marginal cost for a store with elasticity ηs is
ηs / (1 + ηs ). Assuming no variation in marginal costs across stores, prices at stores with elasticities
in the 90th percentile within the typical chain (ηs = −2.81) should be 17 percent higher than at
   1
    Chevalier and Kashyap (2019) and Coibion et al. (2015) point out that average prices paid at the annual or market
level may respond to macroeconomic shocks even when posted prices are constant. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to emphasize that the same force affects the weekly average prices commonly available in scanner data.
Indeed, both Chevalier and Kashyap (2019) and Coibion et al. (2015) treat the weekly average price as equivalent
to the posted price. Campbell and Eden (2014) and Cavallo (2018b) make a related point, noting that aggregation
to the weekly level can cause the frequency of price changes to be overstated.



                                                         2
stores with elasticities in the 10th percentile (ηs = −2.22). However, observed prices are on average
only 0.4 percent higher.2 To formally test the model’s predictions, we regress log prices on the term
log [ηs / (1 + ηs )], instrumented with store income. This yields a between-chain coefficient for food
chains of 0.83 (s.e. 0.23), close to the value of 1 predicted by the model. The within-chain coefficient
is an order of magnitude smaller, at 0.09 (s.e. 0.02), and the compositional issues discussed above
suggest this is likely an overestimate. Our estimated model implies that the median chain could
increase annual profits by $16.1m (1.6 percent of revenue) by moving to optimal flexible pricing.
       We consider a number of potential threats to the validity of our model. First, it abstracts from
variation in marginal costs across stores. Stroebel and Vavra (forthcoming) present a range of
evidence suggesting that such variation is likely to be small, and this is supported by our analysis
of the major grocer’s data. We argue that any remaining cost variation is likely to work against
what we find. Second, our main analysis treats demand as separable across products. Cross-
product substitution could lead us to overstate the relevant elasticities as consumers substitute
among products, or to understate them as consumers substitute on the store-choice margin as in
Thomassen et al. (2017). To partially address this concern, we show that estimated elasticities are
similar when we aggregate prices and quantities to the product category level. Third, prices and
promotions are often determined jointly by retailers and manufacturers (Anderson et al., 2017). The
fact that our results are similar for store brands provides evidence against the view that constraints
imposed by manufacturers are a key driver of our results.
       Finally, and perhaps most importantly, our baseline results focus on short-run weekly elasticities
that need not be equal to the longer-run elasticities relevant to setting a store’s average price level.
Long-run elasticities could be smaller (due to consumer stockpiling as in Hendel and Nevo, 2006)
or larger (due to search frictions). We address this in two ways. First, we show that the results
are similar using prices and quantities aggregated to the quarterly level. Second, we present an
event-study analysis of long-run price changes driven by chain mergers. We consider 114 stores
that changed ownership from one chain to another in our sample. We show that these stores switch
sharply from tracking the prices of their former chain to tracking the prices of their new chain.
This provides a validation of our uniform pricing result, as well as a natural source of long-run price
variation. Products whose prices were higher in the acquiring chain persistently increase; products
whose prices were lower persistently fall. We show that long-run elasticities computed using these
changes are highly correlated with our estimated short-run elasticities for the same stores.
       The next section discusses potential explanations for uniform pricing. Conclusively identifying
   2
    For observed prices, we calculate this by selecting stores that have elasticities within 0.05 of the 10th and 90th
elasticity percentiles in each chain. We compute the within-chain difference in average prices for stores near the 90th
percentile versus stores near the 10th percentile, and then take an equal-weighted average across retailers.



                                                          3
the correct explanation(s) is beyond the scope of this paper. However, discussions and interviews
with chain managers, consultants, and industry analysts suggest two leading explanations. The
first is managerial inertia, encompassing both agency frictions and behavioral factors that prevent
firms from implementing optimal policies, even though the benefits exceed the economic costs
traditionally defined. The second is brand image concerns, encompassing various mechanisms by
which varying prices across stores would lead to negative reactions from consumers that could
depress demand for a chain in the long run. We discuss several reasons that lead us to suspect that
the former may be more important than the latter. We also consider the possible roles played by
tacit collusion, menu costs, and engineering costs.
    The final section turns to the broader economic implications of uniform pricing. First, uniform
pricing may exacerbate inequality. In a calibrated example, we find that uniform pricing increases
the prices faced by consumers in the poorest decile of zipcodes by ten percent relative to the
prices faced by consumers in the richest decile. Second, uniform pricing is likely to substantially
dampen the response of prices to local demand shocks. This significantly shifts the incidence of
these shocks – for example, exacerbating the negative effects of the Great Recession on markets
with larger declines in housing values. Third, uniform pricing dramatically changes the standard
analysis of retail mergers. Finally, uniform pricing alters the incidence of intra-national trade costs
and can lead to severe biases in standard estimates of trade costs.
    We are not the first to document uniform pricing policies in retailing. Online Appendix Table
1 provides an overview of relevant papers.3 Prior work by Nakamura (2008) and contemporaneous
work by Hitsch et al. (2017) find that chain effects explain a substantial share of price variation in
large samples of stores and products. Cavallo (2017, 2018a) documents uniform pricing using data
from retailer websites in the context of comparing online to offline prices. Other papers have focused
on zone pricing for select retail chains, including early studies of the Dominicks food chain (e.g.,
Hoch et al., 1995, Chintagunta et al., 2003) and more recent evidence on three home improvement
chains including Home Depot (Adams and Williams, 2019).4 Our paper differs from most prior
work focusing directly on the extent of uniform pricing in that it compares observed pricing to
an optimal benchmark5 and highlights broader economic implications. As a separate contribution,
the novel instrumental variables strategy we develop in Section 4.2 may be applicable to demand
estimation in other settings where multi-establishment firms set partly or fully uniform prices.
   3
     Our discussion focuses on private retail firms. Miravete et al. (forthcoming) analyze the implications of a uniform
markup regulation for government-run liquor stores in Pennsylvania. Their work parallels ours in estimating variation
of demand elasticities and considering the distributional implications of uniform pricing.
   4
     Other related papers summarized in Online Appendix Table 1 are Hwang et al. (2010), Cavallo et al. (2014),
Kaplan and Menzio (2015), Gagnon and López-Salido (forthcoming), and Dobson and Waterson (2008).
   5
     Adams and Williams (2019) is the only prior study that computes a benchmark for optimal pricing.



                                                           4
        Our paper also relates to a large body of work on the extent and implications of local retail
price responses to economic shocks or incentives. Work by Gagnon and López-Salido (forthcoming),
Cawley et al. (2018), and Leung (2018) provide direct evidence supporting our claim that uniform
pricing dampens responses to local shocks. Our work also speaks to the literature tracing out the
implications of retail firms’ price setting for macroeconomic outcomes, including influential early
work using scanner data by Bils and Klenow (2004) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), and recent
contributions such as Anderson et al. (2017).6
        Finally, our paper relates to work in behavioral industrial organization. For a review, see
Heidhues and Koszegi, 2018. Most of the work in this area has focused on firms optimally responding
to behavioral consumers (e.g., DellaVigna and Malmendier, 2004). Our paper is instead part
of a smaller literature on behavioral firms — that is, cases in which firms deviate from simple
benchmarks of profit maximization (Bloom and Van Reenen, 2007; Hortaçsu and Puller, 2008;
Goldfarb and Xiao, 2011; Massey and Thaler, 2013; Hanna et al., 2014).


2        Data

Our primary data sources are the Nielsen Retail Scanner (“RMS”) and Nielsen Consumer Panel
(“Homescan”) data provided by the Kilts Center at the University of Chicago. RMS records the
average weekly revenue and quantity sold for over 35,000 stores and roughly four million unique
products (UPCs). We use RMS data for the period 2006 to 2014. Homescan tracks the purchases of
roughly 115,000 individual consumers across different stores. We use Homescan data to define the
demographic composition of each store’s consumers. We provide additional details on the sample
construction in the Online Appendix.
        Stores. We focus our main analysis on food stores, and show supplemental analysis for drug
and mass-merchandise stores. Table I Panel A shows that the initial Nielsen sample includes 38,539
stores with total average yearly revenue of $224 billion recorded in RMS.7
        We define a chain to be a unique combination of two identifiers in the Nielsen data: parent code
and retailer code. The former generally indicates the parent company that owns a chain and the
latter indicates the chain itself. Nielsen does not disclose the names of the chains in the data, but
a general example would be the Albertson’s LLC parent company which owns chains including
Albertson’s, Shaw’s, and Jewel-Osco. Sometimes, a single retailer code appears under multiple
    6
     A large body of prior work has considered the broader question of how responses to local and aggregate shocks
may differ. See, for example, Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), Stroebel and Vavra (forthcoming), and Beraja et al.
(2019). Our contribution is to show that uniform pricing can change predictions of local responses and to provide an
additional mechanism for different responses to shocks at different geographic levels.
   7
     This figure omits revenue from products not in the RMS data, including prescription drugs and most produce.



                                                         5
parent codes, possibly for reasons related to mergers.
      To define our main analysis sample, we exclude stores that switch chains over time,8 stores in
the sample for fewer than 104 weeks, and stores without any consumer purchases in the Homescan
data. We next introduce restrictions at the chain level. First, we require that the chains are present
in the sample for at least 8 of the 9 years. Second, in cases where the same retailer code appears
for stores with different parent codes, we only keep the parent code associated with the majority
of such stores, and we further exclude cases in which this retailer code-parent code combination
accounts for less than 80% of the stores with a given retailer code. Third, we exclude chains in
which 60% or more of stores belonging to a retailer code-parent code combination change either
parent code or retailer code in our sample.
      As Table I Panel A shows, these restrictions result in a final sample of 22,680 stores from 73
chains, covering a total of $191 billion of average yearly revenue. These include 9,415 stores from
64 food store chains ($136 billion average yearly revenue), 9,977 stores from 4 drugstore chains ($21
billion), and 3,288 stores from 5 mass merchandise chains ($34 billion). We focus our main analysis
on food stores and present results for drug and mass merchandise stores in supplemental analyses.
      To define store demographics such as income and education, we use the characteristics of con-
sumers in the Homescan panel. The median food store has 27 Homescan panelists ever purchasing
at the store, for a total of 1,067 trips (Table I Panel B). We associate each consumer with the
demographics of their zipcode of residence as measured in the 2008-12 American Community Sur-
vey (ACS). We then define the demographics of a given store to be the average of these zipcode
demographics across its consumers, weighted by the number of trips they take to the store.9 We
let Ys denote the resulting measure of income for store s. This is equal to $27,420 for the median
store, $22,770 for the 25th percentile store, and $34,300 for the 75th percentile store.
      Turning to chain-level summary statistics, Panel C of Table I shows that the median food chain
has 66 stores spanning 4 Designated Market Areas (DMAs) and 2.5 states. Online Appendix Figure
1 shows the locations of these stores. Online Appendix Table 2a shows that the number of stores
and chains in the sample is roughly constant over time.
      Products. We focus on a sample of products that are frequently sold and available across
many of the chains. This guarantees clean comparisons both within and between chains. It also
minimizes the frequency of missing observations due to prices not being observed in weeks with
zero sales. Such missing values can cause systematic bias since zero sales are more likely to occur
in weeks when prices are relatively high.
  8
    We return to such switchers in an event-study analysis in Section 5.
  9
    This demographic information is more granular than a measure computed from the store location recorded in
the RMS data, which is either a county or a 3-digit zipcode.



                                                     6
       We consider 40 product categories or “modules” (Online Appendix Table 2b), ranging from
canned soup to soda to yogurt.10 These account for an average yearly revenue of $49.3 billion
across the 9,415 food stores, or 36.2 percent of total revenue in the Nielsen data for these stores.
Within a module, we keep all the products (UPCs) which satisfy an availability restriction: pooling
across chains, a product must have positive revenue in at least 80% of store-weeks. This leaves us
with 1,365 products covering $10.8 billion in yearly revenue for the food stores, corresponding to
nearly 8 percent of revenue for these stores.11 Examples include a 12-can package of Coca-Cola
and a 59 oz. bottle of pulp-free Simply Orange juice. We apply similar restrictions for drug and
mass merchandise stores, covering the modules listed in Online Appendix Table 2c.
       We consider different sets of products for robustness analyses. We define products in the top and
bottom decile by yearly revenue across all chains. We also create a sample of store-brand products,
as indicated by Nielsen. Finally, we define the baskets of products to construct module-level indices.
For a given chain and module, we include all products such that the average across stores of the
share of weeks with non-zero sales for that UPC is at least 95 percent. For some modules such
as soda and orange juice, products meeting this criterion cover 55-65 percent of the total module
revenue, while for other modules like chocolate or coffee, they cover just 17-30 percent.
       Prices. We define the price Psjt in store s of product j in week t to be the ratio of the weekly
revenue to weekly units sold. The price is not defined if no units are sold in a store-product-week.
As Table I Panel D shows, the products in our main sample have positive sales in 90.7% of weeks,
with an average price of $2.86. We let psjt denote the demeaned log price, defined as the residuals
from a regression of log (Psjt ) on product-year fixed effects. We define the store-product average
price psj to be the simple average of psjt across t, and the store average price ps to be the simple
average of psj across j.
       We also define price and quantity indices at the module level. We start from the weekly log
price log(Psjt ) and weekly log units sold log(Qsjt ), then average across all products j included in the
basket defined above for that module-chain-year, weighting by the total quantity sold for product
j in the chain-year. If a product j has no sales in a particular store s and week t, we omit product
j from the store-week cell and scale the weights on other products up accordingly.12
  10
     These modules have a large overlap with ones used in previous analyses, e.g., Hoch et al. (1995). Of the remaining
1148 modules in the data set, many have small total revenues or include products that are very differentiated across
chains, and thus would not satisfy our restrictions.
  11
     The remaining revenue is accounted by products that fail our criteria because they sell relatively infrequently, or
because they sell in some chains but are absent in many chains, e.g., regional products like dairy.
  12
     We use the same weights for price and quantity so that, under the assumption that all products in a module have
a constant-elasticity demand with the same elasticity η, we can recover η by regressing the module index quantity
on the module index price. We use quantity weights to mirror a geometric modified Laspeyres Index, similar to the
index of Beraja et al. (2019) and consistent with the BLS category-level price indices. Our index is not exactly a
geometric Laspeyres Index because the weights are not week 1 weights but instead average quantities in year y.



                                                           7
    Major Grocer’s Data. We use supplemental scanner data from a major grocer (parent code)
studied in Gopinath et al. (2011). These data contain the same variables as the Nielsen data, plus
gross revenue (defined to be the total revenue had all transactions occurred at the non-sale posted
price), wholesale prices paid, and gross profits. The definition of weeks in these data differs from
Nielsen, and is aligned with the timing of the retailer’s weekly price changes. The data cover 250
stores belonging to 12 retailers (retailer codes) from 2004 until mid-2007. We focus on the largest
retailer, which has 134 stores, and match 132 stores to stores in our main sample.


3     Descriptive Evidence

3.1    Example

We begin with a visualization of pricing by a chain that is representative of the typical patterns
in our data. Figure I Panel A shows the prices of one product in the orange-juice module. The
rows correspond to the stores in the chain, and are sorted by income. The columns correspond to
weeks from January 2006 to December 2014. The color of each store-week indicates the demeaned
log price psjt . Darker colors correspond to higher prices and white indicates missing values due to
zero sales.
    The figure shows substantial variation of prices across weeks, with frequent sales, but virtually
no variation across stores within a week. Variation across stores is not visibly correlated with
store income, i.e., the vertical position of stores in the chart, even though income ranges from
only $13,000 at the bottom of the chart to roughly $50,000 at the top. Figure I Panel B shows a
similar pattern for five other products in the yogurt, chocolate, soda, cookies, and cat food modules
respectively. Here we display 50 of the stores shown in Panel A. We see variation across products
in the depth and timing of sales, but again no systematic variation in prices across stores. The
pricing patterns of this chain are representative of the large majority of chains in our sample. We
present two other examples in Online Appendix Figure 2 Panels A and B.
    While patterns like these are typical of the majority of chains, a few other chains follow a
pattern of zone pricing: within a zone (often a state or group of states), the patterns will look like
the ones documented above, with larger price differences across zones.


3.2    Measures of Pricing Similarity

To describe chain pricing patterns more systematically, we introduce three measures of the extent
of uniform pricing. Each is defined separately for each pair of stores s and s0 and product j.
    The first measure is the quarterly absolute log price difference. For each pair of stores s and s0 ,


                                                   8
product j, and quarter v, we first compute the average of log(Psjt ) and log(Ps0 jt ) respectively across
weeks with non-missing prices in both store s and s0 . We then compute the absolute difference
between the average for store s and the average for store s0 . Finally, we average these quarterly
absolute differences across quarters.
   The second measure is the weekly correlation of log prices. For each pair of stores s and s0
                                                                                           
and product j, we first compute the residuals from regressions of log(Psjt ) and log Ps0 jt on store-
product-year fixed effects. We then compute for a product j the correlation between the store s
residuals and the store s0 residuals, including all weeks t which are non-missing in both store s and
s0 for product j, provided there is a minimum of 26 such weeks.
   These two measures capture two orthogonal dimensions: cross-sectional differences in average
prices, and correlation of price changes over time. Two stores with the same timing and depth
of sales, but different regular prices would have high weekly correlation but also a high quarterly
difference. Conversely, two stores with similar average prices at the quarterly level, but different
timing of sales would have a low quarterly difference but also a low weekly correlation.
   The third measure is the share of (nearly) identical prices, defined as the share of observations
across weeks t for which |log(Psjt ) − log(Ps0 jt )| < 0.01 for a product j. We require a minimum of
26 weeks of non-missing observations for a pair-product.
   To compute within-chain measures of similarity for product j and chain c, we sample up to 200
pairs of stores (s, s0 ) in chain c, and we average the measures of similarity across all such pairs,
using the same pairs for all products. To compute between-chain measures of similarity for product
j and chain c, we follow a similar procedure but draw 200 pairs composed of a store s in chain c
and a store s0 belonging to a different chain c0 .
   In Figure II Panels A, B, and C we plot the distribution of these measures, with each product,
chain forming one observation. Prices for within-chain pairs (solid bars) are far more similar than
for between-chain pairs (hollow bars) on all three measures. The absolute log price difference (Panel
A) is typically below 5 log points for the within-chain pairs, and typically above 8 log points for
the latter. The weekly correlation (Panel B) is nearly always above 0.5 for within-chain pairs but
almost always below 0.3 for between-chain pairs. The share of identical prices (Panel C) is typically
above 0.3 for within-chain pairs, but is rarely above 0.3 for between-chain pairs.
   Table II summarizes variants of these measures. Compared to the baseline price similarity in
these pairs (Panel A), Panel B shows that the patterns are essentially unchanged if we restrict
attention to cases where stores s and s0 are in the same geographic market (DMA). Panel C shows
the same for cases where s and s0 are in different DMAs and also face very different income levels
(with one store in the pair in the top third of the income distribution and the other in the bottom


                                                     9
third). Online Appendix Figure 3 displays the distribution of distance between pairs for these
samples. These results provide initial evidence against the possibility that the observed similarity
reflects same-chain store pairs serving more homogeneous consumers in terms of either geography or
demographics. The results also suggest that the observed similarity does not result from constraints
specific to stores operating in the same geographic market, for example, because price advertising
is determined at the newspaper or television market level. The results are similar if we focus just
on food stores (Table II Panel D), drug stores (Panel E), or mass-merchandise stores (Panel F).
The results are also similar for products in the top and in the bottom decile of revenue, and for
generic products in food stores (Online Appendix Table 3).13
    Figure III summarizes pricing similarity at the chain level. In Panel A, quarterly absolute log
price difference is on the horizontal axis, weekly correlation is on the vertical axis, and each point
indicates the similarity measure for a chain, averaged across all products. The majority of chains
cluster in the upper-left of the figure, with low price differences and high correlation. Of the 73
chains, 59 have both an average correlation of weekly prices above 0.7 and an absolute quarterly
distance in prices below 5 log points. These two measures of pricing similarity are highly correlated:
chains that are similar in one dimension are also similar in the other dimension. This correlation
is not mechanical. One might have seen, for example, highly correlated sales but varying levels of
regular prices across stores.14
    Panel B returns to the phenomenon of zone pricing. We decompose the pricing similarity into
similarity for pairs of stores within a state, versus across state boundaries. Focusing on chains that
operate at least three stores in two or more states, we plot the within-state log price difference on
the horizontal axis, and the between-state log price difference on the vertical axis. Zone pricing
following state boundaries should show up in this figure as larger differences between state than
within state, i.e., points lying above the 45-degree line. For the majority of chains, the within-state
and between-state differences are similar; these chains do not appear to determine prices by state.
A minority of chains do have clearer zone pricing patterns, notably chain 9.15
    An alternative measure of price uniformity, motivated by Nakamura (2008) and Hitsch et al.
(2017), is the share of variation in prices explained by chain fixed effects. For each product j,
we run a regression of the store-product prices psj on chain and DMA fixed effects. If pricing is
near-uniform within chains, chain fixed effects should explain most of the variation. If local factors
  13
     We cannot compute the between-chain similarity in pricing for generic products, which are not obviously compa-
rable across chains. Nielsen assigns the same “masked” UPC to generic products that it deems similar across chains,
but we cannot verify that these different generic products are of similar quality.
  14
     The measure of similarity based on quarterly log prices differences is correlated with the measure based on
the share of (near-)identical prices (Online Appendix Figure 4 Panel A). Also, chains with uniform prices for our
benchmark products also tend to have uniform prices for generic products (Online Appendix Figure 4 Panel C).
  15
     Online Appendix Figure 4 Panel B shows a parallel figure using correlation in weekly prices.


                                                        10
such as competition or demand shifters are the key drivers, DMA fixed effects should explain most
of the variation. Online Appendix Figure 5 shows that the median R2 with DMA fixed effects is
0.486, while the median R2 with chain fixed effects is 0.824. The R2 with chain fixed effects rises
to 0.872 when we drop the chains identified in Figure III Panel B as engaging in zone pricing.


3.3      Price Response to Consumer Income

We now turn to the relationship between prices and income, focusing on food stores. Stores in
high-income areas should have less elastic consumers (a prediction we confirm below), so all else
equal, we expect these stores to charge higher prices.16 Though we argue that variation in marginal
costs across stores is likely to be small, any such variation might well be positively correlated with
income, and so tend to strengthen this relationship.
       Figure IV shows the relationship between income and log price within and between chains. For
the within-chain relationship, we regress both store average log price ps and store income Ys on
chain fixed effects, and show a binned scatterplot of the residuals in Panel A. The relationship is
positive and highly significant, but the magnitude is very small: an increase in per-capita income
of $10,000, equivalent to a move from the 30th to the 75th percentile, is associated with a price
increase of only 0.47 log points (0.47 percent). For the between-chain relationship, we show a
scatterplot of chain averages in Panel B. This relationship is also highly significant, but an order
of magnitude larger: a $10,000 increase is associated with a price increase of 4.2 log points.
       We view this sharp contrast between the within- and between-chain results as one of our key
findings. It suggests that chains are either varying their prices far too little across stores in response
to income, or varying their prices far too much at the overall chain level. Our model below separates
these two hypotheses, providing strong support for the former.
       Panel C shows how these key relationships vary across products. For each of the 1,365 products,
we estimate the slope of the within-chain relationship (as in Panel A) and of the between-chain
relationship (as in Panel B). We then plot the distribution of the two estimated slopes. The within-
chain price-income slope is remarkably consistent, with almost all estimates between 0 and 0.015.
In contrast, the between-chain price-income slope ranges more broadly, mostly between 0 and 0.10.
       In the Online Appendix, we extend this analysis focusing on zone pricing. In Online Appendix
Figure 6 Panel A, we re-estimate the within-chain relationship, but now plot residuals after taking
out chain-state fixed effects. This reduces the price-income slope to 0.38 log points per $10,000
of income, but it remains statistically significant. In Online Appendix Figure 6 Panel B, we show
  16
    That elasticities vary inversely with income is a standard prediction of theory and the motivation for the common
practice of interacting price with income in empirical demand specifications. Berry et al. (1995), for example, derive
such a relationship from a simple Cobb-Douglas utility specification and impose it in estimation.


                                                         11
the complementary plot of chain-state mean prices after subtracting the chain mean. Across states
within a chain, a $10,000 income increase is associated with an increase in prices of 1.24 log points,
a slope about a quarter the size of the between-chain relationship. This relationship is stronger for
the 12 food chains that we identify as zone pricers based on Figure III Panel B.
      Next, we consider an extensive set of robustness checks. Estimating within-chain coefficients
separately by chain (Online Appendix Figure 7) shows that all but three chains have coefficients
below 0.01. The pattern of small within-chain response and large between-chain response is clear
in nearly every module (Online Appendix Figure 8). The results are similar replacing income with
the fraction of college graduates (Online Appendix Figure 9 Panels A and B), or median home
prices (Online Appendix Figure 9 Panels C and D). We also obtain similar results for store-brand,
high-revenue, and low-revenue products, for prices weighted by product revenue, and for module-
level price indices (Online Appendix Figure 10). Further, Online Appendix Table 4 shows that the
within-chain results are stable to (i) running the specifications at the store-product level instead of
at the store level, (ii) including only products with valid elasticities, and (iii) including chain-state
fixed effects instead of just chain fixed effects. The between-chain results are similarly robust to
(i) running the specification at the chain-product level instead of at the chain level, (ii) running an
unweighted regression, and (iii) dropping two chains that appear as outliers in Figure IV Panel B.
Moving beyond demographics, a simple measure of store-level competition has a similarly small,
but statistically significant, impact on prices within chain (Online Appendix Table 5). The within-
chain evidence for mass merchandise and drugstore chains is similar to the evidence for food stores,
with a larger zone pricing relationship for drug stores (Online Appendix Figure 11).
      Table III presents an alternative view of the price-income relationship. We run a store-level
regression of average log price ps on both store income Ys and the average income of stores in the
chain to which s belongs. In some specifications, we also include the average income in s’s chain-
state. We separate food stores (Panel A) from drugstores and mass merchandise stores (Panel
B and C), as we can only do a meaningful between-chain comparison for the food stores. The
first column presents the regression including only own-store income as a benchmark. The second
column adds chain average income for food stores. Consistent with the evidence in Figure IV, a
store’s response to its own consumers’ income is an order of magnitude smaller than its response to
the average income served by its chain. This result remains when we add county fixed effects (third
column). Thus, if we look at two stores in the same county both attracting consumers of the same
income, one from a mainly high-income chain and one from a mainly low-income chain, the former
will tend to charge higher prices than the latter.17 The fourth and fifth columns add chain-state
 17
      An alternative explanation is that the chain-level income measure may capture the elasticity of consumers in a



                                                         12
average income as a regressor. This response is larger than the own-store-income response but
smaller than the response to overall chain average income, consistent with our zone pricing results.
In Online Appendix Table 6 we show that the results are parallel for alternative sets of products.


3.4    Composition Effects

The within-chain pricing in Figure IV Panel A poses a puzzle. Why would chains vary prices in a
systematic way with consumer income, but then do so with a tiny magnitude far smaller than the
one with which they respond to income at the chain level, and far smaller than the analysis below
suggests would be profit maximizing? We show that this small price-income relationship is likely to
be mainly an artifact of compositional differences, due to the fact that the standard Nielsen price
measure is the weekly average price paid rather than the price the store posts on any given day.
    If all consumers of a store in a given week paid the same prices, weekly average price paid and
posted price would be equal. For them to diverge, prices paid must vary within a week. There are
two main reasons why they are likely to do so. First, Nielsen’s weekly revenue and units sold are
based on a week that runs from Sunday through Saturday. Although most retailers change prices
at a weekly frequency, their price changes may occur on a different day of the week. For example,
if a retailer changes prices on Wednesdays, consumers who buy in the first half of Nielsen’s week
will pay a different price from those who buy in the second half. Second, some consumers may use
store cards or obtain other discounts that lead them to pay lower prices.
    Consider a retailer that charges identical prices in all stores and that changes prices on Wednes-
days. In a particular week, they cut the price from P high to P low . The weekly average price in the
Nielsen data for store s will be PsRM S = θs P high + (1 − θs )P low , where θs is the share of purchases
in the first half of the week in store s. If the share θs varies across stores, this will obscure the
fact that the chain is charging uniform prices. In fact, the share θs will vary systematically: for
stores facing less elastic consumers, fewer will shift purchases to the low price, and θs will be higher.
Measured prices PsRM S will thus be higher for stores facing higher income or otherwise less elastic
consumers, even with uniform prices. A similar effect arises if the share of consumers who use store
cards or other discounts is greater among more price elastic consumers. This effect can generate a
price-income gradient similar to the one we observe.
    We illustrate this with an example calibrated to data from the major grocer described in Section
2, which indeed changes prices on Wednesdays. Suppose that the income of store s is $10,000 greater
than the income of store s0 , and that, consistent with the estimated income-elasticity relationship
store better than the own-store income measure due to measurement error in the latter. Counter to this explanation,
the store elasticity is predicted by own-store income but not by chain-level income (Online Appendix Table 8).



                                                        13
(Table V, Column 2), this translates into price elasticities among their respective consumers of
ηs = −2.5 and ηs0 = −2.63. Suppose that P low is about 30 percent lower than P high , consistent
with the average depth of a sale for this grocer. Consistent with our model below, assume a
constant-elasticity demand function Qs = kPsηs . Then (θs , θs0 ) = (0.298, 0.289) , and the difference
in average weekly log prices would be 0.0034.18 For this grocer, products go on sale and off of sale in
about 30% of weeks, which implies a slope of 0.0010 in Figure IV Panel A. Thus, under reasonable
assumptions, the week misalignment could explain one fifth of the observed slope of 0.0047. These
calibrations do not account for heterogeneity in the share of consumers using store cards, a factor
which could account for another large part of the within-chain price-income slope.19
       We use the data from the major grocer to provide direct evidence on compositional effects. We
expect to see the effect arising from mid-week price changes in the Nielsen data, where the data
is reported on a Sunday-to-Saturday basis, but not in the grocer’s data, where it is reported on
a Wednesday-to-Tuesday basis. Figure V Panel A shows a binned scatterplot of the within-chain
relationship using the Nielsen price measure for the 132 stores in both data sets. This grocer uses
geographic pricing zones, so we focus on the within-chain-state relationship, yielding a slope of
0.0032, similar to the one for all stores in Online Appendix Figure 6 Panel A. Using weekly prices
from the grocer’s data yields a slope of 0.0018 (Figure V Panel B). The difference between these
slopes (0.0032 − 0.0018 = 0.0014), which is likely due to the week-offset effect, lines up nicely with
our calibration above.20 Figure V Panel C shows the same slope using the posted non-sale price,
which we observe in the grocer’s data. This is not the object we would ideally like—if stores vary
the frequency or depth of their sales, we would consider this real variation in posted prices—but
it provides a benchmark. Here nearly all remaining slope disappears, with an insignificant point
estimate of 0.0010. This chain sets near uniform non-sale prices with respect to income.
       We can also look at the effect of these compositional effects on the analysis of price similarity
in Section 3.2. This is illustrated in Online Appendix Table 7 for within-DMA pairs of stores
for the major grocer. In the RMS data, the price distance measures are similar to the ones for
other retailers: 0.026 quarterly log price distance, 0.874 correlation, and 47.5% of identical prices
within chain. In the major grocer data, we can control not only for the week offset, but also for
the differential coupon use across stores by excluding pairs with prices that are not exact to the
cent, likely indicating that different consumers paid different prices. When we do so, the quarterly
  18
                                                                                     high
                                                                                    qs              (P high )ηs
       Assume prices change in the middle of the week and note that θs =                       =          η           . Plugging
                                                                                  high
                                                                                 qs      low
                                                                                       +qs      (     )    (P low )ηs
                                                                                                   P high s +
                     high    low                                                                              RM S
in the values for P       , P , ηs , and ηs0 yield the values of (θs , θs0 ) which in turn yield values of Ps        and PsRM
                                                                                                                            0
                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                .
  19
     This effect affects not only the cross-sectional price-income relationship, but also the apparent response of prices
to income shocks in panel data, as estimated in the literature on local price responses discussed in Section 7.
  20
     The difference in slopes between the Nielsen and the major grocer data is similar if we do not account for
geographic pricing zones (Online Appendix Figure 12).


                                                              14
log price distance decreases to 0.013, the correlation increases to 0.949, and the share of identical
prices nearly doubles to 81.4%. Once one controls for both compositional effects, the pricing for
this grocer is nearly perfectly uniform.
      Our conclusion is that the within-chain slope shown in Figure IV Panel A is at least partly an
artifact of composition effects. We suspect that a large majority of chains are in fact charging the
same prices in all of their stores, or in all stores within geographic zones.


3.5      Product Assortment

Firms not only choose prices, but also many other store-level variables including which brands to
carry, whether to sell organic products and generic versions, and how many products to sell. These
other dimensions may provide alternative ways to cater to consumer demand. For example, stores
in lower-income areas might carry a cheaper olive-oil product while stores in higher-income areas
carry an expensive extra-virgin version.
      To investigate this margin, we define an assortment index based on the average national-level
prices of the products sold by a store. The index is higher when the store carries relatively expensive
products but does not depend on the prices charged by the store itself. We define a per-unit constant
price for product j to be the average log price for product j in year y across all stores s that carry it,
divided by the unit size (e.g., 40 oz). We then average this measure over products carried by store
s to create an assortment price index for a store s, year y, within a sub-module b. Sub-modules are
defined as subsets of modules with similar product size. To create the final assortment index for
store s, we demean the index by sub-module-year, average over the years and over the sub-modules.
We provide additional detail in the online appendix in Section A.1.9.
      Figure VI displays the within-chain and between-chain relationship of this assortment index with
store-level income. The patterns are strikingly parallel to the ones for pricing: the within-chain
slope of the assortment index with respect to income (0.0058, Panel A) is an order of magnitude
smaller than the between-chain slope (0.0489, Panel B). The distribution of the within-chain and
between-chain slopes across sub-modules of products (Panel C) reinforces this pattern.21
      Column 1 of Table IV shows that the within-chain difference in assortment between pairs of
stores is about four times smaller than the between-chain difference in assortment (Panel A).
Furthermore, the assortment index responds an order of magnitude more to chain-level income
than it responds to store-level income variation (Panel B). In Columns 2-4 we document similar
patterns for additional measures of assortment: the fraction of products within a sub-module that
are in the top 10% of unit prices (Column 2), the fraction of organic products for the relevant
 21
      The zone pricing assortment patterns also parallel the results for pricing (Online Appendix Figure 13).


                                                          15
modules (Column 3), and the fraction of generic products (Column 4).
         Finally, in Column 5 we consider a different decision: how many products to carry in a store.
As with assortment, the stores are more similar within a chain than across chains, and respond
more to chain-level income than to store-level income.22


4         Demand Estimation and Optimal Prices

4.1           Model

We introduce a simple demand model to gauge the degree to which we would expect prices to vary
within and between chains. The model makes strong assumptions, and we do not necessarily take
deviations from the model predictions to imply a failure of profit maximization.
         A monopolistically competitive chain r chooses a price Psj in each product-store to maximize
total profits. Each store’s residual demand for product j takes the constant elasticity form Qsj =
          η
ksj Psjsj , where Qsj is the number of units sold, ksj is a scale term, and ηsj is the store’s price
elasticity for product j. Total cost consists of a marginal cost crj that may vary by chain but does
not vary by store within a chain, as well as a store-level fixed cost Csj . The chain solves

                                           X                                           X
                               max{Psj }             (Psj − crj ) Qsj (Psj ) −                  Csj .                       (1)
                                           s(r),j                                      s(r)

                                                    ∗ satisfies
The first order conditions imply the optimal price Psj
                                                                         
                                           ∗
                                                                 ηsj
                                    log   Psj       = log                     + log (crj ) .                                (2)
                                                                1 + ηsj
                                                                                           
                                                                                     ηsj
Thus, under optimal pricing a regression of log prices on log                       1+ηsj       with chain-product fixed effects
should yield a coefficient of one.
         While the assumption of constant marginal costs within a chain is strong, several pieces of
evidence suggest that it may be a reasonable approximation. Stroebel and Vavra (forthcoming) use
data on wholesale costs for a retailer to show that geographic variation in these costs is minimal.
Since wholesale costs account for three-quarters of total costs, this limits the scope for cost variation.
They then present further evidence suggesting that neither variation in labor costs nor variation
in retail rents plays a significant role. If marginal costs vary positively with factors like labor
    22
    Many managerial decisions that would be interesting to study such as the store size, opening hours, and shelf
space allocations are not observed in the data. We did attempt to examine the incidence of featured and displayed
products, but the information is not recorded with enough consistency to allow informative within- and between-chain
comparisons.



                                                                16
costs or retail rents this would introduce upward bias in the price-income relationship, and so
strengthen our core finding that this relationship is surprisingly small. We confirm Stroebel and
Vavra (forthcoming)’s findings for wholesale costs in our large grocer’s data, finding no relationship
between wholesale costs and store income (Online Appendix Figure 14).


4.2       Elasticity Estimates

To evaluate the extent to which observed pricing matches the prediction of equation (2), we require
estimates of the elasticities of demand ηsj for each store-product pair. As our benchmark measure,
we estimate the response of weekly log quantity to the weekly log price. We allow for store-product-
year fixed effects αsjy and store-product-week-of-year fixed effects γsjw and estimate separately for
each store-product sj:


                                log (Qsjt ) = ηsj log (Psjt ) + αsjy + γsjw + sjt .                               (3)


       To address potential endogeneity of prices, we instrument log (Psjt ) with the average of log (Psjt )
across other stores in s’s chain that are located outside s’s DMA. This is a version of the instru-
menting approach introduced by Hausman (1996) and applied by Nevo (2001), where prices of a
product in other markets serve as instruments. The existence of uniform pricing within chains
combined with frequent sales makes this approach particularly compelling in our setting. The key
assumption is that the timing of chain-level sales is unrelated to local demand shocks for a given
store (after controlling for seasonality via γsjw ). We view this as a compelling assumption given
the jagged and idiosyncratic pattern of sales illustrated in Figure I and the heterogeneous demand
conditions faced by stores within chains. As further evidence, we discuss below robustness analysis
in which we allow for DMA-product-week fixed effects, which will soak up any local market shocks.
The first-stages of our regressions are very strong, with coefficients close to 1 (Online Appendix
Figure 15 Panel C).23
       We believe this instrumental variables strategy may be applicable in other settings with uniform
pricing. Average chain decisions may provide a valid instrument for price differences both over time
(as here) and across products. It is also possible to extend the strategy to instrument for a store’s
prices with the average demographics of other stores in the chain, following a logic similar to George
and Waldfogel (2003). Allcott et al. (2018b) and Allcott et al. (2018a) are examples of papers that
have already built on this strategy.
       Our estimated price elasticity ηbsj is the coefficient on log (Psjt ) from this IV regression. We
  23
    The estimated elasticities with this IV procedure are highly correlated with elasticities estimated from specifica-
tion (3) with OLS, as Online Appendix Figure 16 Panel A shows.


                                                          17
cluster standard errors by two-month periods. We require that valid η̂sj have at least 104 weeks
of data as well as standard errors within (0.01, 1.25). To adjust for sampling error, we use an
Empirical Bayes (EB) procedure for each chain-product that shrinks elasticities to their chain-
product mean.24 We denote the shrunk elasticities by η̃sj and winsorize both η̂sj and η̃sj at −7
and −1.2. We also define store-level price elasticities η̂s (respectively, η̃s ) by first subtracting from
η̂sj (η̃sj ) its mean across s and then averaging the demeaned values across products j.
       Figure VII Panel A provides evidence on the fit of the demand model. The figure shows a binned
scatterplot of residuals of log (Qsjt ) against residuals of log (Psjt ) after partialing out the fixed effects
αsjy and γsjw , for a random sample of 25 products. To illustrate variation in elasticities by income,
we choose the 50 stores nearest to the $20,000 income level (11th percentile) and the 50 stores
nearest to the $60,000 income level (98th percentile). The model assumes a linear relationship,
and the figures shows that this assumption holds to a remarkable degree. The plot also shows that
demand is less elastic in the higher-income stores and more elastic in the lower-income stores.
       Panel B shows the distribution of the raw and EB-adjusted store-level elasticities η̂sj and η̃sj .25
These are well-behaved, with all but a handful of values smaller than the theoretical maximum of
−1, and most of the mass falling between −1.5 and −3.
       Alternative Elasticities. A concern is geographically correlated demand shocks that affect
many stores within a chain and thus could bias even the instrumented elasticity estimates. To
address this concern, we re-estimate specification (3) at the product-DMA level including an ad-
ditional fixed effect ζdjt for the DMA-product-week, capturing any time-series component that is
common across all stores in a DMA. Online Appendix Figure 16 Panel B shows that this has a
very limited impact on the elasticities. A different omitted variable could be chain-level variation
in promotions or product displays. For some products and stores, the Nielsen data set carries
information on feature and display promotion. Adding these controls once again has a very limited
impact (Online Appendix Figure 16 Panel C).
       Our short-run elasticities may differ from the longer-run elasticities that are relevant to the
pricing problem. Longer-run elasticities could be smaller due to stockpiling, or larger if it takes
consumers time to adjust to price changes. As a step toward addressing these concerns, we estimate
quarterly elasticities. We average the weekly log price and log units sold across all weeks in a quarter,
and re-estimate a modified version of equation (3).26 As Online Appendix Figure 17 shows, the
  24
     Online Appendix Figure 15 Panel A shows the distribution of the shrinkage parameter. See detail on the shrinkage
procedure in the online appendix in Section A.1.11.
  25
     Online Appendix Figure 15 Panel B shows the distribution of the elasticities at store-product level.
  26
     We estimate quarterly elasticities in groups of up to 20 products within each module, forcing the same elasticity
in a module-group. Specifically, we estimate log (Qsjv ) = ηsg log (Psjv ) + αsjy + γsjq + sjv for groups of products j
in each module-group g. The fixed effect γsjq controls for store-product-quarter fixed effects.



                                                          18
quarterly elasticities are smaller (in absolute value) than the benchmark ones, but the two measures
are highly correlated. As with the benchmark elasticities, the log-log specification is approximately
linear and the elasticities are highly correlated with local income. We return to these elasticities in
the next section, and we present alternative evidence on long-run elasticities in Section 5.
       To illustrate the role of stock-piling, we run a regression of log(Qsjt ) on log(Psjt ) including
leads and lags of prices (Hendel and Nevo, 2006). The specification includes the same set of fixed
effects as (3), but restricts the coefficient on the log price variables to be the same across products
and stores. As Online Appendix Figure 18 shows, the coefficients on lagged prices variables, while
statistically significant and in line with the predictions of a stockpiling model, are an order of
magnitude smaller than the coefficients on price in week t, even for the storable products.
       Our model also ignores substitution between products. If some of the response in our benchmark
elasticities reflects within-store substitution, the optimal price response could be smaller than our
model predicts. To partially address this issue, we re-estimate our elasticities using the module-
level price and quantity indices described in Section 2. As Online Appendix Figure 19 shows, the
module-level elasticities are again smaller in absolute value than the benchmark elasticities, but
the two are highly correlated. We return to these elasticities as well in the next section.
       Correlates. Returning to our benchmark elasticities, Table V relates the raw store-level elastic-
ities η̂s to demographic and competition measures. The first two columns show a robust relationship
between elasticity and income.27 In column 3, we add the share of college graduates, the median
home price, controls for the fraction of urban area, and indicators for the number of competitor
stores within 10 kilometers. The coefficients have the expected signs, with income remaining the
most significant determinant, and elasticities increasing with the degree of competition. We find
                                                                       
                                                                 η̂
similar results in columns 4-6 with the log elasticity term log 1+η̂sjsj as the dependent variable.


4.3      Comparing Observed and Optimal Prices

In this section, we test the model and estimate the empirical analogue of equation (2),


                                         psj = αrj + β λ̂sj + εsj ,                              (4)
                                                                     
                                                                   η̂
where αrj     are chain-product fixed effects and λ̂sj = log 1+η̂sjsj . Under the assumptions of the
model, the coefficient β on the log elasticity term equals 1.28 If chains under-respond to elasticity
  27
     We consider two alternative income measures: (i) the income of the county where the store is located, and (ii)
the self-reported income of store consumers in the Homescan data, averaged by trip. Online Appendix Table 9 shows
that our benchmark income measure is the best predictor of elasticity and of log elasticity.
  28
     Recall that psj is the average residual from a regression of log (Psjt ) on product-year fixed effects. Since the
model implies that equation (2) holds period-by-period, it also holds when averaging across t.



                                                         19
variation, we will instead observe β < 1. We instrument λ̂sj with store-level income to address
measurement error in the estimates η̂sj . The standard errors are block bootstrapped by parent code.
   We then compare the within-chain price variation captured by equation (4) to the analogous
variation between chains. We regress chain average prices prj on product fixed effects αj and
the simple average of λ̂sj across stores s within chain r, instrumenting for the latter with chain
average income. The model of equation (2) makes no direct prediction about the coefficient in
this regression, since it allows marginal costs crj to vary across chains. However, provided that
such marginal cost variation is small relative to demand-side variation, we expect a coefficient of
approximately one.
   Finally, to facilitate data visualization and simplify computation, we estimate versions of both
the within-chain and between-chain specifications aggregated to the store level. We define the
store-level log elasticity λ̂s to be the store average of the residuals from a regression of λ̂sj on
product fixed effects. For the within-chain specification, we regress the store average price ps on
λ̂s and chain fixed effects, instrumenting for λ̂s with store average income. For the between-chain
specification, we regress the chain mean of ps on the chain mean of λ̂s instrumenting with chain
average income.
   Figure VIII displays the store-level first stage relationship between the log elasticity term and
income, both within chains (Panel A) and between chains (Panel B). It also shows the distribution
of estimates of the product-by-product first-stages (Panel C). Consistent with expectations, the
relationship of elasticity to income is of similar magnitude within and between chains.
   Table VI presents the main results, beginning with the within-chain estimates. The first column
shows estimates of equation (4), the most direct test of our model. In this specification, we allow the
first-stage coefficient on store income to vary by product. The estimated coefficient is β̂ = 0.0482
(s.e. = 0.0137). In the second column, we simplify the model by constraining the first-stage
coefficient to be the same across products; the first stage for this case is in Column 4 of Table V.
The estimated coefficient increases somewhat to β̂ = 0.0852 (s.e. = 0.0210). The third column
shows that the estimates are essentially identical when we aggregate to the store level and regress
ps on λ̂s . The first stage regression for this case is Column 5 of Table V. In all these cases, the
within-chain variation in prices is an order of magnitude smaller than the model prediction of β̂ = 1.
   The patterns are quite different for the between-chain estimates, which we run at the chain-
product level (Column 4) and at the chain level (Column VI 5). To maximize power, we fix the
first stage coefficient for these regressions at the values from Columns 4 and 5 of Table V. The
coefficients are β̂ = 0.7609 (s.e. = 0.2158) and β̂ = 0.8339 (s.e. = 0.2315) respectively, an order of
magnitude larger than the within-chain versions and statistically indistinguishable from β̂ = 1.


                                                  20
   Robustness. Table VII presents a series of robustness checks. To simplify computation, we
perform these checks using the store-level aggregated specification of Table VI, Columns 3 and 5.
   Our baseline results use per-capita income of the zipcodes of residence as an instrument for the
log elasticity term λ̂sj . Row 1 shows that the results are similar if we instead use as instruments
the full set of demographic and competition variables in column 6 of Table V. In row 2 we use
the self-reported income of Homescan panelists rather than their zipcode incomes to construct
the instrument. The first stage is not quite as strong, but the within and between results are
qualitatively similar.
   Row 3 reports results using the quarterly elasticity (see Section 4.2). The within-chain coefficient
is even smaller than the benchmark value. This reflects two offsetting forces: (i) the quarterly
elasticities vary less across stores, which would reduce the optimal price variation, but, (ii) the
                                                                                  
                                                                              ηs
elasticities are lower in magnitude, which makes the log elasticity term log 1+η s
                                                                                     more responsive
to a given change in elasticity. The smaller coefficient indicates that the second effect dominates.
The between-chain relationship is still an order of magnitude larger than the within-chain response.
   Row 4 reports results using module-level price and elasticity measures introduced in Section
4.2. The within-chain coefficient is similar to the baseline. We do not estimate a between-chain
specification because our module-level price indices are chain-specific.
   Rows 5-9 show that the results are also similar (i) for store-brand products, thus at least partially
addressing the concern that the uniform pricing is driven by negotiation with the manufacturers
of branded products; (ii) for high-revenue products; (iii) for low-revenue products, (iv) weighting
prices and elasticities by product revenue; and (v) winsorizing elasticities at -1.5 (instead of -1.2).
   In rows 10 and 11 we show that for the drug and mass merchandise chains the within-chain IV
slope is larger than for the food chains but still much smaller than one (β̂ = 0.2286 and β̂ = 0.2013).
   Finally, in Online Appendix Table 10 and Online Appendix Figure 20 we present OLS estimates
not instrumenting the log elasticity term with income. The OLS within-chain price-elasticity re-
lationship is an order of magnitude too flat to be consistent with the model. The between-chain
results provide weaker (and not statistically significant) evidence of response to chain-level income,
possibly because the elasticity estimates are less comparable across chains than income levels.
   Average Prices Paid. Our main question is how the pricing decisions of firms compare to
the benchmark of optimal pricing, and we are therefore interested mainly in the prices firms choose
to post. With regards to the welfare effects on consumers, however, we also want to consider the
average price paid over a longer time horizon. The presence of sales works as a kind of “automatic”
price discrimination, guaranteeing that more elastic consumers pay lower prices over the year, even
in presence of uniform pricing. This is closely related to the way sales affect responsiveness of


                                                  21
average prices to macroeconomic shocks (Chevalier and Kashyap , 2019 and Coibion et al., 2015).
    In Table VIII, we estimate the model with the average price paid over a year. The within-chain
coefficient (β̂ = 0.1786) is larger than the benchmark estimate as expected, but is still five times
smaller than under optimal pricing. The between-chain coefficient is similar to the benchmark.


4.4    Loss of Profits

The model allows us to compute the profits lost as a result of nearly-uniform pricing. Under uniform
pricing, we assume that a chain r sets a constant price P̄rj across all stores s to maximize its profit

                                            Xh                 η                η
                                                                                    i X
                             max{P̄rj }             P̄rj ksj P̄rjsj − crj ksj P̄rjsj −  Cs ,
                                           s(r),j                                   s(r)


where s(r) is the set of stores s belonging to chain r. This leads to the first order condition

                                            h                                   i
                                                          η                η −1
                                  X
                                         ksj (1 + ηsj ) P̄rjsj − crj ηsj P̄rjsj   = 0.                               (5)
                                  s(r)


Each chain r sets their average price P̄rj equal to the solution to (5). We estimate ηsj using the
EB-adjusted elasticity estimates η̃sj , and the scale factor ksj using the average k̂sj over the weeks
              η̃
t of Qsjt /Psjtsj . We estimate marginal costs crj by plugging in the observed average price P̄rj into
       hP                            i hP                      i
                                η̃sj                   η̃sj −1
ĉrj =     s k̂sj (1 + η̃sj ) P̄rj    /  s k̂sj η̃sj P̄rj       , which, by equation (5), is a consistent estimator.
    Given these assumptions, we compute the profits for store s and product j under uniform
pricing, Π̄sj , and under optimal pricing, Π∗sj , which we obtain by setting Psj
                                                                              ∗ = ĉ · η̃ /(1 + η̃ ).
                                                                                    rj   sj       sj

We then aggregate across all 982 products j for which we have estimated elasticities and scale up
this amount to account for the products we do not cover, to estimate the yearly store-level profit
variables, Π̄s and Π∗s . We report the estimated profit loss in dollars per year, Π∗s − Π̄s , as well as in
fraction of revenue, (Π∗s − Π̄s )/Rs , where Rs is the annual revenue for store s in the Nielsen data.29
    The results are reported in Panel A of Table IX. In the median store, the annual profit loss
from uniform relative to optimal pricing is $239,000, or 1.79 percent of revenue, with the losses as
high as 3.7 percent of revenue at the 90th-percentile store. Next, we compute the approximate loss
from the actual within-chain price-elasticity slope we observe, rather than assuming fully uniform
                                                                                                                     IV
pricing. We use the prices implied by our benchmark IV specification: Psj = Arj [η̃sj /(1 + η̃sj )]β                      ,
where β IV is the estimate in column 3 of Table VI and Arj is a constant that guarantees that the
  29
     We report the loss of profit as a fraction of revenue as it does not require us to estimate the fixed costs Cs . To
compute the implied loss of profit as a fraction of profits, as we reported in earlier drafts, we follow Montgomery
(1997), who estimates gross profit margins of 25 percent and operating profit margins of 3 percent; we therefore
assume that Ĉs = (1 − (3/25)) ∗ Π∗s . Under these assumptions, the estimated profit loss as fraction of profits is 10.2%
for the median store and 11.7% for the median chain.


                                                             22
average price Psj across all stores s in chain is equal to the uniform price P̄rj .30 This tempers the
losses to a median profit loss of 1.47 percent of revenue. We also compute the loss of profits for
state-zone optimal pricing, where prices are set optimally, but are uniform at the state level. This
leads to loses comparable to those estimated using the actual price-elasticity slope.
         In Panel B of Table IX, we aggregate the profits for all stores s in a chain r. The annual chain-
level profit loss from uniform pricing is $19.6 million for the median chain and $111.5 million for the
90th percentile chain. The annual loss from varying prices according to the observed price-elasticity
slope is $16.1m for the median chain and $91.6m for the 90th percentile chain.
         Online Appendix Table 11 shows that the losses of profits computed using the quarterly elasticity
and the module-level index elasticity are somewhat smaller than the benchmark estimate. The losses
for drug and mass merchandise chains are if anything larger than for food stores.


5         Evidence from Mergers

In this section, we study how prices and quantities change when stores move from one chain to
another as part of a merger. The extent to which stores adopt the pricing scheme of the acquiring
chain provides a direct test of uniform pricing, as the demand and competitive conditions the
store faces are held essentially constant while chain identity changes. It also provides a powerful
experiment to estimate long-run price elasticities.
         We identify as potential switchers all food stores that change parent code at some point. Recall
that these stores are excluded from our main sample. We refer to the first parent code associated
with a store as its “old” chain and the parent code it switches to as its “new” chain. While
the switch of parent code is recorded, the precise timing is not. To identify the timing, we use a
combination of criteria including store closures and sudden changes in the products carried (product
assortment). These criteria, which do not include pricing information, identify 8 episodes in which
2 or more stores switch chains, for a total of 114 switching stores. In all 8 episodes the assortment
of the switching stores mirrors the assortment in the old chain before the acquisition, but switches
promptly to the assortment of the new chain afterwards (Online Appendix Figure 21).31
         As an example of the way prices adjust, Figure IX Panel A shows prices of a single product
around one merger. The prices in the 15 switching stores during the pre-acquisition period follow
exactly the prices of stores in the old chain, and are not synchronized to prices in the acquiring
    30
     If we were to use the actual observed prices rather than the prices predicted from the estimated price-elasticity
coefficient β IV , the estimated loss in profits would be much larger, since there is a large component of variation in
the actual prices that is not explained by the model. See Online Appendix Table 11.
  31
      In some cases, all the stores in the “old” chain switch, in which case we cannot measure the similarity to the
“old” chain post acquisition. See the online appendix in Section A.1.12 for additional detail.



                                                          23
chain. After the acquisition, following a short closure, the switching stores’ prices track precisely
the prices in the acquiring chain. While this plot shows the behavior for just one product, it is
representative of the pricing for products in this chain.
   As more systematic evidence, Panel B averages across the 8 events and all products, and plots
the average absolute difference in log prices between the switching stores and (i) stores in the old
chain (ii) stores in the new chain. Before the event, the absolute difference is close to zero for the
old chain and higher for the new chain, suggesting that the switching stores followed the prices of
the old chain before acquisition. After the event, the pattern reverses, suggesting that the switching
stores jump to following the prices of the new chain. Online Appendix Figure 22 shows that this
pattern holds separately for each of the eight acquisitions. Online Appendix Figure 23 shows
that the demographics of customers shopping at switching stores does not change systematically
post-acquisition relative to non-switching stores.
   Given the sharp changes in pricing, these mergers provide a unique opportunity to estimate
long-run price elasticities. Consider the single product whose price is shown in Figure IX Panel
A. The new chain generally charges lower prices for this product than the old chain; thus, it is
likely to become cheaper in the switching stores after the acquisition. For other products, the new
chain charges higher prices; these items are likely to become more expensive in the switching stores.
These are long-term, persistent price changes, which quite closely mimic the kind of experiment we
would see if a chain switched some of its stores from uniform to flexible pricing.
   We use these changes to estimate long-run elasticities. In a first step, we estimate separately
for each acquisition episode and each product j

                                            y P ost Switcher
                       log (outcomesjt ) = βsj dt ds         + ξsj + ζjt + sjt ,                 (6)


where outcomesjt may be either price Psjt or quantity Qsjt , the stores s include the switching stores
and stores in the old and new chain, the weeks t include up to 52 weeks pre-acquisition and up
to 52 weeks post-acquisition, the indicator dPt ost denotes weeks post acquisition, and the indicator
dSwitcher
 s        denotes stores that switch ownership. In each product-level regression, we control for
invariant product-store differences with the fixed effects ξsj and for common time series changes
with product-week fixed effects ζjt . The regression with price as the outcome yields the estimated
                                                       P . For products that are cheaper in the new
event-study change in log prices due to acquisition, β̂sj
                                              P will be negative, and vice versa for products that are
chain, as in the case of Figure IX Panel A, β̂sj
more expensive in the new chain. The regression with quantity as the outcome yields the estimated
                                                         Q
event-study change in log quantity due to acquisition, β̂sj .



                                                  24
                                                               Q       P for all the switching stores
    In the second step, we interpret the regression slope of β̂sj on β̂sj
and all products as the relevant elasticity. As the bin scatter in Figure X Panel A shows, the
event-study elasticity is −1.4171 (s.e. 0.0207), smaller (in absolute value) than the average weekly
elasticity for the pre-acquisition period for these stores of −1.9905 and similar to the quarterly
elasticity −1.6313. Online Appendix Figure 24 shows a well-behaved pattern of elasticities for each
of the 8 acquisitions.
    While Figure X Panel A shows the overall event-study elasticity, we estimate a store-specific
                                                                    Q
event-study elasticity ηsLR by running a univariate regression of β̂sj      P for a store s and all
                                                                       on β̂sj
the relevant products j. This allows us to compare in Panel B the store-level long-run elasticities
with our benchmark store-level short-run elasticities. (The elasticities are demeaned by acquisition
episode.) The two elasticities are clearly correlated, with a slope of 0.80 (s.e. 0.14), not significantly
different from one. Further, the long-run elasticities are also highly correlated with the quarterly
elasticities and with store-level income (Online Appendix Figures 25 Panels A and B). Finally, the
event-study elasticities are similar if we estimate them using as controls (i) only the stores in the
old chain or (ii) only the stores in the new chain (Online Appendix Figure 25 Panel C).
    While we cannot compute these long-run elasticities for the stores in our main sample, this sug-
gests that the short-run elasticities we use are informative of the more relevant long-term elasticity.


6    What Explains Uniform Pricing?

The results above present a puzzle. The retail chains in our sample include some of the largest
consumer-facing firms in the country. Most of them have decades of experience. They manage
complex supply chains with tens of thousands of products, and they implement elaborate patterns
of sales and promotions whose timing, depth, and duration differ dramatically across products and
across time. Yet even though they are changing thousands of prices every week, their prices are
essentially uniform across stores—at most varying at the level of large geographic zones. Why do
chains not vary prices more and pick up the large gains in profit we predict would result?
    Conclusively answering this question is beyond the scope of this paper. However, discussions
and interviews with chain managers, industry consultants and analysts have given us at least a
qualitative sense of the factors that may be important. Two explanations come up most frequently.
    The first is what we will call managerial inertia. This encompasses both agency frictions and
behavioral factors that prevent firms from implementing optimal policies even though the benefits
of doing so exceed the economic costs traditionally defined. The combination of sophisticated sales
patterns with uniform pricing across stores seems a close cousin of other cases in which firms devote



                                                   25
significant resources to optimizing some variables, while ignoring or devoting limited resources to
others. This pattern has been observed in small firms such as a bagel delivery service (Levitt, 2006)
and seaweed farmers (Hanna et al., 2014). It has also been observed in much higher stakes contexts,
such as rental car companies failing to vary prices with car mileage (Cho and Rust, 2010), baseball
teams ignoring statistics like on base percentage (Hakes and Sauer, 2006), fracking operations
failing to optimize quantities of sand and water (Covert, 2015), and manufacturing firms failing
to implement simple routines that would dramatically improve productivity (Bloom et al., 2013).
Hanna et al. (2014) develop a model of this phenomenon (building on Schwartzstein 2014) in which
managers devote scarce attention to a subset of choice variables. Such inertia may be exacerbated
by herding (Scharfstein and Stein, 1990), as managers who recognize the value of experimenting
along some previously unexplored dimension may not internalize all the potential benefits if the
experiment succeeds, and may pay a disproportionate share of the costs if it fails.
      The industry participants we spoke to frequently pointed to such inertia as an explanation for
uniform pricing. One leading consultant suggested that when information systems made sophisti-
cated pricing possible beginning in the 1990s, firms faced a choice between optimizing price levels
and sales patterns or optimizing variation across stores and opted to focus on the former. Other
participants noted that pricing teams within retailers often have limited sophistication, and that
they face a range of organizational barriers—from opposition by teams that would pay costs of
introducing flexible pricing but reap few benefits, to constraints imposed by budgeting and report-
ing structures, to herding incentives—that make a major change in pricing difficult. The lack of
experimentation with varying prices across stores also means that there is limited awareness of how
large the potential gains could be. As one former executive at a large national retailer told us:

        Getting buy-in from managers on incremental improvements [to pricing strategy] is
        hard. You need to show how it will integrate with markdown budgets, with gross
        margin optimization, with regional profit targets. The manager will say, “Your science
        does not solve my job. And if it doesn’t solve my job I don’t want your science.” It’s
        probably true that not varying prices across stores is a missed opportunity. But there
        are many other missed opportunities and this may be one of the smaller ones.32

We suspect that managerial inertia may be the most important explanation for uniform pricing.
      The second explanation is what we will call brand image concerns. This encompasses various
mechanisms by which varying prices across stores would lead to negative reactions from consumers
that could depress demand for a chain in the long run. This could arise if consumers who observe
 32
      Personal telephone interview, February 8, 2019.



                                                        26
different prices for the same item in multiple stores perceive this as unfair or a breach of an implicit
contract. In a report on UK grocery pricing, the Competition Commission (2003) writes:

         Asda said that it would be commercial suicide for it to move away from its highly
         publicized national EDLP pricing strategy and a breach of its relationship of trust
         with its customers, and it would cause damage to its brand image, which was closely
         associated with a pricing policy that assured the lowest prices always.

Such concerns could be reinforced if prices are explicitly advertised in local or national media, and
consumers thus expect all stores’ prices to match what was advertised. A similar mechanism could
be at play if chains are posting prices for individual products online, a force shown to be important
in other settings by Cavallo (2018b) and Ater and Rigbi (2017). Our conversations confirm that
these concerns are frequently cited by managers as a potential risk if chains were to vary prices.
       While brand image concerns may be important, there are several reasons why we suspect they
may not be the key causal factor in our setting. First, most of the gains from flexible pricing would
come from varying prices between stores that are separated geographically, making price compar-
isons less likely. Very few consumers would know that a store in Akron, OH is charging different
prices from a store in Milwaukee, WI. Second, the optimal pricing implied by our model would
likely amount to giving discounts to poorer consumers and raising prices on wealthier consumers.
This seems less likely to cause a public relations outcry than the reverse. Third, virtually all price
advertising is local, and so should not constrain pricing across markets, and most of the retailers we
study did not post prices of individual items online during our sample period.33 Finally, retailers
in many other sectors do vary prices across stores without appearing to provoke customer outcry,
including Starbucks (Luna, 2017), McDonalds, and Burger King (Thomadsen, 2005). Gasoline
prices vary widely across locations within a chain, and even grocery chains that sell gasoline vary
gasoline prices across their stores.34 None of this precludes some managers viewing brand image
risk as a reason to oppose varying prices. Still, we suspect such concerns may be more important
as an ex post justification rather than the main driver of uniform pricing.
       Several other explanations could contribute to uniform pricing but were mentioned less often if
at all in our interviews. A first is that committing to uniform pricing may allow chains to soften
price competition (Dobson and Waterson, 2008 and Adams and Williams, 2019). We cannot rule
out this being an important factor, though in evidence discussed below we fail to find evidence that
  33
     If online posting were a key driver of uniform prices, we might expect to see chains moving to uniformity as they
start posting online. As Online Appendix Table 13 shows, there is no significant increase in the extent of uniform
pricing over our sample.
  34
     As an illustrative example, we examined the gasoline prices for three Safeway stores in different cities using
gasbuddy.com. For these stores, we found regular gasoline prices of $2.94, $3.21, and $3.07.


                                                         27
the extent of uniform pricing varies with the extent of competition. A second is traditional menu
costs. We expect such costs to be a small factor given the frequency with which stores change prices
over time. A third is IT or engineering costs of varying prices across stores. Though sophisticated
versions of non-uniform pricing could be costly to optimize, our results suggest large profit gains
to even coarse schemes that adjust all prices in a store by a single factor based on local income.
The engineering costs of such a scheme are likely small relative to the predicted gains.
         While we cannot empirically distinguish the various explanations, looking at the correlates of
price uniformity across chains offers some suggestive evidence. In Table X we regress the chain-by-
chain coefficients on the log elasticity term in equation (4) — a measure of the extent to which each
chain deviates from uniform pricing — on chain characteristics.35 Chains with larger gains from
varying prices—larger chains and chains with stores serving more diverse income levels—vary prices
more (Columns 1-2). When we combine such factors into a measure of profit loss from uniform
pricing (Column 3), chains with greater loss vary prices more. This effect loads on the total (log)
profit loss rather than the percentage loss. These results are consistent with the managerial inertia
mechanism to the extent that inertia functions like a chain-level fixed cost of implementing non-
uniform pricing. It is also consistent with some role for IT or engineering costs. Finally, neither the
share of a chain’s stores with nearby competitors nor the share with nearby same-chain stores are
significant predictors of uniformity (Column 4).36 In Online Appendix Table 13 we show that the
price-log elasticity relationship does not differ for stores with no competing stores nearby. These
facts provide some evidence against either tacit collusion or brand image concerns (where the key
issue is consumers directly observing prices across stores) playing a driving role.


7         Implications

In this section, we consider four broader economic implications of uniform pricing.


7.1        Inequality

Allcott et al. (2018a) and Jaravel (forthcoming) both highlight the way variation in prices can
potentially exacerbate inequality. Uniform pricing by chains may have a substantial effect in this
sense, since optimal prices co-vary positively with income and thus uniform pricing will tend to
lower the prices paid by the rich and raise the prices paid by the poor.
    35
     For each chain, we regress the store-level log price on the store-level income, yielding the coefficients in Online
Appendix Figure 7. We then divide these coefficients by the first-stage coefficient in Table V, column 5.
  36
     In Online Appendix Table 12, we document similar results using the chain-level quarterly absolute log price
difference, as in Figure III Panel A.




                                                          28
   To quantify this effect, Figure XI shows the predicted relationship between local income and
prices for a hypothetical representative product sold by every chain with the same marginal cost c
under (i) uniform pricing and (ii) flexible pricing. We also present the relationship between local
income and the average yearly price paid, to incorporate variation in prices paid due to endogenous
substitution by consumers as discussed in Section 4.3.
   We compute the uniform price, pU     r
                                          nif orm
                                                  , as in equation (5), taking the predicted elasticity
                                                                                                ηs
based on the income first stage. We compute optimal flexible prices as p∗s = log(c) + log(            ),
                                                                                              1 + ηs
where the log elasticity term is also replaced with the predicted value from the income first stage.
We compute the yearly price paid scenario using pYs early = pU
                                                             r
                                                               nif orm
                                                                       + β Y early (λs − λr ), where
β Y early is the estimated slope using price paid in Table VIII, column 1 and λr is the average of λs
within chain r. We present additional details in Section A.1.13 in the online appendix.
   Figure XI shows that uniform prices are somewhat increasing in store income because low-
income and high-income areas are served by distinct chains. In the flexible pricing counterfactual,
prices are much more responsive to local income. The slope of yearly average prices is only slightly
steeper than under uniform pricing, suggesting that consumer substitution does not substantially
change the implications of uniform pricing. These patterns are similar if we use the quarterly or
index elasticities instead of the weekly elasticities (Online Appendix Figure 26).
   This calibration suggests important quantitative implications for inequality. Consumers of
stores in the lowest income decile pay about 3.4 log points higher prices under the yearly price
paid benchmark than under flexible pricing, while consumers of stores in the top income decile pay
about 6.5 log points lower prices. We emphasize that this is not a complete equilibrium analysis,
and these patterns could be either moderated or strengthened by unmodeled competitive responses
including entry and exit.


7.2    Response to Local Shocks

A second implication of our findings relates to the response of prices to local shocks. Benchmark
models assume that when a negative shock to income or wealth hits consumers in an area, the
impact on welfare will be offset to some extent by reductions in local retail prices. Similarly, any
shocks that increase local costs would tend to be reflected in higher prices. Such responses will be
dampened by uniform pricing, especially if the geographic area affected by the shock is small.
   As an illustration, in Table XI we consider stores facing a negative shock to local consumer
income of $2,000. We translate this into a change in the log elasticity term using the coefficient
from Table V, column 5. We consider three cases: (i) a nationwide shock that affects all stores in
the country; (ii) a shock that affects all stores in a given state; (iii) a shock that affects all stores in a


                                                     29
given county. For each shock, we compute the response of log prices under flexible pricing (column
1), under uniform pricing (column 2), and under the average yearly price paid scenario (column 3),
following the same approach as in Section 7.1. For (ii), we compute the results separately for each
of the 48 states and then average the results. For (iii), we average analogously across counties.
    The dampening effect of uniform pricing on local price responses is dramatic. Under flexible
pricing, the $2,000 income shock leads to 1.01 log points lower prices regardless of the geographic
level. When the shock is national, the response is similar (though not identical) under uniform
pricing, since it is optimal for all stores in a chain to adjust their prices by roughly the same
amount. For state and county-level shocks, however, the responses are far smaller. Under uniform
pricing, the average state-level shock reduces prices by only 0.32 log points, and the average county-
level shock by only 0.04 log points. The responses of yearly average prices to local shocks is larger,
but still highly attenuated relative to flexible pricing.37
    Panels B and C explore this further and consider a shock affecting California or Nevada. A
negative shock in California leads to a price decrease in the California stores of 0.72 log points under
uniform pricing, still dampened but much closer to the response under optimal pricing, given that
the chains operating in California have a majority of their stores in the state. In contrast, an equal-
sized shock in Nevada lowers prices in Nevada stores by only 0.16 log points under uniform pricing,
since many Nevada chains operate most of their stores elsewhere. This example also illustrates
potential price spillovers. Under uniform pricing, a shock in California causes prices in Nevada to
decrease by 0.38 log points, as some Nevada stores are part of the same chains as the California
stores. In contrast, the impact of a shock in Nevada on California is negligible at 0.04 log points.
    Some recent research provides evidence consistent with these simulations. Gagnon and López-
Salido (forthcoming) show that large localized demand shocks due to labor conflicts, population
displacement, and weather events translate into minimal changes in local supermarket prices. Caw-
ley et al. (2018) show that pass-through of a Philadelphia soda tax into supermarket prices was
smaller at chain stores than at independent retailers. Leung (2018) shows that the pass-through of
a local minimum wage change into prices is moderate for supermarkets and negligible for drug and
mass merchandise stores, citing the uniform pricing documented here as a likely explanation. In
contrast, Stroebel and Vavra (forthcoming) document relatively large effects of house prices on local
retail prices; one explanation is that house price changes are correlated at the regional level and so
translate into larger price changes than more localized shocks, consistent with the predictions in
Table XI.38
  37
     The patterns for local price response to shocks are similar if we use the quarterly or price index elasticities instead
of the benchmark elasticity, with a larger overall response to the negative shock (Online Appendix Table 14).
  38
     There are several other reasons why past work may have found larger responses to local shocks beyond broad



                                                            30
7.3    Merger Enforcement

A third implication relates to the analysis of horizontal mergers by competition authorities. The
standard approach to analyzing such mergers in the US proceeds in three steps (Balto, 2001).
First, the territory in which the merging firms operate is divided into separate geographic markets,
typically an MSA or smaller. Second, the change in concentration and other relevant competitive
conditions is analyzed separately in each market, typically ignoring markets where the parties do
not compete. Third, if the merger would reduce competition in one or more individual markets
to a sufficient degree, the merger is blocked or the parties are required to divest stores in the
affected markets. This analysis is economically coherent under the assumption that chains set
prices independently in each market.
    Uniform pricing changes this picture dramatically. If firms charge uniform prices, separate
markets can no longer be analyzed in isolation. The impact of a merger in a market will depend
not only on the change in concentration in that market but also on the change in concentration
in all other markets where the firms operate. Even markets where the firms operate but do not
compete will be affected, and will also alter the impact of the merger in the markets where they
do compete.
    As an example, suppose the first and second largest supermarket chains in city A propose to
merge. Consider three cases: (i) the chains only operate in city A; (ii) the chains compete in a
large number of other markets but all of these will remain competitive after the merger; (iii) the
chains each operate in a large number of non-overlapping markets. The standard analysis would
treat these three cases the same for the purposes of analyzing predicted anticompetitive effects in
city A. Under uniform pricing, however, the results of this merger would be dramatically different:
case (i) would likely result in a substantial price increase as predicted by the standard analysis
whereas cases (ii) and (iii) would likely result in a much smaller or even negligible price increase.
    When the existence or lack of uniform pricing is noted in merger cases, it is often used as a
test of the extent to which firms compete. For example, in evaluating a proposed merger between
Whole Foods and Wild Oats supermarkets (FTC v. Whole Foods, 2007), the District Court cited
the fact that “Whole Foods prices are essentially the same at all of its stores in a region, regardless
of whether there is a Wild Oats store nearby” as evidence that Whole Foods and Wild Oats are
not each others’ primary competitors and that the relevant product market must include other
supermarkets (Varner and Cooper, 2007).39 Such conclusions are invalid if firms charge uniform
geographic scope. First, some chains do vary prices by geographic zone so prices are not perfectly uniform. Second,
some prior work looks at price indices that also incorporate variation in the set of available products. Third, average
prices do vary within chain as a result of compositional effects.
  39
     Conversely, in the proposed merger of Staples and Office Depot (FTC v. Staples and Office Depot, 1997), the



                                                          31
prices: Whole Foods and Wild Oats would set the same price at all stores even if they were each
others’ only competitor and their merger would lead to a substantial increase in price.


7.4    Incidence of Trade Costs

A fourth implication relates to the incidence of trade costs. A large literature estimates trade
costs by examining differences in the prices of specific products at geographically separated stores
(see surveys by Fackler and Goodwin, 2001 and Anderson and van Wincoop, 2004). As a recent
example, Atkin and Donaldson (2015) use prices in the Nielsen RMS data to estimate trade costs,
accounting for the source locations of the products and allowing for spatially varying markups.
    Setting aside the adjustment for markups, this strategy will estimate trade costs to be larger the
more prices vary across space. Uniform pricing would thus lead trade costs to be underestimated. At
an extreme, if all stores were owned by a single chain that practiced uniform pricing, the estimated
trade costs would be zero. In the observed data, the extent to which they are underestimated will
depend on the size and geographic distribution of chains. Atkin and Donaldson (2015)’s adjustment
for markups would also be affected by uniform pricing.40
    Uniform pricing also affects the real incidence of trade costs. Just as it tends to lower prices in
high-income areas and raise them in low-income areas, it will tend to raise prices in locations close
to where products are produced and lower them in remote locations. It thus leads to a relative
reduction in the benefits of trade for those close to ports or origin locations and a relative increase
in these benefits for those far away.


8     Conclusion

In this paper, we show that most large US food, drugstore, and mass merchandise chains set uniform
or nearly-uniform prices across their stores, and that limiting price discrimination in this way costs
firms significant short-term profits. The result of nearly-uniform pricing is a significant dampening
of price adjustment, which has important implications for the extent of inequality, the pass-through
of local shocks, the analysis of mergers, and the incidence of trade costs.


FTC cited the fact that “the two superstore chains charge lower prices... in cities where they directly compete,
relative to prices in cities where [they] do not face each other head to head” as evidence that Staples and Office Depot
are each others’ primary competitors (Baker, 1999).
   40
      Atkin and Donaldson (2015) infer the extent of market power from the observed pass-through of price shocks
in origin locations to prices in stores further away. While they would ideally use the origin wholesale price, this
is not available so they use the origin retail price as a proxy. Uniform pricing will tend to increase the estimated
pass-through, as it increases the correlation between changes in retail prices in origin and destination markets that
are served by stores from the same chains. It will therefore tend to reduce the level of estimated markups, while
(correctly) implying less variation in markups across space.


                                                          32
    References
Adams, Brian and Kevin R. Williams. 2019. “Zone Pricing in Regional Oligopoly.” American
 Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 11(1): 124-56.

Allcott, Hunt, Rebecca Diamond, Jean-Pierre Dube, Jessie Handbury, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Molly
  Schnell. 2018a. “Food Deserts and the Causes of Nutritional Inequality.” Working Paper.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2018b. “Regressive Sin Taxes, with
  an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax.” Working paper.

Anderson, Eric, Benjamin A. Malin, Emi Nakamura, Duncan Simester, and Jón Steinsson. 2017.
 “Informational Rigidities and the Stickiness of Temporary Sales.” Journal of Monetary Eco-
 nomics, 90(C): 64-83.

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2004. “Trade Costs.” Journal of Economic Literature,
 42(3): 691–751.

Angrist, Joshua D., Peter D. Hull, Parag A. Pathak, and Christopher R. Walters. 2017. “Leveraging
 Lotteries For School Value-Added: Testing and Estimation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
 132(2): 871-919.

Ater, Itai and Oren Rigbi. 2018. “The Effects of Mandatory Disclosure of Supermarket Prices.”
  Working paper.

Atkin, David and Dave Donaldson. 2015. “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Implications
  of Intra-national Trade Costs.” NBER Working Paper No. 21439

Baker, Jonathan B. 1999. “Econometric Analysis in FTC v. Staples.” Journal of Public Policy &
  Marketing, 18(1):11-21.

Balto, David A. 2001. “Supermarket Merger Enforcement.” Journal of Public Policy and Marketing,
  20(1):38-50.

Beraja, Martin, Erik Hurst, and Juan Ospina. 2019. “The Aggregate Implications of Regional
  Business Cycles.” Working paper.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn, and Ariel Pakes. 1995. “Automobile Prices in Market Equilib-
  rium.” Econometrica, 63(4):841-90.

Bils, Mark and Peter J. Klenow. 2004. “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices.” Journal
  of Political Economy, 112(5): 947-985.

Bloom, Nicholas, Benn Eifert, Aprajit Mahajan, David McKenzie, John Roberts. 2013. “Does
  Management Matter? Evidence from India.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1): 1-51.

Bloom, Nicholas and John Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices
  Across Firms and Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4): 1351-1408.

Campbell, Jeffrey R. and Benjamin Eden. 2014. “Rigid Prices: Evidence from U.S. Scanner Data.”
  International Economic Review, 55(2): 423-442.

Cavallo, Alberto. 2017. “Are Online and Offline Prices Similar? Evidence from Large Multi-Channel
  Retailers.” American Economic Review, 107(1), 283–303.

                                               33
Cavallo, Alberto. 2018a. “More Amazon Effects: Online Competition and Pricing Behaviors.”
  Jackson Hole Economic Symposium Conference Proceedings (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
  City).

Cavallo, Alberto. 2018b. “Scraped Data and Sticky Prices.” Review of Economics and Statistics
  100(1): 105-119.

Cavallo, Alberto, Brent Nieman, and Roberto Rigobon. 2014. “Currency Unions, Product Intro-
  ductions, and the Real Exchange Rate.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2): 529-595.

Cawley, John, David Frisvold, Anna Hill, and David Jones. 2018. “The Impact of the Philadephia
  Beverage Tax on Prices and Product Availability.” NBER Working Paper No. 24990.

Chevalier, Judith and Anil Kashyap. 2019. “Best Prices: Price Discrimination and Consumer Sub-
  stitution.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11(1): 126-159.

Chintagunta, Pradeep K., Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Vishal Singh. 2003. “Balancing Profitability and
  Customer Welfare in a Supermarket Chain.” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 1(1):111-
  147.

Cho, Sungjin and John Rust. 2010. “The Flat Rental Puzzle.” The Review of Economic Studies,
  77(2): 560-594.

Coibion, Olivier, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Gee Hee Hong. 2015. “The Cyclicality of Sales, Regular
  and Effective Prices: Business Cycle and Policy Implications.” American Economic Review,
  105(3): 993-1029.

Covert, Thomas R. 2015. “Experiential and Social Learning in Firms: The Case of Hydraulic
  Fracturing in the Bakken Shale.” Working paper.

Competition Commission. 2003. Safeway plc and Asda Group Limited (owned by Wal-Mart Stores
  Inc); Wm Morrison Supermarkets PLC; J Sainsbury plc; and Tesco plc: A Report on the Mergers
  in Contemplation. Cm 5950. TSO, London, UK.

DellaVigna, Stefano and Ulrike Malmendier. 2004. “Contract Design and Self-Control: Theory and
  Evidence” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(2), 353-402.

Dobson, Paul W. and Michael Waterson. 2008. “Chain-Store Competition: Customized vs. Uniform
 Pricing.” Warwick Economic Research Papers No. 840.

Fackler, Paul L. and Barry K. Goodwin. 2001. “Spatial Price Analysis.” Handbook of Agricultural
  Economics, vol. 1 : 971–1024.

Federal Trade Commission. 2010. Horizontal Merger Guidelines.

United States District Court, District of Columbia Circuit. 2007. “Federal Trade Commision v.
 Whole Foods Market, Inc.” 502 F.Supp.2d 1 (2007), No. 07-1021(PLF).

United States District Court, District of Columbia Circuit. 1997. “FTC v. Staples, Inc. and Office
 Depot, Inc.” FTC File No. 9710008. Civil Action No. 197CB00701.

Gagnon, Etienne and David J. López-Salido. Forthcoming. “Small Price Responses to Large De-
 mand Shocks.” Journal of the European Economic Association.


                                               34
George, Lisa and Joel Waldfogel. 2003. “Who Affects Whom in Daily Newspaper Markets?” Journal
 of Political Economy, 111: 765–784.

Goldfarb, Avi and Mo Xiao. 2011. “Who Thinks about the Competition? Managerial Ability and
 Strategic Entry in US Local Telephone Markets.” American Economic Review, 101(7): 3130-3161.

Gopinath, Gita, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, Chang-Tai Hsieh, and Nicholas Li. 2011. “International
 Prices, Costs, and Markup Differences.” American Economic Review, 101(6): 2450-2486.

Hakes, Jahn, K., and Raymond D. Sauer. 2006. “An Economic Evaluation of the Moneyball Hy-
  pothesis.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 20 (3): 173-186.

Hanna, Rema, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Joshua Schwartzstein. 2014. “Learning Through Noticing:
  Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3): 1311-
  1353.

Hausman Jerry A. 1996. “Valuation of new goods under perfect and imperfect competition.” In The
  Economics of New Goods, ed. TF Bresnahan, RJ Gordon, pp. 209–48. Chicago: Univ. Chicago
  Press

Heidhues, Paul and Botond Koszegi. 2018. “Behavioral Industrial Oganization,” in Handbook of
  Behavioral Economics, Vol. 1, ed. D Bernheim, S DellaVigna, and D Laibson, Elsevier, 517-612.

Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo. 2006. “Measuring the Implications of Sales and Consumer Inventory
  Behavior.” Econometrica, 74(6): 1637-1673.

Hitsch, Guenter, Ali Hortaçsu, and Xiliang Lin. 2017. “Prices and Promotions in U.S. Retail Mar-
  kets: Evidence from Big Data.” Booth Working paper 145.

Hoch, Stephen J., Byung-Do Kim, Alan L. Montgomery, and Peter E. Rossi. 1995. “Determinants
 of Store-Level Price Elasticity.” Journal of Marketing Research, 32(1): 17-29.

Hortaçsu, Ali and Steven L. Puller. 2008. “Understanding strategic bidding in multi-unit auctions:
  a case study of the Texas electricity spot market.” RAND Journal of Economics, 39(1): 86-114.

Hwang, Minha, Bart J. Bronnenberg, Raphael Thomadsen. 2010. “An Empirical Analysis of As-
 sortment Similarities Across U.S. Supermarkets.” Marketing Science, 29(5): 858-79.

Jacob, Brian A., and Larse Lefgren. 2008. “Can Principals Identify Effective Teachers? Evidence
  on Subjective Performance Evaluation in Education.” Journal of Labor Economics, 2008(26):
  101-36.

Jaravel, Xavier. Forthcoming. “The Unequal Gains from Product Innovations: Evidence from the
  US Retail Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics.

Kane, Thomas J., and Douglas O. Staiger. 2008. “Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achieve-
 ment: An Experimental Evaluation.” NBER Working Paper No. 14607.

Kaplan, Greg and Guido Menzio. 2015. “The Morphology of Price Dispersion.” International Eco-
 nomic Review, 56(4): 1165-1206.

Leung, Justin. 2018. “Minimum Wage and Real Wage Inequality: Evidence from Pass-Through to
  Retail Prices.” Working paper.


                                                35
Levitt, Steven D. 2006. “An Economist Sells Bagels: A Case Study in Profit Maximization.” NBER
  Working Paper No. 12152.

Luna, Nancy. 2017. “Starbucks quietly raises Southern California prices up to 30 cents.” Orange
  County Register.

Massey, Cade and Richard H. Thaler. 2013. “The Loser’s Curse: Decision Making and Market
 Efficiency in the National Football League Draft.” Management Science, 59(7): 1479-1495.

McMillan, Robert Stanton. 2007. “Different Flavor, Same Price: The Puzzle of Uniform Pricing for
 Differentiated Products.” Working paper.

Miravete, Eugenio J., Katja Seim, and Jeff Thurk. Forthcoming. One Markup to Rule Them All:
 Taxation by Liquor Pricing Regulation” American Economic Journal: Microeconomics.

Montgomery, Alan L. 1997. “Creating Micro-Marketing Pricing Strategies Using Supermarket Scan-
 ner Data.” Marketing Science, 16(4): 315-337.

Nakamura, Emi. 2008. “Pass-Through in Retail and Wholesale.” American Economic Review Pa-
 pers and Proceedings, 98(2): 430–437.

Nakamura, Emi and Jón Steinsson. 2008. “Five Facts about Prices: A Reevaluation of Menu Cost
  Models.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4): 1415–1464.

Nevo Aviv. 2001. “Measuring market power in the ready-to-eat cereal industry.” Econometrica, 69:
  307–42.

Orbach, Barak Y. and Liran Einav. 2007. “Uniform prices for differentiated goods: The case of the
  movie-theater industry.” International Review of Law and Economics, 27(2): 129-153.

Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein. 1990. “Herd Behavior and Investment.” American
  Economic Review, 80: 465-479.

Schwartzstein, Joshua. 2014. “Selective Attention and Learning.” Journal of the European Economic
  Association 12(6): 1423-52.

Shiller, Ben and Joel Waldfogel. 2011. “Music for a Song: An Empirical Look at Uniform Pricing
  and Its Alternatives.” Journal of Industrial Economics, 59(4): 630-660.

Stroebel, Johannes and Joseph Vavra. Forthcoming. “House Prices, Local Demand, and Retail
  Prices.” Journal of Political Economy.

Thomadsen, Raphael. 2005. “The Effects of Ownership Structure on Prices in Geographically Dif-
  ferentiated Industries.” RAND Journal of Economics, 36(4): 908-929.

Thomassen, Øyvind, Howard Smith, Stephan Seiler, and Pasquale Schiraldi. 2017. “Multi-Category
  Competition and Market Power: A Model of Supermarket Pricing.” American Economic Review,
 107(8): 2308-2351.

Varner, Carlton, and Heather Cooper. 2007. “Product Markets in Merger Cases: The Whole Foods
  Decision.” The Antitrust Source, October 2007.




                                               36
Panel A. Single Chain, Prices of a Single Product in Orange Juice Category




Panel B. Single Chain, Prices of Products in Five Categories




                                                             Figure I
                                                    Examples of Uniform Pricing
            Notes. Figures depict log price in store s and week t for a particular product j. To facilitate comparison across products, we standardize
prices by demeaning the log price by the average log price across all stores s in all chains. Darker colors indicate higher price and the figure is
blank if price is missing. Each column is a week. Each row is a store, and stores are sorted by store-level income per capita. In Panel B, the same
50 stores appear for each product.




                                                                         37
Panel A. Quarterly Absolute Log Price Difference                                                     Panel B. Weekly Log Price Correlation




Panel C. Weekly Share of Identical Prices




                                                                     Figure II
                          Similarity in Pricing Across Stores: Same-Chain Comparisons vs. Different-Chain Comparisons
           Notes. Each observation in the histograms is a chain-UPC representing the average relationship between up to 200 store-pairs belonging to each chain. The “same chain”
pairs are formed from stores belonging to the same chain; the “different chain” pairs are formed from stores in different chains, requiring in addition that the two stores do not
belong to the same parent_code. Panel A displays the distribution of the average absolute difference in log quarterly prices between two stores in a pair, winsorized at 0.3. Panel B
displays the distribution of the correlation in the weekly (demeaned) log prices between two stores, winsorized at 0. Panel C displays the share of prices in a pair of stores that are
within 1 log point of each other.


                                                                                         38
Panel A. Quarterly Similarity in Pricing versus Weekly Correlation of Prices, by Chain




Panel B. Within-State versus Between-State Quarterly Absolute Log Price Difference, by Chain




                                                      Figure III
                                    Similarity in Pricing, Chain-Level Measure
          Notes. Each observation in Panels A and B is a chain, with circles representing food stores, diamonds representing
mass merchandise stores, and squares representing drug stores. In Panel A, for each chain, we plot the average across all within-
chain pairs of the quarterly absolute difference in log price (as in Figure II Panel A) and of the weekly correlation in log price
(Figure II Panel B). We compute the averages using up to 200 pairs of stores within a chain. In Panel B, each observation is a
chain that operates at least three stores in each of at least two states. Chains that differentiate pricing geographically—with
difference between across-state and within-state quarterly absolute price difference greater than 0.01—are denoted with solid
markers.


                                                               39
Panel A. Within Chain                                                                       Panel B. Between Chains




Panel C. Within-Chain and Between-Chain Coefficients by UPC




                                                                                         Figure IV
                                                                                      Price vs. Income
           Notes. Panel A is a binned scatterplot with 50 bins of the residual of log price in store s on the residual of income in store s. Residuals are after removing chain fixed
effects. Panel B is a scatterplot of average price on average income at the chain level for the food stores, with the labels indicating a chain identifier. Panel C shows the distribution
of the coefficient, within and between chains, UPC-by-UPC. The figures report the coefficients of the relevant regressions, with standard errors clustered by parent_code. Analytic
weights equal to the number of stores in each aggregation unit are used for the regression in Panel B.

                                                                                           40
Panel A. Data from Nielsen: Average Weekly Log Price                                     Panel B. Data from Major Grocer: Average Weekly Log Price




Panel C. Data from Major Grocer: Nonsale Log Price




                                                                     Figure V
                                 Price vs. Store-Level Income Within State: Investigation Using Major Grocer’s Data
          Notes. Panels A-C are binned scatterplots of the residuals of log price in store s on the residuals of income in store s. Residuals are after removing chain-state fixed
effects. The figures report the coefficients and robust standard errors of the relevant regressions. Axes ranges have been chosen to make the slopes visually comparable. Prices are
demeaned by UPC. Products were selected using the following criteria: products must be sold for at least 40 weeks in 99% of Major Grocer stores.


                                                                                        41
Panel A. Within Chain                                                                                Panel B. Between Chain




Panel C. Within-Chain and Between-Chain Coefficients by Submodule




                                                                          Figure VI
                                                 Assortment Price Index vs. Store-Level Income (Food Stores)
           Notes. These figures show the relationship of which products stores carry, a non-price measure of store-level decision making, vs. income. The assortment price index is
constructed as follows: first, for each product that is in the top 20% of national units sold, we calculate the average national log unit price. Second, we divide each module into up
to five sub-modules based on product package size. Third, we calculate the average log national unit price for each store-sub-module-year. We collapse this measure to a store
level Assortment Price Index (API) by averaging over the sub-module-years for each store. Panel A is a binned scatterplot with 50 bins of the residual of API in store s on the
residual of income in store s. Residuals are after removing chain fixed effects. Panel B is a scatterplot of average API on average income at the chain level for the food stores, with
the labels indicating a chain identifier. Panel C shows the distribution of the coefficient, within and between chains, submodule-by-submodule for a total of 388 submodules sorted
by package size. The figures report the coefficients of the relevant regressions, with standard errors clustered by parent_code.
Analytic weights equal to the number of stores in each aggregation unit are used for the regression in Panel B.


                                                                                         42
Panel A. Specification Check: Linearity of Log Quantity and Log Price for Two Income Levels




Panel B. Distribution of Elasticity Estimates: Store-Level Average




                                                       Figure VII
                                          Elasticity Estimates and Validation
          Notes. Panel A is a binscatter of log P and log Q for 25 randomly sampled UPCs after residualizing for week-of-year
and year fixed effects. One set of observations includes the 50 stores nearest to the $20,000 income level; the second set includes
50 stores nearest to the $60,000 income level. The slope of each line is the elasticity for that group of stores and products. Panel
B plots the distribution of the store-level elasticity, shrunk and raw. Store-level elasticities are mean-zero. We have recentered
these elasticities using the average of the store-UPC-level elasticities to show level.


                                                                43
Panel A. Within Chain                                                         Panel B. Between Chain




Panel C. Distribution of Within Chain vs. Between Chain Coefficients, UPC-by-UPC




                                                                            Figure VIII
                                                             Log Elasticity versus Store-Level Income
         Notes. Panel A is a binned scatterplot with 50 bins of the residual of log        store s on the residual of income in store s. Residuals are after removing chain fixed

effects. Panel B is a scatterplot of average log      on average income at the chain level, with the labels indicating a chain identifier. Panel C shows the distribution of the
coefficients, within-and-between-chain, UPC-by-UPC.


                                                                                      44
Panel A. Quarterly Log Prices for Merger 5, Selected Product




Panel B. Event Study of Weekly Price Changes for All Switching Stores




                                               Figure IX
                        Event-Study Graph of Pricing in Stores that Change Owner
           Notes. Panel A is a quarterly log price series of one UPC in Merger #5. Old and new chain price series are leave-out
means of stores in the new and old parent_code that do not switch, respectively. The vertical lines show the window where the
switch has occurred. The y-axis scale is redacted to prevent product identification. Panel B shows the absolute log price
difference of all switching stores from their old and new chains. We standardize the weeks according to the switch time to make
different switches comparable. The increased jaggedness of the solid line over time is caused by some old chains closing down
and changes in product assortment.


                                                             45
Panel A. Acquisition-Induced Change in Quantity vs. Change in Price




Panel B. Store-Level Estimated Long-run Elasticity Vs. Weekly Elasticity




                                                    Figure X
                                  Long-Term Elasticities from Store Acquisitions
           Notes. Panel A shows a binscatter plot of changes in log quantity versus changes in log price after a store has been
acquired by a different chain for the universe of products. Formally, for a given product, changes in log quantity and price are
obtained as OLS coefficients on an interaction of a dummy for the post-acquisition period with the particular store indicator,
controlling for store and date fixed effects. Control stores include up to 200 stores in the original and acquiring chain which
exhibit at least 50% availability for the particular product before and after the acquisition. The long-run elasticity is obtained as
the coefficient in an OLS regression of changes in log quantity on changes in log price for all stores and products. Panel B shows
store-level long-run elasticities versus (weekly) short-run elasticities after demeaning both variables on the merger-level. For
each store, the long-run elasticity is computed as in Panel A, restricting the observations to the particular store. Short-run
elasticities are estimated using data prior to the merger only.


                                                                 46
                                                 Figure XI
                   Price Rigidity and Inequality: Prices in Areas with Different Income.

          Notes. In this figure, using a representative product, we plot binned scatterplots with 50 bins of store-level uniform
price and counterfactual log prices (under flexible pricing) versus store-level income. The elasticity of each store is according to
the predicted elasticity using the coefficients of Table 5 Column 5. The counterfactual price assumes flexible pricing, that is
      ∗
log       = log     + log( ) using the estimated elasticity for each store s and a constant marginal cost for all chains. The
uniform price is the profit maximizing uniform price set for each chain. Yearly Price perturbs the optimal uniform price within
each chain by the yearly IV coefficient of prices on elasticity (Table 8 Column 1) which is meant to include the “automatic
stabilizer” effect of intertemporal substitution due to sales. Chain average Price Paid and chain average Uniform Price are equal.
We use the median of the estimated marginal costs as the marginal cost for the representative product.




                                                                 47
                                                              TABLE I
                                    SAMPLE FORMATION AND SUMMARY STATISTICS

                                                     Panel A: Sample Formation
                                                                                                                Total
                                                                         No. of       No. of       No. of       Yearly
                                                                         Stores       Chains        States     Revenue
Initial Sample of Stores                                                 38,539        326         48+DC       $224bn
Store Restriction 1. Stores do not Switch Chain, >= 104 weeks            24,489        119         48+DC       $193bn
Store Restriction 2. Store in Homescan dataset                           22,985        113         48+DC       $192bn
Chain Restriction 1. Chain Present for >= 8 years                        22,771         83         48+DC       $191bn
Chain Restriction 2. Valid Chain                                         22,680         73         48+DC       $191bn

Final Sample, Food Stores                                                 9,415          64        48+DC        $136bn
Final Sample, Drug Stores                                                 9,977           4        48+DC        $21bn
Final Sample, Merchandise Stores                                          3,288           5        48+DC        $34bn
                                      Panel B: Store Characteristics, Food Stores
                                                                Mean        25th                  Median         75th
Average per-capita Income                                      $29,770 $22,770                    $27,420      $34,300
Percent with at least Bachelor Degree                           10.2%       5.0%                   8.3%         13.3%
Number of Homescan Households                                    31.3         16                    27            42
Number of Trips of Homescan Households                           1382        522                   1067          1860
Number of Competitors within 10 km                                3.6          0                     1            5
                                            Panel C: Chain Characteristics, Food Stores
                                                                     Mean         25th             Median        75th
Number of Stores                                                       147         30               66           156
Number of DMAs                                                         7.4          2                4            8
Number of States                                                       3.4          1               2.5           4
                                           Panel D: Product Characteristics, Food Stores
                                                                                                   Yearly      Weekly
                                                                         No. of       No. of                                Weekly
                                                                                                  Revenue      Average
                                                                        Products     Modules                               Availability
                                                                                                  by Store       Price
Benchmark Sample                                                          1,365          40       $1.18M        $2.86         90.70%
                                                                                                  (572K)       (0.134)         (6.39)
Total Yearly Revenue Covered = $10.8bn, 7.95% of Yearly Revenue for the Stores
Sample with Estimated Elasticities                                         982           38        $0.98M       $2.65         94.04%
                                                                                                   (505K)       (0.152)        (4.26)
Total Yearly Revenue Covered = $9.20bn, 6.77% of Yearly Revenue for the Stores


      Notes. Valid chains are those in which at least 80% of stores with that retailer_code have the same parent_code and in which at
least 40% of stores never switch parent_code or retailer_code . Total Yearly Revenue is the yearly average total revenue recorded in
the Nielsen RMS dataset. To get yearly revenues, we take total revenue and divide by the number of years a store appears in the
sample. The average price is calculated by summing both the number of units sold and revenue for a product in a store. The ratio is
taken and then averaged to obtain a store-level average price. Weekly availability is calculated first at the yearly level by counting the
number of weeks a product is sold divided by the number of weeks a store is open. Then, we average across years for store-level
availability.




                                                                   48
                                                         TABLE II
            SIMILARITY IN PRICING ACROSS STORES, WITHIN-CHAIN VS. BETWEEN-CHAIN
                                                                       Correlation in               Share of Weekly Log
                                   Absolute Difference in          (Demeaned) Weekly Log            Prices within One Log
Measure of Similarity:              Quarterly Log Prices                  Prices                            Point
                                                  Different                        Different                       Different
                                 Same Chain        Chain           Same Chain       Chain          Same Chain       Chain
                                    (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)

                                        Panel A: Benchmark UPCs, All Store Pairs
Mean                                 0.031          0.137             0.806          0.091            0.622          0.104
Standard Deviation                  (0.031)        (0.062)           (0.190)        (0.101)          (0.222)        (0.094)
Number of Chain-UPCs                86,426         86,197            84,875         83,930            85,140         86,001

                                 Panel B. Benchmark UPCs, Store Pairs Within a DMA
Mean                                 0.025          0.126             0.846          0.106            0.679          0.131
Standard Deviation                  (0.025)        (0.067)           (0.161)        (0.173)          (0.201)        (0.141)
Number of Chain-UPCs                86,344         83,483            84,804         73,498            85,057         83,198

       Panel C: Benchmark UPCs, Store Pairs Across DMAs, Top 33% income vs Bottom 33% Income Only
Mean                                 0.041          0.141             0.759          0.087            0.544          0.102
Standard Deviation                  (0.039)        (0.065)           (0.225)        (0.098)          (0.245)        (0.095)
Number of Chain-UPCs                61,167         80,344            59,542         79,052            59,755         85,715

                                            Panel D: Food Stores, All Store Pairs
Mean                                 0.031          0.137             0.809          0.089            0.624          0.104
Standard Deviation                  (0.031)        (0.062)           (0.189)        (0.096)          (0.222)        (0.094)
Number of Chain-UPCs                83,793         83,558            82,282         81,312            82,546         83,382

                                             Panel E: Drugstores, All Store Pairs
Mean                                 0.052          0.136             0.651          0.041            0.498          0.095
Standard Deviation                  (0.031)        (0.062)           (0.254)        (0.100)          (0.286)        (0.079)
Number of Chain-UPCs                  551            552               528            546              529            547

                                    Panel F: Mass Merchandise Stores, All Store Pairs
Mean                                 0.032          0.130             0.761          0.195            0.569          0.081
Standard Deviation                  (0.020)        (0.082)           (0.178)        (0.191)          (0.186)        (0.083)
Number of Chain-UPCs                 2,082          2,087             2,065          2,072            2,065          2,072


     Notes. This table presents measures of similarity of pricing for pairs of stores both within a chain, and across chains. To
form the pairs we select a maximum of 200 pairs per chain (within the appropriate channel only) that correspond to the
comparison criteria we impose (see text for additional details). In Panel A, we sample from the universe of store pairs within
each channel. In Panel B, we sample from store pairs where both stores are located in the same DMA only, while in Panel C we
compare only pairs of stores in diferent DMAs and such that one store in the pair is in the bottom third of the income measure,
while the other store is in the top third. Panels D, E, and F are the means per channel.




                                                              49
                                                     TABLE III
                                          DETERMINANTS OF PRICING

                                                                              Log Price
                                                  (1)              (2)           (3)             (4)             (5)

                                                Panel A: Food Stores
Own Store Income                             0.0168*** 0.0047***             0.0042***       0.0038***       0.0038***
(in $10,000s)                                 (0.0041)     (0.0009)           (0.0009)        (0.0003)        (0.0003)
Chain Average Income                                      0.0372***          0.0320***        0.0296**
(in $10,000s)                                              (0.0096)           (0.0108)        (0.0114)
Chain-State Average Income                                                                    0.0086**        0.0086**
(in $10,000s)                                                                                 (0.0042)        (0.0042)
Fixed Effect for County                          No              No              Yes             No              No
Fixed Effect for Chain                           No              No              No              No              Yes
Observation Level                               Store           Store           Store           Store           Store
Observations                                    9,415           9,415           9,415           9,415           9,415
R-squared                                       0.128           0.266           0.702           0.268           0.933

                                                Panel B: Drug Stores
Own Store Income                             0.0077***                                       0.0054***       0.0054***
(in $10,000s)                                 (0.0011)                                        (0.0006)        (0.0006)
Chain-State Average Income                                                                   0.0247***       0.0242***
(in $10,000s)                                                                                 (0.0068)        (0.0049)
Fixed Effect for Chain                           No                                              No              Yes
Observation Level                               Store                                           Store           Store
Observations                                    9,977                                          9,977           9,977
R-squared                                       0.100                                          0.185           0.394

                                          Panel C: Mass Merchandise Stores
Own Store Income                            -0.0117***                                        0.0033***      0.0033***
(in $10,000s)                                 (0.0029)                                         (0.0010)       (0.0010)
Chain-State Average Income                                                                   -0.0679***      0.0071***
(in $10,000s)                                                                                  (0.0092)       (0.0016)
Fixed Effect for Chain                           No                                               No             Yes
Observation Level                               Store                                            Store          Store
Observations                                    3,288                                           3,288          3,288
R-squared                                       0.041                                           0.276          0.932


     Notes . In Panel A, standard errors are clustered by parent_code . In Panels B and C, standard errors are clustered by
parent_code -state. In Panels B and C we do not report the specifications with chain-average income given that there are
only 4 drug chains and only 5 mass merchandise chains.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              50
                                                         TABLE IV
                 PRODUCT ASSORTMENT AND OTHER FIRM DECISIONS IN FOOD STORES

                                          Product       Share Products       Fraction of       Fraction of
                                        Assortment       in Top Decile        Organic           Generic        Log Number of
Measures:                               Price Index      by Unit Price        Products          Products       UPCs Carried
                                     (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                               (5)
              Panel A: Within/Between Chain Relationships: Absolute Log Difference Store Pairs
Within-Chain Pairs Mean            0.012           0.007          0.004           0.011                              0.126
Between-Chain Pairs Mean           0.052           0.019          0.007           0.055                              0.273

                                             Panel B: Relationship with Income
Store Income, $10,000s                   0.0058***       0.0119***        0.0125***            -0.0062***         0.0281***
                                          (0.0013)        (0.0017)         (0.0011)             (0.0014)           (0.0077)
Chain Income, $10,000s                   0.0425***       0.0331***        0.0200**               -0.0080          0.1178**
                                          (0.0107)        (0.0084)         (0.0076)             (0.0110)           (0.0494)
County Fixed Effects                         Yes             Yes              Yes                  Yes                Yes
Number of Modules                             40              40               8                    37                40
Products Considered                       Top 20%            All              All                  All                All
Sample Mean                                 0.000           0.219            0.085                0.231              5.495
Sample Standard Deviation                   0.042           0.042            0.042                0.048              0.222
Observation Level                           Store           Store            Store                Store              Store
Observations                                9,415           9,415            9,415                9,415              9,415
R-squared                                   0.527           0.539            0.315                0.150              0.211


      Notes. In Panel A, we use the same sample of store-pairs as in our price analysis in Table II. Each observation is the
average measure in a store-sub-module-year, and we report the average over the pair-sub-module-years for within-chain pairs
and between-chain pairs. The Product Assortment Price Index is a measure of the average log unit price for nationwide top-
selling products that are carried by each store. Specifically, the products must be in the top 20% of units sold among all
products belonging to the module. See notes to Figure VI for additional details of how the Product Assortment Price Index is
calculated. Fraction of Products that are in the Top 10% Unit Price is the share of products carried at the store-level that have
national average unit prices in the top 10% for each sub-module. Fraction of Organic Products and Fraction of Generic
Products require that at least 1 percent of products belong to that category in order to ensure that variation across stores is
possible (for example, organic toilet paper does not exist). In Panel B, standard errors are clustered by parent_code .
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                              51
                                                      TABLE V
                  DETERMINANTS OF STORE-LEVEL ELASTICITY IN FOOD STORES


                                                                                        Log      Elasticity
Dependent Variable:                                Elasticity                                  1 + Elasticity
                                         (1)          (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)
Demographic Controls
   Income Per Capita         0.1395*** 0.1329*** 0.1170***                       0.0527*** 0.0503*** 0.0501***
   (in $10,000s)              (0.0226)     (0.0146)   (0.0187)                    (0.0051)  (0.0051)  (0.0084)
   Fraction with College                              0.1833*                                           0.0364
   Degree (or higher)                                 (0.1081)                                        (0.0345)
   Median Home Price                                    0.0064                                         -0.0014
   (in $100,000s)                                     (0.0113)                                        (0.0052)
   Controls for Urban Share                                X                                               X
Controls for Number of Competitors Within 10km
   1 Other Store                                       -0.0186                                                -0.0110**
                                                      (0.0149)                                                 (0.0053)
   2 Other Stores                                   -0.0319***                                               -0.0144***
                                                      (0.0106)                                                 (0.0047)
   3+ Other Stores                                  -0.0624***                                               -0.0236***
                                                      (0.0151)                                                 (0.0053)
Fixed Effect for Chain           No           Yes         Yes                       Yes            Yes            Yes
Fixed Effect for UPC             No           No          No                        Yes            No             No
Observation Level               Store        Store       Store                   Store-UPC        Store          Store
Observations                    9,415       9,415       9,415                    6,593,513        9,415         9,415
R-squared                       0.138       0.666       0.671                      0.398          0.688         0.692


       Notes. Standard errors are clustered by parent_code . All independent variables are our estimates of store-level
demographics at the zip-code level based on Nielsen Homescan (HMS) panelists' residences. Demographics are from
2012 ACS 5-year estimates. Fraction with College Degree (or higher) is the fraction of adults 25 and older with at
least a bachelor's degree. Controls for Urban Share are a set of dummy variables for Percent Urban for values in [.8,
.9), [.9, .95), [.95, .975), [.975, .99), [.99, .999), and [.999, 1]. Columns 4 - 6 represent the first stage we use in our
IV specification (Table VI and Table VII). Columns 4 and 5 are the first stages of the IV regressions in Table VI,
corresponding to the disaggregated and aggregated specifications respectively. Column 6 is the first stage of Table VII
row 1. The first stage allowing for the log elasticity-income relationship to vary by UPC is not shown here.

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                52
                                                               TABLE VI
                            DETERMINANTS OF STORE-LEVEL ELASTICITY IN FOOD STORES
                                                          Within-Chain, IV                                     Between-Chain, IV
Dependent Variable:                                          Log Price                                         Average Log Price
                                              (1)                (2)                   (3)                    (4)              (5)
         Elasticity                       0.0482***          0.0852***             0.0934***
Log
       1 + Elasticity                      (0.0137)           (0.0210)              (0.0220)
                  Elasticity                                                                             0.7609***            0.8339***
Average Log
                1 + Elasticity                                                                            (0.2158)             (0.2315)
First Stage Varies by UPC?                  Yes                  No                   N/A                    No                  N/A
Fixed Effects                           Chain x UPC          Chain, UPC              Chain                  UPC
Observation Level                        Store-UPC           Store-UPC               Store               Chain-UPC              Chain
Observations                             6,593,513            6,593,513              9,415                 54,364                64


      Notes. This table reports the results of instrumental variable regressions, in which the log elasticity term is instrumented with store-
level income as in Table V columns 4 and 5 for disaggregated and aggregated specifications, respectively. The standard errors are block
bootstrapped by parent_code . Columns 1 and 2 are done at the disaggregated store-UPC level. In column 1, we allow the log elasticity-
income relationship to vary by UPC. In columns 2 - 5 we pool this relationship. Column 4 is done at the chain-UPC level. Elasticities are
winsorized at -1.2 to -7. Column 5 reports the mean average log elasticity term (not log of average elasticity).
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                     53
                                                         TABLE VII
                          LOG PRICES AND STORE-LEVEL LOG ELASTICITY, ROBUSTNESS

                                                     Within-Chain, IV           Between-Chain, IV                 First Stage

                                                                                                            Log       Elasticity
Dependent Variable:                                      Log Price              Average Log Price                   1 + Elasticity
                                                             (1)                       (2)                            (3)
Benchmark Coefficient                                    0.0934***                 0.8339***                      0.0503***
                                                          (0.0220)                  (0.2315)                       (0.0051)
1. Benchmark Products, IV with all variables             0.0986***                   0.8274***                    0.0501***
                                                          (0.0186)                    (0.2121)                     (0.0084)
2. Homescan Income as Instrument                         0.1112***                    1.8686**                    0.0232***
                                                          (0.0313)                    (0.7408)                     (0.0040)
3. Quarterly Elasticity                                  0.0626***                   0.5579***                    0.0749***
                                                          (0.0148)                    (0.1405)                     (0.0059)
4. Module Index Price and Elasticity                     0.0716***                                                0.0678***
                                                          (0.0200)                                                 (0.0061)
5. Generics                                              0.0686***                                                0.0407***
                                                          (0.0230)                                                 (0.0039)
6. Top-Decile Products by Revenue                        0.0947***                   0.6195***                    0.0466***
                                                          (0.0180)                    (0.2318)                     (0.0036)
7. Bottom-Decile Products by Revenue                     0.0868***                   0.9799***                    0.0558***
                                                          (0.0235)                    (0.2469)                     (0.0070)
8. All Products, Weighted by Revenue                     0.0829***                   0.6526***                    0.0511***
                                                          (0.0157)                    (0.2105)                     (0.0042)
9. Elasticities Winsorized at -1.5                       0.1338***                   1.1942***                    0.0351***
                                                          (0.0320)                    (0.3160)                     (0.0033)
10. Drug Stores                                          0.2286***                                                0.0330***
                                                          (0.0394)                                                 (0.0050)
11. Mass Merchandise Stores                              0.2013***                                                0.0220***
                                                          (0.0504)                                                 (0.0038)


      Notes. Each row and column represents a different specification. This table reports the results for various instrumental
variable regressions, in which the log elasticity term is instrumented with store-level income. The standard errors are block
bootstrapped by parent_code in rows 1 through 9. Standard errors are block bootstrapped by parent_code-state in rows 10 and 11.
The benchmark coefficients are the corresponding coefficients from Table VI columns 3 and 5. Row 1 uses a richer set of
regressors for the first stage and the benchmark weekly price; see Table V column 6. In row 2, we instrument using Homescan per
capita income. Row 3 replaces our benchmark elasticities with quarterly elasticities. In row 4, we replace both price and elasticity
with module index prices and elasticities. In row 5, we reestimate elasticities for our within-chain generic products and replace
both price and elasticity with equivalent generic prices and elasticities using a total of 12,423 generic product. Row 6 keeps the
top decile of products by average yearly revenue, taking into account the number of years a product is in the sample. Row 7 keeps
the bottom decile of products by average yearly revenue, also taking into account the number of years a product is in the sample.
Row 8 keeps all benchmark products but weights by store-UPC revenue. Row 9 winsorizes elasticities above at -1.5 rather than -
1.2, still winsorizing below at -7. Rows 10 and 11 show the within results for Drug and Mass Merchandise stores. Between chain
comparisons are not possible. In column 3, we show the corresponding first stage of the IV regression.

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                54
                                   TABLE VIII
               AVERAGE YEARLY PRICE IN FOOD STORES

                                       Within-Chain, IV         Between-Chain, IV
                                                                Average Yearly Log
Dependent Variable:                     Yearly Log Price               Price
                                               (1)                      (2)
Benchmark Coefficient                      0.0934***                0.8339***
                                            (0.0220)                 (0.2315)

Log     Elasticity                         0.1786***
      1 + Elasticity                        (0.0180)
Average Log      Elasticity                                          0.7657***
               1 + Elasticity                                         (0.2285)
Fixed Effect for Chain                         Yes
Observation Level                             Store                     Chain
Observations                                  9,415                      64


      Notes. The price variable is the ratio of yearly revenue to yearly units sold
instead of taking the ratio at the weekly level. Standard errors are block bootstrapped
at the parent_code level. The benchmark coefficients are the corresponding
coefficients from Table VI columns 3 and 5. The sample is restricted to food stores.
The first stage uses within-chain variation in income and log elasticity as in Table V
column 5.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                         55
                                                             TABLE IX
                                     ESTIMATED LOSS OF PROFITS IN FOOD STORES

                                                                    10th          25th         Median           75th           90th
                                           Panel A: Store-Level (N=9,415)
Comparing Flexible Pricing to Uniform Pricing
   Yearly Dollars                                       $112.0K     $158.0K                    $239.0K        $374.1K        $602.3K
   Percent of Revenue                                    1.11%       1.39%                      1.79%          2.45%          3.71%
Comparing Flexible Pricing to IV Price-Elasticity
   Yearly Dollars                                        $92.2K     $129.4K                    $196.1K        $307.5K        $494.1K
   Percent of Revenue                                    0.90%       1.14%                      1.47%          2.01%          3.04%
Comparing Flexible Pricing to State-Zone Optimal Pricing
   Yearly Dollars                                        $97.9K     $138.6K                    $212.0K        $329.5K        $530.2K
   Percent of Revenue                                    0.98%       1.22%                      1.56%          2.14%          3.27%
                                             Panel B. Chain-Level (N=64)
Comparing Flexible Pricing to Uniform Pricing
   Yearly Dollars                                        $2.12M      $7.07M                    $19.57M        $50.81M       $111.45M
   Percent of Revenue                                     1.18%       1.43%                     1.93%          2.26%          2.82%
Comparing Flexible Pricing to IV Price-Elasticity
   Yearly Dollars                                        $1.73M      $5.80M                    $16.09M        $42.19M       $91.57M
   Percent of Revenue                                     0.97%       1.17%                     1.59%          1.84%         2.33%
Comparing Flexible Pricing to State-Zone Optimal Pricing
   Yearly Dollars                                        $1.78M      $6.41M                    $18.53M        $48.88M       $97.02M
   Percent of Revenue                                     0.89%       1.35%                     1.61%          1.95%         2.66%


      Notes. This table reports the difference between the profits computed under optimal pricing and the profits under alternative
scenarios, divided by the store-level revenue. Optimal pricing is assuming the monopolistic competition model and thus deriving
optimal prices using log(P ) = λ + log(c ), where λ is log elasticity. Elasticities are winsorized at -1.2 and -7. Uniform pricing
assumes that each chain sets the optimal uniform price across its stores. Pricing according to the IV price-elasticity slope assumes that
chains set prices according to β. the IV estimate in Table VI column 3. State-Zone Optimal Pricing assumes that the chain charges a
uniform price within each state, with the price set optimally in the chain-state. In Panel A each observation is a store. In Panel B we
aggregate to the chain level. The percentiles do not indicate the same store. For example, the median store in terms of dollars lost is
not the median store in terms of losses as a percent of revenue.




                                                                  56
                                             TABLE X
                     ESTIMATED LOSS OF PROFITS IN FOOD STORES

                                                      Price-Elasticity Relationship (IV)
                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)              (4)
Log (No. of Stores)                          0.0178***       0.0083
                                              (0.0053)      (0.0089)
Log (No. of States)                            -0.0047       0.0054
                                              (0.0124)      (0.0127)
Log (Average Yearly Store Sales)               -0.0151       -0.0189
                                              (0.0169)      (0.0130)
Standard Deviation of Store-level                           0.0685**
Per-capita Income, $10,000s                                 (0.0278)
Log Dollar Profit Loss from                                               0.0153**
Uniform Pricing                                                           (0.0059)
Percent Profit Loss from                                                   -0.0130
Uniform Pricing                                                           (0.0145)
Share of Stores with Competitor                                                               0.0071
Stores within 10 km                                                                         (0.0325)
Share of Store with Same-Chain                                                               -0.0057
Stores within 10 km                                                                         (0.0635)
Analytic Weights                                 Yes            Yes            Yes              Yes
Observation Level                               Chain          Chain          Chain           Chain
Observations                                     64             64             64               64
R-squared                                       0.186          0.314          0.156            0.001


Notes: The dependent variable is the chain-by-chain estimate of the IV specification, as in Table VI
column 3, computing the first stage using all chains. Standard errors are clustered by parent_code
Analytic weights equal to the inverse standard error squared of the reduced form chain-level regression
of price on income are used. The chain-level percent profit loss from uniform pricing is as in Table IX,
Panel B, row 1. The log dollar profit loss from uniform pricing is computed taking the store-level loss
from uniform pricing in dollar terms, and scaling it up by the share of revenue in that store due to the
selected UPCs; we then sum the dollar losses across stores in a chain, and take the log.

*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  57
                                                             TABLE XI
            RESPONSE TO LOCAL SHOCKS USING A REPRESENTATIVE PRODUCT IN FOOD STORES

Outcome:                                                     Estimated Log Point Change in Prices: $2,000 Decrease in Income
Assumed Price Setting:                                        Flexible Pricing           Uniform Pricing             Yearly Pricing
                                                                      (1)                        (2)                        (3)
                                           Panel A: $2000 Negative Shock in All Stores
National Shock, Impact on All Stores                                 -1.01                      -1.00                      -1.00
State-Level Shock, Impact on Same-State Stores                       -1.01                      -0.32                      -0.45
County-Level Shock, Impact on Same-County Stores                     -1.01                      -0.04                      -0.21
                                           Panel B: $2000 Negative Shock in California
Impact on California Stores                                          -1.01                      -0.72                      -0.77
Impact on Nevada Stores                                              0.00                       -0.38                      -0.31
                                            Panel C: $2000 Negative Shock in Nevada
Impact on Nevada Stores                                              -1.01                      -0.16                      -0.31
Impact on California Stores                                           0.00                      -0.04                      -0.03


      Notes. Displayed are the estimated log point response to a permanent $2,000 decrease in income using a representative product
with predicted elasticities using the coefficients in Table V column 5. Additionally, we assume that the income shock translates into a
change of the log elasticity in terms of that same column. In Panel A, the averages are the mean response for stores in each locality,
weighting each locality equally. Uniform Pricing assumes that chains set one uniform price across all stores with a constant marginal
cost for all chains, and that all stores are the same size. Yearly pricing takes into account consumer substitution by adjusting using the
coefficient in Table VIII column 1. For more detail, see section 7.1 Inequality.




                                                                   58
