NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COCO ISSUANCE AND BANK FRAGILITY
Stefan Avdjiev
Bilyana Bogdanova
Patrick Bolton
Wei Jiang
Anastasia Kartasheva
Working Paper 23999
http://www.nber.org/papers/w23999

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

The study has benefited from discussions by Felipe Cortes, Mark Flannery, Florian Heider,
George Pennacchi, Klaus Schaeck, Theo Vermaelen, and comments from Ruth Doubleday,
Louise Eggett, Ingo Fender, Ulf Lewrick, Noel Reynolds, and Kostas Tsatsaronis, as well as
seminar participants at the American Economic Association, Bank for International Settlements,
Deutsche Bundesbank, the Committee on the Global Financial System workshop on contingent
capital instruments, Conference on Financial Regulation at the University of Chicago, De
Nederlandsche Bank, European Finance Association, European Winter Finance Conference,
Imperial College of London, NBER Risks of Financial Institutions, Research Task Force of the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, Western Finance Association, University of Geneva,
and University of St. Gallen. We thank Minchen Zheng (Columbia) for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the Bank for International Settlements or the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stefan Avdjiev, Bilyana Bogdanova, Patrick Bolton, Wei Jiang, and Anastasia
Kartasheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.

CoCo Issuance and Bank Fragility
Stefan Avdjiev, Bilyana Bogdanova, Patrick Bolton, Wei Jiang, and Anastasia Kartasheva
NBER Working Paper No. 23999
November 2017
JEL No. G01,G21,G28,G32
ABSTRACT
The promise of contingent convertible capital securities (CoCos) as a “bail-in” solution has been
the subject of considerable theoretical analysis and debate, but little is known about their effects
in practice. In this paper, we undertake the first comprehensive empirical analysis of bank CoCo
issues, a market segment that comprises over 730 instruments totaling $521 billion. Four main
findings emerge: 1) The propensity to issue a CoCo is higher for larger and better-capitalized
banks; 2) CoCo issues result in statistically significant declines in issuers’ CDS spreads,
indicating that they generate risk-reduction benefits and lower costs of debt. This is especially
true for CoCos that: i) convert into equity, ii) have mechanical triggers, iii) are classified as
Additional Tier 1 instruments; 3) CoCos with only discretionary triggers do not have a significant
impact on CDS spreads; 4) CoCo issues have no statistically significant impact on stock prices,
except for principal write-down CoCos with a high trigger level, which have a positive effect.

Stefan Avdjiev
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
Basel 4002, Switzerland
stefan.avdjiev@bis.org
Bilyana Bogdanova
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
4002 Basel
Switzerland
bilyana.bogdanova@bis.org
Patrick Bolton
Columbia Business School
804 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
pb2208@columbia.edu

Wei Jiang
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway, Uris Hall 803
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
wj2006@columbia.edu
Anastasia Kartasheva
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2
4002 Basel
Switzerland
Anastasia.Kartasheva@bis.org

1

Introduction

If there is one term that epitomizes the infamy of the Global Financial Crisis of 2007-09 it
is “too big to fail”. Even when they sought to impose …nancial discipline on banks that had
assumed excessive levels of leverage, …nancial regulators were more often than not forced to
accept bailouts as the only possible stabilizing intervention because the alternative of putting
the failed banks through some form of resolution and imposing losses on depositors and other
bank creditors was seen to be too dangerous in the middle of the crisis. It is not surprising,
therefore, that a major priority of regulators following the crisis, on top of signi…cantly
tightened bank capital and liquidity regulations, was to create new instruments to facilitate
the write-down of the debt of distressed institutions. In short, the priority became to make
sure that, in the event of another crisis, bail-ins would be a credible alternative to bailouts.
One way of bringing about a swift and seamless bail-in is through the conversion of
contingent convertible capital securities (CoCos) previously issued by the bank. The automatic loss absorption by CoCos when a pre-speci…ed trigger has been breached was the main
appeal of these securities according to the early proponents, in particular, Flannery (2005,
2016); Raviv (2004); Du¢ e (2009); McDonald (2013); Co¤ee (2011); Pennacchi, Vermaelen
and Wol¤ (2014); and the Squam Lake Working Group (2010). These advocates of CoCos
disagreed on the design of CoCos, in particular on whether the trigger should be a stock
price ‡oor or a minimum equity-capital ratio, and their proposals were criticized by other
commentators, most notably Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig and P‡eiderer (2013) and Sundaresan and Wang (2015), who argued that CoCos were excessively complex and their conversion
2

could have destabilizing e¤ects.
In the immediate aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis, these debates among academics were mirrored by di¤erences in opinions and preferences among national bank regulators. Nevertheless, the introduction of the Basel III framework, which allows banks to
meet part of their regulatory capital requirements with CoCo instruments, created strong
incentives for banks to seriously explore the possibilities for issuing CoCos. Furthermore,
the inclusion of speci…c contingent capital elements in the Basel III framework brought some
homogeneity in CoCo design across jurisdictions. As the number of jurisdictions implementing Basel III grew, banks responded by raising a substantial amount of capital in the form
of CoCo issues. Between January 2009 and December 2015, banks around the world issued
a total of $521 billion in CoCos through 731 di¤erent issues.
The market for bank CoCos is now large enough to undertake a systematic empirical
analysis of bank CoCo issuance. We do this by assembling the …rst comprehensive data set
of all CoCo issues by banks between 2009 and 2015. Beyond providing an overview of the
main characteristics of CoCos and their issuers, our study seeks to address two fundamental
questions: What drives bank CoCo issuance decisions? And how do CoCo issues a¤ect
issuers’balance sheets?
To determine the factors driving CoCo issuance, we perform a duration analysis and
estimate which bank characteristics are associated with a higher propensity to issue a CoCo.
Our …rst main broad …nding is that larger banks and banks with relatively strong balance
sheets, were among the …rst wave of CoCo issuers. But banks with impaired balance sheets

3

that were in greater need of recapitalization were less likely to issue CoCos. Even though this
result is surprising at …rst sight, it is consistent with the predictions of our simple theoretical
model (presented in Appendix B). Issuance decisions are made with shareholder interests
in mind; and shareholders may pass on a CoCo issue if it does not enhance shareholder
value. As our theoretical model predicts, a CoCo issue by a bank with an impaired balance
sheet mostly bene…ts the bank’s senior unsecured debt holders (a version of the classic "debt
overhang" problem). Viewed in this light, our result is less surprising. Consistent with
this interpretation, we also …nd that statistical signi…cance is greater for CoCos that specify
a principal write-down when the trigger is breached rather than a conversion of debt into
equity. Principal write-down CoCos are, in e¤ect, junior to equity in distress states and,
therefore, particularly attractive to shareholders.
We also conduct an event study to evaluate the impact of CoCo issuance on the issuer’s
balance sheet. In particular, we estimate the announcement e¤ect of a CoCo issue on the
issuer’s CDS spreads and equity prices, breaking the e¤ect down by key issuer characteristics and CoCo contract features. Several striking results emerge from this analysis. First,
the overall impact of a CoCo issue on the issuer’s CDS spread is negative and strongly
statistically signi…cant, indicating that, according to market participants, a CoCo issue unambiguously strengthens the issuer’s balance sheet. When we break down the e¤ect by CoCo
loss absorption mechanism, we …nd that the impact on CDS spreads of CoCos that convert
into equity is much stronger than the respective impact of principal write-down CoCos. This
latter result is again consistent with the predictions of our simple model. As we show, a

4

CoCo that converts into equity disciplines risk-taking by shareholders because conversion
may dilute existing equity holders’claims. In contrast, risk-taking is rewarded at the conversion margin when CoCos absorb losses via a principal write-down. This explains why the
net reduction in credit risk following the issue of a principal write-down CoCos is lower.
When we further separate the announcement e¤ects by the type of trigger mechanism,
we strikingly …nd that the presence of a mechanical trigger makes all the di¤erence. More
concretely, only CoCos that have a mechanical trigger (in addition to a discretionary trigger)
have a signi…cant negative impact on the issuer’s CDS spread. In other words, the issuance
of a CoCo with only a discretionary trigger is seen to have no signi…cant e¤ect on the bank’s
credit risk by the market. The most likely explanation for this market reaction is that
these CoCos are pure "gone concern" instruments, with a lot of uncertainty surrounding the
regulator’s conversion decision. CoCos that also have a mechanical trigger combine both
“gone concern”and “going concern”features. The market reaction to the announcement of
CoCo issues with a mechanical trigger suggests that the triggering event for these CoCos is
more predictable, at least for the "going concern" part.
We also …nd that the level of the mechanical trigger matters. The impact of high-trigger
CoCos on CDS spreads is stronger than that for low-trigger CoCos. These results shed light
on an important controversy around banks’true motivation for issuing CoCos. Ever since
the …rst CoCo issue by Lloyd’s in November 2009, which speci…ed a low trigger, the concern
was raised that the contingent component of these instruments was purely theoretical and
that regulatory intervention to save the issuer would take place long before the low trigger

5

level would be breached (see Alessandri and Haldane, 2009 and Glasserman and Perotti,
2017). Our results only partially con…rm these concerns and indicate that, at least for hightrigger CoCos, market expectations do factor in a signi…cant probability of conversion. It is
also worth noting that these results also partially dispel another myth about CoCos: that
investors were only focused on the high yields and entirely ignored the risk of conversion.
All in all, we …nd that CoCo issuance has generally contributed to reducing bank fragility.
But not all instruments are equal in this regard. The CoCos that have the strongest strengthening e¤ect on bank balance sheets are the ones that absorb losses by converting to equity
as well as those that have a mechanical trigger and an Additional Tier 1 (AT1) designation.1
We also look at the announcement e¤ects on bank equity prices and …nd that for the
full sample there is no signi…cant impact of CoCo issuance on the issuer’s stock price. This
is again consistent with the predictions of our theoretical model and re‡ects the fact that
while a CoCo issue may strengthen a bank’s balance sheet it may do so at the behest of
shareholders. Interestingly, however, the one type of CoCo whose main design features are
most bene…cial to shareholders – a principal write-down CoCo with a high trigger – does
have a positive and statistically signi…cant impact on the issuer’s equity price.
Our paper contributes to the wider literature of empirical studies of …nancial contracts
(see Roberts and Su…, 2009, for a survey). Because our …nancial contracts are publicly traded
we are able to shed light on market reactions to particular designs, which is typically not
possible for venture capital contracts and syndicated bank loans.
1

The implicit assumption behind the above conclusions (and throughout our analysis) is that CoCo
issuance is not substituting for CET1 issuance, i.e. that CoCos are issued on top of (rather than instead of)
CET1.

6

None of the CoCos in our sample have converted or been in danger of converting during
our sample period. We therefore cannot investigate the e¤ects of conversion.2 However,
the study by Vallee (2015) of hybrid bonds issued by European banks between 1998 and
2012, which have similar features to CoCos structured as reverse convertible bonds, shows
how conversion can provide a capital cushion to issuing banks in a crisis. Vallee studies the
e¤ects of the ex-post conversion of these hybrid bonds during the …nancial crisis of 2007-09
and …nds that conversion had the intended e¤ects predicted by CoCo theories.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides the institutional
background, describes the current state of CoCo issuance, and presents an overview of the
sample. Section 3 describes the post-crisis policy debates around bank regulatory reform.
It also summarizes the predictions derived from the theoretical framework developed in
Appendix B. Section 4 presents the empirical analyses. Section 4.1 contains several duration
analyses on the propensity of a bank to issue a CoCo. Section 4.2 reports the estimates of
the impact of CoCo issuance on the CDS spread and the stock price of the issuing bank, as
well as the di¤erential e¤ects of the main CoCo contract features. Section 5 discusses open
questions about the future design of CoCos and o¤ers concluding comments.
2

Outside our sample period, there has been one episode in which coupon suspension was feared for
Deutsche Bank’s CoCos in February 2016, and another episode in which conversion of Banco Popular’s
CoCos was triggered by the regulator in June 2017.

7

2

Institutional Background and Sample Overview

2.1

The CoCo market

CoCos have two de…ning features –a trigger modifying the debt repayment terms and a lossabsorption mechanism. We describe the di¤erent forms these features can take in Figure 1.
A CoCo can have one or more triggers. In case of multiple triggers, the loss absorption
mechanism is activated when any trigger is breached. All CoCos are required to have a
discretionary trigger under Basel III. This trigger type allows regulators to activate the loss
absorption mechanism if they decide that the issuer has reached the point of non-viability.
In addition, some CoCos also have a mechanical trigger, which is de…ned relative to the
capital of the CoCo-issuing bank. In theory, the capital measure could be based on book
values or market values. In practice, however, the mechanical triggers of all the CoCos that
have been issued so far are book-value based. In most cases, those are de…ned in terms of
the ratio of the issuing bank’s Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital to its risk-weighted
assets (RWA).

[Insert Figure 1 here.]

The loss-absorbing mechanism is the second key characteristic of a CoCo. Recapitalization through conversion can occur in two ways. A mandatory conversion-into-equity (MC)
CoCo increases CET1 capital by converting the CoCo debt into equity at a pre-de…ned conversion rate. The conversion rate can be based on the market price of the stock at the time
the trigger is breached, a pre-speci…ed price (e.g. the stock price at issuance), or a combina8

tion of the two prices. Principal write-down (PWD) CoCos repair the bank’s balance sheet
by writing down the CoCo’s principal amount, either permanently or temporarily.3
Basel III framework contains two key contingent capital elements (Figure 2).4 First,
all (AT1 and T2) CoCos must include a discretionary trigger, also known as a point of
non-viability (PONV) trigger. Second, all AT1 CoCos classi…ed as liabilities must have a
mechanical trigger, with a minimum trigger level of 5125% (in terms of CET1/RWA).5
However, the Basel III framework does not specify a particular loss absorption mechanism,
implicitly treating PWD CoCos and MC CoCos in a symmetric fashion.6

[Insert Figure 2 here.]

More recently, two other regulatory changes have further expanded the potential market
footprint of bank CoCos. The …rst change is the upcoming Total Loss Absorption Capacity
(TLAC) resolution requirements rules for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs).
The new TLAC requirements can be (at least partially) satis…ed through the issuance of
CoCos as well as through the issuance of other (non-CoCo) "bail-inable" debt.7 The second
change was introduced by the European Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD),
which includes the Minimum Requirement for Own Funds and Eligible Liabilities (MREL)
3

Avdjiev, Kartasheva, and Bogdanova (2013) provide further details on CoCo contract features and bank
capital regulations related to CoCos.
4
As illustrated in Figure 2, the regulatory minimum capital requirements under the Basel III framework
are (RWA-based) ratios of 45% for CET1, 6% for Tier 1 capital (CET1 + AT1), and of 8% for total capital
(CET1 + AT1 + T2). All instruments other than those in CET1 are optional –i.e. banks have the option
to meet all their capital requirements using only CET1.
5
The latter requirement does not apply to AT1 CoCos classi…ed as equity (i.e. preferred shares.)
6
In some jurisdictions (e.g., Switzerland), national supervisors supplement the Basel III minimum capital
levels by requiring G-SIB banks to have additional capital layers, …lled with CoCos. See FINMA (2015).
7
The TLAC standard de…nes a minimum requirement for the instruments and liabilities that should be
"bailin-able" (i.e. readily available for bail-in within resolution) at G-SIBs. See FSB (2015).

9

stipulating that a su¢ cient fraction of bank debt liabilities be bail-inable.8
Nearly as important as bank regulations are institutional investors’constraints and issuer
incentives to create notable clientele e¤ects on CoCo design. In particular, the persistently
low interest rates in the post-…nancial crisis environment incentivized …xed income investors
to invest in high-yield instruments. However, …xed income investors are often restricted by
mandate from investing in instruments that have a non-negligible probability of converting to
equity or face higher compliance costs for these instruments. In contrast, PWD instruments
typically do not fall under such restrictions.

2.2

Sample overview

Our data set is compiled using information from Bloomberg and Dealogic. We have manually augmented the data set with additional information from supplementary sources. The
sample that we use in our benchmark analysis consists exclusively of CoCos issued by banks
and excludes those issued by insurance companies and other non-bank …nancial institutions.
Furthermore, we focus on CoCos that have at least one (mechanical or discretionary) contractual trigger.9
The data comprises the main elements of CoCo term sheets, their regulatory classi…cation, and key issuer characteristics. We collect information in the most important CoCo
contractual terms - the loss absorption mechanism (principal write-down or mandatory conversion to equity), the trigger type (mechanical or discretionary), and the trigger level (for
8

See EBA (2016).
In this paper, we focus on loss absorption mechanism triggers and we do not analyze coupon cancellation
triggers. Also we do not include CoCos that have only a statutory trigger.
9

10

CoCos that have a mechanical trigger). In addition, we also collect the following variables:
maturity; issued amount; currency of denomination; regulatory capital classi…cation (AT1
or T2); issue date; price and yield at issuance; coupon rate; and payment rank classi…cation
(subordinated debt, preferred equity, etc.).
As for issuer characteristics, we collect daily data on issuer equity prices and CDS spreads
(for senior unsecured debt). We construct benchmark indices in which banks are grouped
based on their country/region of operations –“Australia and New Zealand,”“Canada”, “Europe,” and “Japan.” For equity prices, we use market capitalization-weighted Datastream
bank country/regional equity indices. For CDS spreads, we calculate equally-weighted averages of the CDS spreads of banks operating in the respective county/regions. In order to
obtain a more representative set of banks included in each country/regional CDS index, we
augment the constituents of the MARKIT iTraxx and CDX indices with additional banks,
which (i) operate in the respective CoCo-issuing jurisdictions and (ii) have liquid CDS for
senior unsecured debt.10
For the empirical exercise on the determinants of CoCo issuance, we take the universe
of potential CoCo issuers to be the top 500 banks (by total assets in 2009) in CoCo-issuing
advanced economies. This sample encompasses both those banks who eventually do issue one
or more CoCo securities and those banks for which CoCo is a potential option, but choose
not to issue. We obtain annual data of the major balance-sheet variables for the actual and
10

All the additional banks that we include in our augmented country/regional CDS indices have (senior
unsecured debt) CDS spreads reported by Markit on at least 75% of the business days in our sample. In our
benchmark empirical exercises, we use the values of each country/regional CDS index on a given date only
if a CDS spread is reported for at least 75% of the banks included in the respective country/region on that
date.

11

potential CoCo issuers from Bankscope.
An overview of the CoCo market through the end of 2015 is presented in Table 1. Between
2009 and 2015, there have been 731 CoCo issuances for a combined issuing volume of $521
billion. The size of the average CoCo issue is $713 million. Nevertheless, that …gure conceals
a wide variation in individual CoCo issue sizes, which range from $2 million to $7 billion.

[Insert Table 1 here.]

The last column of Table 1 provides a break-down of CoCo issuance by region. European
issuers account for 39% of the CoCo market. Another 14% of CoCo issuance has come from
banks from non-European advanced economies. Following a period of rapid growth in CoCo
issuance in the last years, emerging market economies account for over 46% of the CoCo
market by the end of 2015.
The left-hand panel of Figure 3 displays the geographical distribution of CoCo issuance
by individual countries. In the early years of our sample, CoCo issuance was heavily concentrated in advanced European countries; issuers headquartered in the UK and Switzerland
were particularly active. In the later years of our sample, CoCo issuance in non-European
advanced economies (Australia, Japan, and Canada) gradually picked up in tandem with
the implementation of Basel III. Issuance by banks in emerging market economies (EMEs)
remained relatively low until the last couple of years in our sample, when Chinese banks became particularly active issuers of CoCos. One notable absence from the list of CoCo-issuing
jurisdictions is the United States, where banks have issued AT1 and T2 instruments that

12

have only statutory (as opposed to contractual) triggers

11

.

[Insert Figure 3 here.]

Banks tend to issue CoCos either in their respective home currency or in US dollars
(Figure 3, right-hand panel). Virtually all CoCos denominated in British pounds, Australian
dollars, Japanese yen, Canadian dollars, and Chinese yuan were issued by banks from the
respective currency-issuing jurisdictions. Also, roughly two thirds of the $84 billion in eurodenominated CoCos were issued by banks from the Euro area. The US dollars denominated
issuance totaled $148 billion and accounted for 28% of global issuance.
The majority of the CoCos in our sample have a mechanical trigger in addition to the
discretionary trigger (present in all CoCos in our sample). The total volume of CoCos with
a mechanical trigger is $292 billion (or 56% of the global aggregate), and the amount of
CoCos with only a discretionary trigger is $229 billion (or 44% of the global aggregate). The
majority of CoCos issued by banks in advanced economies tend to have mechanical triggers.
The majority ($205 billion) of the CoCos with a mechanical trigger have trigger levels
that do not exceed 5125%, which is the minimum trigger level (in terms of CET1/RWA)
required for a CoCo classi…ed as a liability to qualify as AT1 capital under Basel III. About
$87 billion worth of CoCos have a mechanical trigger level that is higher than 5.125%.12
Slightly more than half (55%) of all CoCos are classi…ed as AT1 capital. The rest are
11

We have not included the AT1 preferred shares and the T2 subordinated debt instruments issued by US
banks since all of them have only statutory triggers. As discussed above, we focus on contingent convertible
capital instruments with at least one contractual trigger.
12
Another potentially relevant critical capitalization level is the Capital Conservation Bu¤er Requirement
(CBR). When an issuer’s capital bu¤er falls below the CBR, it is constrained in its ability to continue its
existing dividend and coupon payouts.

13

classi…ed as T2 capital. AT1 CoCo issuance has dominated in most advanced economies,
where nearly three quarters of the CoCos are classi…ed as AT1 capital. The only exceptions
are Switzerland and Canada (where issuance has been roughly evenly split between AT1 and
T2 CoCos) and Japan (where T2 CoCos have accounted for two thirds of all issuance). In
contrast, EME banks have issued mostly T2 CoCos, which represent 63% of their total CoCo
issuance so far.
Figure 4 tracks the evolution of the CoCo market between 2009 and 2015. It shows that
the volume of CoCo issuance has grown rapidly since 2009. The left-hand panel of Figure
4 reveals that, in the early years, issuance of AT1 instruments was slightly more prevalent
than that of T2 instruments. As issuance by EME banks picked up in 2014 and 2015, so too
did the share of T2 CoCos.

[Insert Figure 4 here.]

The right-hand panel of Figure 4 breaks down the evolution of CoCo issuance by the lossabsorption mechanism. Even though MC CoCos dominated in the early years, the issuance
of PWD instruments picked up over time. Growing demand by …xed income investors for
CoCos and shareholder incentives to issue PWD CoCos could be important factors that
contributed to this trend.

14

3

Policy debates and hypotheses

For most advocates, the main case for CoCos is the quick and simple bail-in mechanism
they provide. Early critics of CoCos have argued, however, that an even better and simpler
bail-inable instrument is equity (Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig, and P‡eiderer, 2013). Another
early concern was that the design of some types of CoCos could result in destabilizing bail-ins
(Sundaresan and Wang, 2015). These observations, and others we discuss below, have been
at the heart of policy debates around CoCos. Our analysis focuses on how the design of
CoCos matters for the overall costs and bene…ts from issuing such instruments.

3.1

Market-based or accounting-based triggers?

While CoCo issuance reduces the issuing bank’s probability of failure, it also changes the
distribution of payo¤s over di¤erent claims in states of distress. As a result, the CoCo trigger
may be subject to gaming by bank managers, regulators, and investors. Di¤erent designs
give rise to strategic gaming problems. One prominent issue that has been widely discussed
in the literature is the pros and cons of book-value versus market-value triggers in terms of
the promptness and accuracy of conversion.
The responsiveness of book-value triggers depends on the frequency with which book
values are reassessed and disclosed. It also depends on the accuracy and robustness of the
internal risk models that are used to measure the risk exposure of bank balance sheets. These
factors reduce the ability for CoCos with accounting-based triggers to respond in a timely
way to the onset of a sudden crisis. In contrast, market-value triggers, as Flannery (2005,
15

2009) and Calomiris and Herring (2013) have argued, are that they immediately respond
to news about realized or prospective bank losses. In addition, they are somewhat more
immune to accounting obfuscation.13
However, a potential shortcoming of market-based triggers is that they are exposed to
price volatility generated by noise trading.

Moreover, they may invite stock price ma-

nipulation or speculative attacks. For example, market-based triggers may be vulnerable to
strategic short-selling for the purposes of forcing the conversion of a CoCo and thereby transferring value from equity holders to CoCo investors, as Hillion and Vermaelen (2004) have
argued. A broader concern with using market prices for regulatory purposes is that this can
distort the information content of prices (see Faure-Grimaud 2002, and Bond, Goldstein and
Prescott 2010). For CoCos speci…cally, when a market price triggers conversion, the share
price re‡ects both the value of the issuer’s total assets and the redistribution of value among
initial shareholders and CoCo investors, as discussed in Glassermann and Nouri (2016) and
Berg and Kaserer (2015).
There are several proposals that address these latter concerns, including: i) inducing
gradual conversion into shares (Bulow and Klemperer, 2014); ii) …xing the number of new
shares at conversion (Flannery, 2009); iii) letting the trigger be based on a historical moving
average of stock prices (Du¢ e, 2009, and Calomiris and Herring, 2013); and, iv) …xing the
conversion price below the share value at conversion, with an option for initial shareholders
to purchase the new shares at the lower price (Pennacchi, Vermaelen, and Wol¤, 2013).
13

As we have already noted, all AT1 and T2 CoCos must include a discretionary trigger. Such triggers potentially have regulatory forbearance problems, and generate excessive sensitivity of the market to regulatory
announcements.

16

Another important feature of CoCos is their maturity. As Pennacchi and Tchistyi (2016a)
have argued, CoCos with in…nite maturity are much more robust to price manipulation.
They show that when CoCos are perpetuities, the multiple equilibrium problem identi…ed
by Sundaresan and Wang (2015) disappears and equilibrium is unique regardless of other
CoCo features.

3.2

Loss absorption and risk taking incentives

The e¤ect of CoCo issuance on risk-taking incentives of the issuing bank is an important
aspect of CoCo design. In theory, PWD CoCos could encourage excess risk-taking around
the conversion trigger, whereas MC CoCos that dilute existing shareholders upon conversion
could encourage accounting manipulation to delay conversion. Moreover, CoCos with conversion terms that transfer value to equity holders upon conversion are likely to encourage
additional risk-taking. Indeed, Berg and Kaserer (2015) analyze the conversion price of CoCos issued by Lloyds in an option-pricing context and show that those bonds create perverse
risk incentives for banks’equity holders.
Excess risk-taking incentives associated with PWD CoCos can be mitigated by exposing
bank executive compensation to CoCo price risk (Bolton, Mehran, and Shapiro, 2015 and
Hilscher and Raviv, 2014). Approaches to address the concerns regarding MC CoCos have
been more diverse. Flannery (2005) and Calomiris and Herring (2013) urge that the design
of CoCos should take the form of MC CoCos that are dilutive to preexisting equityholders
and that convert well before the bank faces insolvency. Similarly, Martynova and Perotti

17

(2016) show that CoCos lower bank risk-taking in equilibrium only when they take the
form of high-trigger MC CoCos. But the problem with these CoCo designs is that bank
equityholders have little incentives to issue such CoCos, because doing so mostly bene…ts
outstanding unsecured creditors with higher seniority in the event of a bankruptcy state.
In other words, bank equityholders may face a “debt overhang” problem with respect to
high-trigger, dilutive, MC-CoCos. However, Chen, Glasserman, Nouri, and Pelger (2013)
and Albul, Ja¤ee, and Tchistyi (2012) have shown that equityholders can have a positive
incentive to issue CoCos to the extent that they also bene…t when the issuer has a lower
default risk (for example, via lower costs of debt rollovers).
In summary, the literature highlights that CoCo contract features a¤ect bank risk-taking
incentives. Though CoCo contract-design could be in‡uenced by regulators, the reality is
that issuing banks have substantial leeway in selecting the contract features they want.
Hence it is important to understand the e¤ects of CoCo designs on bank incentives in order
to induce CoCo contracts that are desirable from the perspective of …nancial stability.

3.3

CoCos as a macroprudential tool

Several proposals of CoCo design have focused on the question of how CoCos should be
modi…ed to deal with a systemic risk event. The essence of these proposals is that the
CoCo trigger should be contingent on some measure of systemic risk. However, this contract
design could paradoxically lead to higher systemic risk because it would increase moral
hazard frictions. That said, CoCos whose conversion is triggered by a systemic event do

18

o¤er the desirable property that they deliver a bail-in only when it is needed, in a crisis
when restructuring a bank’s liabilities and raising new capital is di¢ cult.
One early such proposal came from Kashyap, Rajan, and Stein (2008), who suggest
that banks purchase capital insurance, with a trigger that is based on a systemic event.
Similarly, the Squam Lake Working Group (2009) proposes that CoCos convert to equity
under two conditions: (i) a breach of a trigger based on an accounting capital ratio; and (ii)
a declaration by regulators that there is a systemic crisis. Caballero and Kurlat (2008) have
also proposed that the central bank could issue tradable insurance credits that entitle the
holder to attach a central bank guarantee to assets on its balance sheet during a systemic
crisis. Their proposal eliminates the need to make the trigger contingent on a speci…c event,
which they argue is a better way of dealing with a surprise shock.
CoCos can also be a macroprudential tool if they implement counter-cyclical equity
bu¤ers. One way of achieving this, suggested by Bolton and Samama (2012), is to do away
with automatic triggers altogether and design the CoCos as reverse convertible bonds granting the issuer the option to convert the bond into equity. Issuers would only convert when
the put option embedded in the CoCo is in the money, which is more likely to be the case in
recessions or in a …nancial crisis. When the issuer exercises the option, the bank is e¤ectively
recapitalized at more favorable terms than available in the market. A CoCo structured as a
reverse convertible bond would be equivalent to giving the issuer a commitment to augment
its equity capital at will, and at favorable terms, in recessions, thus implementing a form
of counter-cyclical equity bu¤er. Vallee (2013) shows that European banks that had issued

19

hybrid debt before the crisis took advantage of the convertibility option to convert the debt
issues in the middle of the crisis of 2007-09, which enabled them to partially recapitalize
their stressed balance sheets. Finally, Zeng (2013) also derives optimal countercyclical bank
capital requirements, and shows that they can be implemented using CoCo instruments.

3.4

Hypotheses

Our empirical analysis focuses on two key questions. What bank characteristics determine
whether a bank issues a CoCo of a given design? And, what is the impact of CoCo issuance
on the market price of other claims on the issuing bank? To guide our empirical analysis,
we develop a simple theoretical model (presented in Appendix B) that generates several
predictions on these two questions. The model considers a bank issuer with assets and
liabilities in place that currently satisfy regulatory capital requirements, but risks violating
these requirements in a future crisis state in which it incurs a loss. The decision the issuer
faces is whether to issue a CoCo now, so as to buttress its balance sheet su¢ ciently to be able
to withstand a loss without violating its capital requirements, or to risk having to go through
a costly recapitalization in the crisis state. As a trade-o¤ to …re-sale recapitalization costs
in a crisis, the issuer faces CoCo issuance costs. These issuance costs include underwriting
fees and dilution costs due to asymmetric information.
The model assumes that the decision whether to issue a CoCo or not rests with the
shareholders of the issuing bank, who evaluate the relative costs of CoCo issuance today
versus contingent recapitalization tomorrow, with the goal of shareholder value maximiza-

20

tion. The analysis implies that issuing a CoCo is more attractive to shareholders, the less
the CoCo issue is underpriced by the market, the lower the fraction of equity promised to
CoCo investors upon conversion, and the higher the asset sales discount in a crisis.
Accordingly, there are two important di¤erences between an MC CoCo and a PWD CoCo
for a bank issuer. First, the conversion of the PWD CoCo always increases the value of equity,
while the conversion of an MC CoCo could result in dilution of equity holders. Second, PWD
CoCos are less likely to be underpriced by the market, because the loss upon conversion is
contractually speci…ed and is therefore less likely to be overestimated by investors. Moreover,
PWD CoCos are 100% …xed income securities, which are more straightforward to value and
which have greater appeal to institutional investors specializing in …xed income securities.
The key predictions of the model about banks’ propensities to issue CoCos are as follows. There is an inverse U-shaped relation between the issuing bank’s incentives to issue
a CoCo and the bank’s equity capitalization. When the bank’s capitalization is very low,
its shareholders have little incentive to issue CoCos, especially MC CoCos, since most of
the bene…ts of the CoCo issue go to senior unsecured debt holders and not equity holders.
When the bank’s capitalization is very high, it has no need to raise costly equity, whether
in the form of CoCos or common stock. It is mostly for intermediate equity capitalization
levels that equity holders have an incentive to issue CoCos, for then equity holders, along
with senior unsecured debt holders, bene…t from the CoCo issue by avoiding a future costly
recapitalization in a crisis.
The model analysis also delivers the following predictions about CoCo-issuing banks’

21

incentives to engage in excess risk taking.14 A su¢ ciently dilutive MC-CoCo contract mitigates bank shareholders’ incentives to engage in excess risk-taking, as they would bear a
cost as a result of CoCo conversion following the realization of a loss. This e¤ect is stronger
for CoCos with higher conversion triggers. In contrast, PWD-CoCos encourage bank excess
risk-taking by decreasing the size of the losses for bank shareholders in the crisis state.
Finally, the model delivers key predictions about the e¤ect of CoCo issuance on the
value of the bank’s other claims. First, CoCo issuance, whatever its design, should increase
the recovery value of senior unsecured debt, and therefore lower the bank’s CDS spreads.
However, there is no such clear prediction for the issuing bank’s share price. The reason is
that the decision to issue a CoCo conveys a “mixed” signal about the health of the issuer’s
balance sheet. If the market prior is that the issuer has a very strong balance sheet, then
the issuance of a CoCo is bad news, but if the market prior is that the bank is undercapitalized, then the issuance of a CoCo is good news. The formal analysis considers a
situation where the issuer may be of three di¤erent types: (i) poorly capitalized banks that
become insolvent upon the realization of a loss, (ii) adequately capitalized banks that require
recapitalization upon the realization of a loss, and (iii) well capitalized banks that do not
require a recapitalization upon the realization of a loss. As we pointed out above, our model
predicts that poorly and well capitalized banks should have no incentives to issue a CoCo.
Thus, an announcement of a CoCo issue can trigger a positive or a negative stock price
reaction, depending on the prior beliefs about the distribution of bank types in the economy.
14

Our analysis on risk-taking incentives aligns with the literature reviewed in Section 3.2.

22

4

Empirical Analyses

We conduct two main sets of empirical exercises. First, we perform duration analyses in
order to investigate the main determinants of the propensity of a bank to issue a CoCo.
Second, we estimate of the impact of CoCo issuance on the CDS spread and the stock price
of the issuing bank, as well as the di¤erential e¤ects of the main CoCo contract features.
In both of our benchmark empirical analyses, we focus on CoCos classi…ed as liabilities
and issued by banks from advanced economies. We do not include CoCos issued by banks
from EMEs since the considerable degree of heterogeneity in the timing of the Basel III
implementation among EME jurisdictions could introduce a signi…cant amount of noise in the
empirical analyses. We do not include CoCos classi…ed as preferred shares in our benchmark
empirical analyses for a couple of reasons. First, as discussed above, CoCos that are classi…ed
as preferred shares are exempt from the requirement to have a mechanical trigger with a
minimum level of 5.125% in order to be eligible to qualify as AT1 capital. This makes
such CoCos considerably di¤erent from AT1 CoCos classi…ed as liabilities. Second, CoCos
classi…ed as preferred shares are concentrated in a very small number of jurisdictions and
represent a tiny fraction of our overall sample.

4.1

Determinants of CoCo Issuance

The …rst question we analyze concerns banks’propensity to issue CoCos. We focus on an
“unconditional”sample of banks that could be potential CoCo issuers. We restrict the sample
to the top 500 banks (ranked by total assets in 2009) in the set of CoCo-issuing advanced
23

economies, plus all the CoCo issuers from advanced economies that are not among the top
500. The resulting sample includes a total of 523 banks.
We take January 2009 as the beginning of our sample period and track CoCo issuance of
all the banks in our sample until December 2015.15 For our …rst question, we estimate the
expected duration from January 2009 until the time when a bank with given characteristics
issues a CoCo for the …rst time. We perform several duration analyses that are reported in
Table 2. The …rst set of results, reported in Panel A, is from a two-sided Tobit regression of
time to issue in the cross-section, the number of months from January 2009 to the time of
the …rst CoCo issue, as a function of key bank balance sheet characteristics. The duration,
by construction, is bounded from below at zero. For the non-issuers, the time of the …rst
CoCo issue is coded as being censored at the end of the sample period.

[Insert Table 2 here.]

The independent variables we focus on are: (i) total assets (in logs); (ii) Tier 1 (Tier-1
capital); (iii) G-SIB (a dummy variable for G-SIB status); (iv) gross loans; (v) deposits; (vi)
trading Securities; and (vii) long-term funding. All variables, except total assets, are scaled
by total assets and expressed as percentage points. All bank characteristics are measured at
the beginning of the sample period, in January 2009. We break down deposits into customer
deposits and bank deposits on the grounds that the risk pro…le of banks with mostly customer
deposits is likely to be signi…cantly di¤erent from that of banks with mostly bank deposits.
We also track interbank lending on both the liability and asset sides through the variables
15

CoCos were only beginning to be considered as a …nancing option by banks in 2009.

24

interbank borrowing and interbank assets.
Our main …ndings are as follows. First, the coe¢ cient on total assets is negative and
signi…cant for all speci…cations. Note that a positive coe¢ cient indicates a longer delay to
issuance, or a low propensity to issue, so that our …rst result implies that larger banks are
quicker to issue CoCos over our sample period. This con…rms the anecdotal evidence that
smaller banks take longer to test the market for new …nancing vehicles.16
Second, the coe¢ cient on Tier 1 is negative and statistically signi…cant in most speci…cations. Recall that our theoretical prediction is that inadequately capitalized banks are
less likely to issue CoCos. Based on the coe¢ cient in column (1), a one-percentage-point
increase in Tier 1 capital (including CET1 and AT1, with an average ratio of 70% in 2009)
is associated with a 38-month shortening in the time to issuance, out of a sample average
of 55.7 months (from January 2009) for all issuers. To take into account the potential nonmonotonicity in the relation, we add the square of the variable Tier 1 (or   1 ^ 2), in
speci…cation (3). Although the coe¢ cient on the squared term is negative, it is insigni…cant.
This is likely due to the fact that the increasing regulatory benchmark during our benchmark
window implied issuance needs for most banks. As a consequence, hardly any banks in our
sample were in an “extremely well funded” state, which prevented the non-monotonicity in
the theoretical model from taking e¤ect.
Third, on the asset side of bank balance sheets, the coe¢ cients on both gross loans
and trading securities are negative and signi…cant. A higher value of the trading securities
variable is typically interpreted as an indication of greater risk-taking by a bank (Roengpitya
16

See, e.g., "Coco bonds: Mass conversion," Economist, September 13th, 2014.

25

et al, 2014). Every percentage point increase in trading securities (with an average of 178%)
predicts a 09 months shortening of the expected duration to …rst issuance.
Fourth, on the liability side, deposits are commonly considered to be a reliable and sticky
source of bank …nancing, as opposed to wholesale funding which is more sensitive to changes
in interest rates and more prone to “runs” in response to negative information about bank
pro…tability. Indeed, Huang and Ratnovski (2011) suggest that wholesale funding was one
of the major sources of bank vulnerability during the …nancial crisis. Consistent with their
analysis, we …nd that banks that are predominantly …nanced by deposits are signi…cantly (at
the 5% level) less likely to issue CoCos. The coe¢ cient of 0810 for deposits suggests that
for every 10-percentage point increase in deposits relative to total assets, a bank waits on
average 81 more months before issuing its …rst CoCo. Further breaking down deposits into
customer deposits and bank deposits, we observe that both elements are highly signi…cant.
Finally, column (5) in Panel A shows that an increase in interbank assets has no signi…cant
e¤ect, but that banks more reliant on interbank borrowing are signi…cantly less likely to issue
CoCos. In the interbank market, a few banks tend to play the role of market makers by
channeling the excess deposits of, usually smaller, banks that do not have access to lending
opportunities to medium-sized and larger banks that have ample lending opportunities (Fecht
et al., 2011).
Panel B of Table 2 reports the estimates of a Cox (1972) proportional hazards analysis of
banks’propensity to issue CoCos in each month during our sample period of January 2009 to
December 2015. Here a higher coe¢ cient means a higher probability of issuing a …rst CoCo

26

in a given month, conditional on no-issuance until the previous month. Each coe¢ cient,
once exponentiated, could be interpreted as an “odds ratio”of issuance by a bank in a given
month.
The results of the Cox hazards analysis mostly reinforce those reported in Panel A: larger
banks, as well as banks with more loans and marketable securities are more likely to issue
a CoCo. The opposite is true for banks with more deposits and more interbank borrowing.
Note, however, that Tier 1 capital adequacy no longer matters at the monthly frequency,
except when both Tier 1 and (Tier 1)^2, are included as regressors, suggesting that the
negative relation between core capital and propensity of CoCo issuance is most prominent
among banks with low levels of Tier 1 capital.
Panels C and D of Table 2 break down CoCo issuance into PWD CoCo and MC CoCo
issues at the bank-month level using the Fine and Gray (1999) competing risk model. Under
this model, the …rst issue of a CoCo with a particular loss-absorbing mechanism (PWD or
MC) is considered the realization of one type of risk, with the other possible form of lossabsorbing mechanism interpreted as a “competing risk.” Accordingly, this model estimates
the propensity to issue a particular type of CoCo instrument, taking into account that
another type of CoCo is also available in the issuer’s choice set.
A …nding that emerges from this analysis is that total assets and Tier 1 tend to be
more consistently signi…cant for PWD CoCos. This …nding is consistent with our theoretical
prediction that CoCos are issued when they primarily bene…t shareholders, but not when
they primarily bene…t senior unsecured debt investors. The larger banks, and the better

27

capitalized banks, are likely to be more resilient in a crisis. For these banks there is therefore
a low credit risk associated with their senior unsecured debt, and hence a low debt overhang
problem. In other words, most of the potential bene…ts of a CoCo issue go to incumbent
shareholders, who tend to bene…t more from a PWD CoCo issue than from an MC CoCo
issue, since the latter has the potential to dilute the value of their shares upon conversion.

4.2

Impact of CoCo Issuance on Senior Unsecured Debt and Equity

4.2.1

Empirical set-up

The issuance of a CoCo can a¤ect the CDS spread of the issuing bank through two main
channels. First, it reduces the probability of default by providing an additional layer of lossabsorbing capacity.17 Second, issuing a CoCo a¤ects the risk-taking incentives of the bank’s
management and equity holders, which can alter the probability of default and thereby have
an impact on the riskiness of senior debt. While the second e¤ect could go in either direction
depending on the main CoCo design features, the …rst e¤ect should be weakly bene…cial for
banks’senior debt holders. Overall, CoCo issuance is expected to lower CDS spreads, as our
theoretical analysis suggests.
As we explain in Section 3.4, the e¤ect of issuing a CoCo on the issuer’s stock price is
more di¢ cult to determine, a priori. However, the relative e¤ect of di¤erent CoCo designs
on the issuer’s stock price is easier to pin down. Given that PWD CoCos do not have any
17

As discussed in the Introduction, our analysis is based on the implicit assumption that CoCos are issued
on top of (rather than instead of) CET1.

28

negative equity dilution e¤ects, we expect to see a more positive stock price response to the
issuance announcement of a PWD CoCo than to an MC CoCo.
We assess the announcement e¤ect of issuing CoCos on CDS spreads and equity prices
using two di¤erent empirical approaches. First, we follow the estimation methodology used
in James (1987) to determine the impact of CoCo issuance. In addition to assessing the
overall e¤ect, we also examine how it depends on the main CoCo contract features (loss
absorption mechanism, trigger type, trigger level, etc.) and on issuer characteristics (size,
capital cushion over trigger level, G-SIB status, geographical location, etc.).18 Second, we
estimate the impact of CoCo issuance on CDS spreads and equity prices in a standard
cross-sectional regression framework.
The event date for CoCo issuance is not always clearly de…ned. Unlike in other event
studies, where all relevant information is simultaneously announced to all market participants
at a clearly de…ned point in time, for CoCo issues there is no single point in time when an
upcoming issue is publicly announced. Instead, information about an upcoming issue spreads
among market participants in a di¤usion-like process. According to market participants, the
information about the intention of a bank to issue a CoCo is revealed to a small group of
potential buyers over the two weeks prior to the date of the issuance. As the book is built,
the information is likely to di¤use to a wider set of investors and to be incorporated into
equity prices and CDS spreads prior to the actual date of the issue. Still, the issue date
often reveals additional value-relevant information, such as the over-subscription status of
the issue.
18

Appendix A contains a detailed description of the estimation methodology.

29

Due to the above reasons, we adopt a conservative approach in selecting the event date
and the window size for our benchmark exercise. More concretely, when measuring the
impact of CoCo issuance on CDS spreads, we select an 11-day window (in units of trading
days), which starts ten business days before the issuance date (t-10) and ends at the issuance
date (t): [t-10, t]. When measuring the impact on equity prices, we select a shorter, six-day
window, which starts …ve business days before the issuance date (t-5) and ends at the issuance
date (t): [t-5, t]. We select a shorter event window for equity prices than for CDS spreads
since the former tend to be more informationally sensitive than the latter. As a result,
equity prices are more likely than CDS spreads to have their reaction to CoCo issuance be
“contaminated”by other information that is revealed during the event window.19

4.2.2

Impact on bank CDS spreads

We estimate the change in issuers’ CDS spreads (on senior unsecured debt) around CoCo
issuance dates. Table 3 reports the results of this estimation.
[Insert Table 3 here.]
Our main …nding is that the overall impact of CoCo issuance on the CDS spread of the
issuing bank is negative and strongly statistically signi…cant. The z-value (¬270) indicates
that the cumulative change vis-à-vis the benchmark during the 11-day event window is
negative and statistically signi…cant at the 1% level.20
19

We also conduct robustness checks, in which we explore a number of alternative window sizes and event
dates. While we do not report those results in the paper due to space constraints, all of them are available
upon request.
20
The second statistic we examine is the proportion of negative prediction errors. It has a value of 57%
and is statistically signi…cant at the 5% level by the Wilcoxon signed rank statistic.

30

The economic signi…cance is also meaningful. The average prediction error (APE) for the
full sample is approximately 3 bps. Once prediction errors are weighted by the (US dollar)
volume of each issue, the estimated impact increases to 5 bps. This implies that issuing a
CoCo reduces the annual interest costs associated with each $10 billion of (non-CoCo) bank
debt by $5 million. Furthermore, the estimated economic impact varies considerably across
CoCo sub-groups, ranging from 2 to 22 bps.
We next break down the full sample into subsamples sorted by the most important CoCo
contract terms and issuer characteristics. Our …rst sorting variable is the loss absorption
mechanism (mandatory conversion or principal write-down). In line with the predictions
of Section 3.4, the impact of mandatory conversion (MC) CoCos on CDS spreads tends
to be considerably stronger than the impact of principal write-down (PWD) CoCos. The
estimated impact of MC CoCo issuance is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 1%
level (with a z-value of ¬307). Roughly two-thirds (63%) of the prediction errors in the MC
CoCo subsample have a negative sign and the Wilcoxon signed rank statistic is statistically
signi…cant at the 1% level. The coe¢ cient for the impact of PWD CoCo issuance has the
right (negative) sign, but it is not statistically signi…cant (according to both, the z-statistic
and the Wilcoxon signed rank statistic).
In economic terms, the size of the estimated impact of MC CoCo issuance on CDS
spreads is also considerably larger than the impact of PWD CoCo issuance. The simple
average prediction error for MC CoCos (¬50 bps) is roughly three and a half times higher
than that for PWD CoCos (¬14 bps). When we weight prediction errors by the size of each

31

respective CoCo issue, the estimated impact of issuing MC CoCos is ¬84 bps, whereas the
impact of issuing PWD CoCos is ¬24 bps.
The signi…cant di¤erences between the estimated impacts of issuing MC CoCos and
PWD CoCos on the CDS spread of the issuing bank points in particular to the potential
importance of the loss absorption mechanism for banks’ risk-taking incentives. The MC
feature increases the cost of risk-taking for current shareholders and management due to
the threat of equity dilution. But, no such costs are imposed by PWD CoCos. On the
contrary, PWD CoCos actually increase the risk-taking incentives of shareholders, as PWD
CoCo holders could absorb losses ahead of shareholders. Thus, in the case of PWD CoCos,
the risk-taking incentive e¤ect works in the opposite direction of the loss absorption e¤ect
(which has a negative impact on CDS spreads for both loss absorption mechanisms). In
contrast, the two e¤ects reinforce each other in the case of MC CoCos.
A second major …nding is that the presence of a mechanical trigger in CoCo term sheets
plays a very important role. The estimated impact of issuing a CoCo with a mechanical
trigger is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 5% level (with a z-value of ¬222).
That subsample of CoCos has an average prediction error of ¬33 bps and weighted average
prediction error of ¬48 bps. In contrast, the estimated impact of issuing a CoCo that only
has a discretionary trigger, while also negative, is not statistically signi…cant.
There are a number of explanations for this key …nding. CoCos with only a discretionary
trigger are more akin to pure "gone concern" instruments and inherit all the uncertainties
associated with regulatory intervention in a bank resolution. At what point will the CoCo

32

be triggered? What happens in resolution? Will the CoCo be totally or partially wiped out?
Will it be the only debt instrument to be bailed in? All of these uncertainties compound to
make the valuation of the CoCo and assessing the impact of the CoCo issue on the value
of senior unsecured debt very di¢ cult. In contrast, CoCos that also have a mechanical
trigger combine features of both “gone concern” and “going concern” instruments. As a
consequence, such CoCos are likely to absorb losses earlier, which is desirable from the
perspective of senior unsecured bondholders.
The level of the mechanical trigger is also important for the CDS market reaction. The
estimated impact of issuing CoCos with a high trigger (above the minimum trigger for AT1
classi…cation of 5125%) on CDS spreads is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 10%
level. The estimated impact of CoCos with a low trigger (less than or equal to 5.125%) is also
negative, but is not statistically signi…cant. CoCos with a high trigger are closer to "going
concern" CoCos, as they are more likely to convert before the PONV than low-trigger CoCos.
Thus, they provide higher-quality protection to unsecured bondholders of the CoCo-issuing
bank.
A third major result is that the impact of CoCo issuance on CDS spreads is a¤ected by the
interaction of the main CoCo design features. Namely, MC CoCos with a mechanical trigger
have a negative and statistically signi…cant impact, whose magnitude (-6.2 bps) is greater
than those of the respective one-dimensional subcategories (MC CoCos and CoCos with a
mechanical trigger). This implies that the above two characteristics interact with each other
to boost the impact of CoCos on CDS spreads. Intuitively, the combination of reduced risk-

33

taking incentives (associated with the MC feature) and automatic loss absorption (associated
with the mechanical trigger feature) provide the greatest degree of protection for senior
unsecured debt holders. Meanwhile, the impact of MC CoCos with a discretionary trigger is
also negative, but it is only statistically signi…cant at the 10% level and its magnitude (¬15
bps) is considerably smaller.
A fourth important …nding is that the size of the CoCo issue (as a share of RWA) also
matters. Large CoCo issues have a negative and statistically signi…cant (at the 5% level)
impact on CDS spreads, but small issues have no statistically signi…cant e¤ect. The weighted
average impact on the issuing bank’s CDS spread is considerably higher for relatively larger
issues (¬72 bps) than for relatively smaller issues (¬17 bps). This is not surprising. The
larger the issue, the thicker the layer of protection that CoCos provide to the senior unsecured
bondholders. Moreover, the fact that the bank was able to place a relatively large issue in
itself reveals that investors have con…dence in the overall healthiness of the bank.
The regulatory classi…cation of CoCo instruments also plays an important role. AT1
CoCos have a negative and highly signi…cant (at the 1% level) impact on CDS spreads. In
contrast, the impact of T2 CoCos is insigni…cant. The weighted average prediction error
for AT1 CoCos is ¬67 bps, whereas that for T2 CoCos is only ¬04 bps. Intuitively, the
enhanced design features associated with the higher quality AT1 capital instruments provide
better protection for the senior creditors of the issuing bank.
Our results also suggest that CoCo issuance tends to have a bigger e¤ect on the CDS
spreads of relatively smaller issuers. The impact of CoCos issued by banks with total assets

34

of less than $1 trillion is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 1% level. In contrast,
the impact of CoCo issuance on CDS spreads tends to be insigni…cant for banks whose total
assets exceed $1 trillion. Splitting banks according to their G-SIB classi…cation generates
similar results.21 That is, the impact of CoCos issued by banks that are not classi…ed as
G-SIBs is highly signi…cant while the impact of CoCos issued by G-SIBs is not statistically
signi…cant. This latter …nding could be interpreted as indicating that market participants
believe that only G-SIBs bene…t from an implicit government guarantee.
We turn next to the results of our cross-sectional regression analysis of the impact of
CoCo issuance on CDS spreads. These results, reported in Table 4, are in line with the
results obtained using the James (1987) methodology.

[Insert Table 4 here.]

The …rst set of cross-sectional regressions examines the e¤ect of the loss absorption mechanism (Table 4, Panel A). In line with the results obtained using the James (1987) methodology, the main …nding is that the impact of MC CoCo on CDS spreads is much more
negative and signi…cant than that of PWD CoCos (speci…cation (1)). In the baseline speci…cation, the impact of MC CoCos is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 5% level.
Once additional dummy controls are included, the impact of MC CoCos is still negative
and statistically signi…cant at the 5% level for AT1 instruments (speci…cation (2)) and for
repeat issuers (speci…cation (4)). In contrast, the estimated impact of PWD CoCos is not
21

For the latter data split, we classify CoCo-issuing banks according to their G-SIB status at the time of
CoCo issuance (for G-SIB lists by year, see FSB (2016)).

35

statistically signi…cant in any of the examined speci…cations.
The second set of results provides insights into the impact of the trigger type (Table 4,
Panel B). In line with the results obtained using the James (1987) methodology, the impact
of CoCos with mechanical triggers is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 5% level
(Column 1). In contrast, the impact of CoCos that only have a discretionary trigger is
not statistically signi…cant. The negative impact of mechanical-trigger CoCos appears to
be stronger for non-G-SIBs (Column 2) and for repeat issuers (Column 3). In sum, CoCos
are most likely to be bene…cial to senior unsecured bondholders if their automatic lossabsorption feature is combined with a thicker layer of protection (as in the case of repeat
issuers) or with an issuer that is not systemically important (as in the case of non-G-SIBs).
The last regression in Panel B examines two-dimensional splits of the main CoCo design
features (Column 4). They indicate that the impact of MC CoCos with a mechanical trigger
(MC/MT CoCos) is negative and statistically signi…cant at the 5% level. The impacts of
the other three CoCo types (MC/DT, PWD/MT, PWD/MT) are also negative, but not
statistically signi…cant.
The third set of regressions investigates the e¤ect of changing the level of the mechanical
trigger (Table 4, Panel C). The estimates from the baseline speci…cation indicate that both
high-trigger and low-trigger CoCos have a negative impact, which is statistically signi…cant
at the 10% level (Column 1). The speci…cations with additional dummy controls reveal that
the high-trigger CoCos of repeat issuers have a negative and strongly statistically signi…cant
(at the 1% level) impact (Column 3). In contrast, the impact of repeat issuers’low-trigger

36

CoCos is statistically signi…cant only at the 10% level. Interestingly, the impact of …rst-time
issuers’ CoCos is not statistically signi…cant, regardless of the trigger level. One possible
explanation for these results is that the early loss absorption feature of high-trigger CoCos
has a larger impact for repeat issuers, since they increase the size of the already existing layer
of protection that CoCos provide for senior unsecured debt, making CoCos a more potent
loss absorption tool. This hypothesis is further supported by the fact that the coe¢ cient on
the issued CoCo amount (as a share of RWA) in the same regression speci…cation is negative
and statistically signi…cant.

4.2.3

Impact on bank equity prices

Our theoretical analysis does not yield clear-cut predictions on the e¤ects of CoCo issuance
on equity prices. That said, we should expect PWD CoCos to have a more positive e¤ect on
stock price than MC Cocos, all else equal, because they are more protective of shareholders.
Table 5 reports the results using the same methodologies as in Table 3, but replacing CDS
spreads with stock prices as an independent variable. For the overall sample, the impact of
CoCo issuance is not statistically signi…cant. This most likely re‡ects the same ambiguity
that we discuss in our theoretical predictions. The results for the one-dimensional subsample
splits along the main CoCo design features (loss absorption mechanism, trigger type, trigger
level) are also insigni…cant.

[Insert Table 5 here.]

The two-dimensional subsample splits generate the most interesting results for the impact
37

of CoCo issuance on equity prices. The most important …nding is that issuing a PWD CoCo
with a high trigger has a positive and statistically signi…cant (at the 5% level) impact on
the equity price of the issuing bank. The combination of (i) the early loss absorption feature
associated with high-trigger CoCos and (ii) the fact that PWD CoCo holders absorb losses
ahead of equity holders appears to explain this result. Conversely, the impact of hightrigger MC CoCos on equity prices is negative, albeit not statistically signi…cant. A likely
explanation for this result is that the e¤ect of possible dilution of equity holders may be
(partially) o¤set by the e¤ect of owning shares in a bank that is better capitalized and more
stable as a result of the CoCo issuance. The fact that the estimated impact of high-trigger
MC CoCos goes in the opposite direction to that of high-trigger PWD CoCos also explains
why the overall impact of high-trigger CoCos (from the one-dimensional sample splits) is
insigni…cant.
Finally, we examine the impact of CoCo issuance on equity prices in cross-sectional
regressions. The main results, which are presented in Table 6, are in line with the ones
obtained using the James (1987) methodology. When examined on a stand-alone basis, the
main CoCo design features (loss absorption mechanism, trigger type, trigger level) do not
have a statistically signi…cant impact on equity prices.
[Insert Table 6 here.]
The regression speci…cations that include two-dimensional (CoCo design feature) dummies generate the most interesting and statistically signi…cant results (Columns 1-3). Just as
for the estimates generated using the James (1987) methodology, the cross-sectional regres38

sion coe¢ cients imply that the impact of PWD CoCos with a high trigger on equity prices
is positive and statistically signi…cant (at the 5% level). Furthermore, the impact of PWD
CoCos with a mechanical trigger is also positive and statistically signi…cant (Columns 4-5).
However, its estimated magnitude is somewhat smaller than the one for PWD CoCos with a
high trigger. Thus, the positive impact of PWD CoCos on stock prices appears to be present
for all PWD CoCos with a mechanical trigger. Nevertheless, it is stronger for high-trigger
PWD CoCos (which absorb losses relatively early) than for low-trigger PWD CoCo (which
absorb losses relatively late).

5

Conclusion

Overall, our analysis indicates that CoCos can contribute to reducing bank fragility. The
CoCo market is no longer a small niche market. Although CoCos are deemed to be complex
by many commentators, possibly too complex for retail investors, there appears to be a
su¢ ciently large institutional investor clientele that stands ready to hold them. One reason
why CoCos are perceived to be so complex is that there is a great variety of CoCo designs,
as we have shown. What is more, the designs that have been chosen by issuers are quite
di¤erent from those recommended by the large theoretical literature on CoCos (e.g., Albul et
al (2016), Chen et al (2017), Glasserman and Nouri (2016), Pennacchi and Tchistyi (2016a,
2016b), Chan and van Wijnbergen (2016)).
The change in the mix of CoCo designs is primarily driven by a combination of experimentation, issuer incentives and investor demand. Now that the CoCo market is reaching
39

maturity, it is important to …nd out which designs are desirable and which ones are not from
a …nancial stability point of view, as well as where CoCo design can possibly be simpli…ed
with a view to standardizing this market.
Our study provides a …rst set of answers to these questions. One of our important …ndings
is the shift over time from MC to PWD CoCos. Our other results suggest that this shift is
driven by shareholder preferences, as the announcement e¤ect of PWD CoCos on stock price
is positive. This shift is also driven by …xed income investor clienteles, who prefer to hold
pure …xed income products rather than hybrids, other things equal.
But is this a desirable development from a …nancial stability perspective? We have
shown that the issuance of MC CoCos has a stronger impact on CDS spreads, which may
suggest that MC CoCos have a superior design from the point of view of reducing bank
fragility. However, we have also shown that shareholder risk-taking incentives tend to be
stronger for instruments with PWD features. This points to a trade-o¤ in terms of the
combined e¤ects of contractual features and overall issuance volumes for …nancial stability
that any e¤orts to standardize CoCo instruments would have to take into account. Other
potential avenues for standardization include: (i) reconsidering the bene…ts of CoCos with
only discretionary triggers; (ii) requiring higher triggers, so that CoCos are more like "going
concern" than "gone concern" instruments; (iii) revisiting the merits of T2 CoCos; (iv)
considering whether to increase CoCo requirements with the goal of increasing their overall
loss-absorbing capacity.
We have explored only a subset of questions on the e¤ects of CoCos on issuing banks’

40

balance sheets. An important open question for the immediate future concerns the investor
clientele of CoCos. Unfortunately, the lack of information on the buy side makes it di¢ cult
to know the distribution of CoCo holdings and assess whether CoCos reduce rather than
redistribute risks in the banking system. CoCos would enhance the stability of issuing
banks and the banking system at large only if the holders of CoCos were long-term investors
unconnected to the banking system.

References
[1] Admati, Anat, Peter DeMarzo, Martin Hellwig, and Paul P‡eiderer, 2013. Fallacies,
irrelevant facts and myths in the discussion of capital regulation: Why bank equity is
not expensive. Unpublished working paper.
[2] Albul, Boris, Dwight M. Ja¤ee, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2016. Contingent convertible bonds
and capital structure decisions. Unpublished working paper.
[3] Alessandri, Piergiorgio, and Andrew Haldane, 2009. Banking on the State. Bank of
England, 9 November 2009.
[4] Avdjiev, Stefan, Anastasia Kartasheva, and Bilyana Bogdanova, 2013. CoCo: A primer.
BIS Quarterly Review, September.
[5] Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 2011. Basel III: A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks and banking systems, June 2011.

41

[6] Bolton, Patrick, and Frederic Samama, 2012. Capital access bonds: Contingent capital
with option to convert, Economic Policy 27, 275-317.
[7] Bolton,Patrick, Hamid Mehran, Joel Shapiro, 2015. Executive compensation and risk
taking. Review of Financial Studies 6, 2139–2181.
[8] Bond, Philip, Itay Goldstein and Edward Simpson Prescott 2010. Market-based corrective actions. Review of Financial Studies 23, 781–820.
[9] Bulow, Jeremy and Paul Klemperer, 2014. Equity recourse notes: Creating countercyclical bank bapital. Unpublished working paper.
[10] Caballero, Ricardo and Pablo Kurlat, 2008. The Surprising’Origin and Nature of Financial Crises: A Macroeconomic Policy Proposal. 2008 Economic Symposium, "Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City.
[11] Calomiris, Charles W., and Richard J. Herring, 2011. Why and how to design a contingent convertible debt requirement. Unpublished working paper.
[12] Chan, Stephanie, and Sweder van Wijnbergen, 2016. Coco Design, Risk Shifting and
Financial Fragility. Unpublished working paper.
[13] Chen, Nan, Paul Glasserman, Behzad Nouri, and Markus Pelger, 2017. Contingent
capital, tail risk, and debt-induced collapse. Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

42

[14] Co¤ee Jr, John C, 2011. Systemic risk after Dodd-Frank: Contingent capital and the
need for regulatory strategies beyond oversight. Columbia Law Review 111, 795–1878.
[15] Glasserman, Paul, and Behzad Nouri, 2016. Market-Triggered Changes in Capital Structure: Equilibrium Price Dynamics. Econometrica 84, 2113-2153.
[16] Cox, D. R., 1972. Regression Models and Life Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society, Ser. B, 34, 187-220.
[17] Du¢ e, Darrel, 2009. Contractual methods for out-of-court restructuring of systemically
important …nancial institutions. Submission requested by the US Treasury Working
Group on Bank Capital, November 9.
[18] European Banking Authority (EBA), 2016. Report on the implementation and design
of MREL framework, 14 December 2016.
[19] Faure-Grimaud, Antoine, 2002. Using Stock Price Information to Regulate Firms. Review of Economic Studies 69, 169 - 190.
[20] Fecht, Falko, Kjell G. Nyborg, and Jorg Rocholl, 2011. The price of liquidity: The
e¤ects of market conditions and bank characteristics. Journal of Financial Economics
102, 344-362.
[21] Financial Stability Board, 2016. 2016 list of global systemically important banks (GSIBs), 21 November 2016.

43

[22] Financial Stability Board, 2015. Principles of loss-absorbing and recapitalization capacity of G-SIBs in resolution, 9 November 2015.
[23] Fine, J. and Gray, R., 1999. A Proportional Hazards Model for the Subdistribution of
a Competing Risk. Journal of the American Statistical Association 94, 496–509.
[24] FINMA, 2015, New "too big to fail" capital requirements for global systemically important banks in Switzerland, Swiss Financial Market Supervisory Authority, October 21,
2015
[25] Flannery, Mark J., 2005. No pain, no gain? E¤ecting market discipline via reverse convertible debentures. In: Hal S. Scott (Ed.), Capital Adequacy Beyond Basel: Banking,
Securities, and Insurance.
[26] Flannery, Mark J., 2016. Stabilizing large …nancial institutions with contingent capital
certi…cates. Quarterly Journal of Finance 6, 1-26.
[27] Hillion, Pierre and Theo Vermaelen, 2004. Death spiral convertibles. Journal of Financial
Economics 71, 381-415.
[28] Hilscher, Jens, and Alon Raviv, 2014. Bank stability and market discipline: The e¤ect of
contingent capital on risk taking and default probability. Journal of Corporate Finance
29, 542–560.
[29] Huang, Rocco, and Lev Ratnovski, 2011, The dark side of bank wholesale funding.
Journal of Financial Intermediation 20, 248-263.
44

[30] James, Christopher, 1987. Some evidence on the uniqueness of bank loans. Journal of
Financial Economics 19, 217-235.
[31] Kashyap, Anil K, Raghuram G Rajan, and Jeremy C Stein. 2008. Rethinking Capital
Regulation. 2008 Economic Symposium, "Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial
System." Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
[32] Martynova, Natalya, and Enrico Perotti, 2016. Convertible bond and bank risk-taking.
Unpublished working paper.
[33] McDonald, R. 2013. Contingent capital with dual price trigger. Journal of Financial
Stability 9, 230-241.
[34] Pennacchi, George, Theo Vermaelen, and Christian C.P. Wol¤, 2014. Contingent Capital: The case of COERCs. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 49, 541–574.
[35] Pennacchi, George, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2016a. A Reexamination of contingent convertibles with stock price triggers. Unpublished working paper.
[36] Pennacchi, George, and Alexei Tchistyi, 2016b. On equilibrium when contingent capital
has a market trigger: A correction to Sundaresan and Wang Journal of Finance (2015).
Unpublished working paper.
[37] Perroti, Enrico, and Paul Glasserman, 2017. The uncovered CoCo bonds. Unpublished
working paper.

45

[38] Raviv, Arthur, 2004. Bank stability and market discipline: debt-for-equity swap versus
subordinated notes. Unpublished working paper.
[39] Roberts, Michael R. and Amir Su…, 2009. Financial Contracting: A Survey of Empirical
Research and Future Directions. Annual Review of Financial Economics 1, 207-226.
[40] Roengpitya, Rungporn, Nikola Tarashev, and Kostas Tsatsaronis, 2014. Bank business
models. BIS Quarterly Review, December.
[41] Sundaresan, Suresh, and Zhenyu Wang, 2015. On the design of contingent capital with
a market trigger. Journal of Finance 70, 881–920.
[42] Squam Lake Working Group on Financial Regulation (2010). An expedited resolution
mechanisms for distressed …nancial …rms: regulatory hybrid securities. Squam Lake
working group, Council on Foreign Relations, April.
[43] Vallee, Boris, 2015. Contingent Capital Trigger E¤ects: Evidence from Liability Management Exercises. Unpublished working paper.
[44] Zeng, Jing, 2013. Contingent Capital Structure. Unpublished working paper.

46

6

Appendix A: Impact of CoCo Issuance - Empirical
Methodology

We conduct our empirical analysis of the impact of CoCo issuance on CDS spreads and
equity prices in two steps.
In the …rst part, we employ the event methodology used in James (1987). The prediction
error associated with CoCo instrument  on day  is de…ned as:

  =  ¬ (



+

  )

where  is the equity return or the change in the CDS spread on day  of the bank that
has issued CoCo instrument ;  is the return on the benchmark equity or CDS index on
day ;



and



are the estimated coe¢ cients from a CAPM over an estimation period of

200 business days that excludes the 40 business days centered around the event date.
The cumulative prediction error (CPE) of CoCo instrument  over an event window
(0 ¬  0 ) is given by:
  =

0
X

  

=0 ¬

and the average cumulative prediction error (ACPE) over a sample of CoCo instruments of
size  is:
  =


1 X
  
 =1

Tests of statistical signi…cance are based on cumulative standardized prediction errors
47

(CSPE) over the event window (0 ¬  0 ) that account for the number of days in the
estimation period and the length of the event window so as to control for the increase
in variance from prediction outside the estimation period. The cumulative standardized
prediction error for bank  over the event window (0 ¬  0 ) is de…ned as:
0
X
 

  =

= ¬
0

where

"

 =  2

"

1
( ¬  )2
1+
+ P
2

=1 ( ¬  )

## 21

and  is the number of business days in the CAPM estimation, 2 is the variance of the
residual in CoCo instrument ’s CAPM regression and  is the mean market return over
the estimation period.
The average cumulative standardized prediction error (ACSPE) over the event window
(0 ¬  0 ) is:


1 X
  =
  
 =1

Assuming the individual prediction errors are independent across instruments, the 
statistic
=

p

 ( )

is distributed as  (0 1) under the null hypothesis that the average cumulative standardized
prediction error equals 0.

48

In the second part of our empirical examination of the impact of CoCo issuance on
CDS spreads and equity prices, we estimate multivariate cross-sectional regressions. More
precisely, we focus on the following speci…cation:

  =



+

   + 

where   are the cumulative prediction errors (de…ned above) over the event window
(0 ¬  0 ) and X is a set of characteristics of the instrument and the issuing bank. More
concretely, we focus on the main CoCo contractual features such as the loss absorption
mechanism, the trigger type, and the trigger level. In order to properly account for multiple
issuance by a single bank over the sample period, we use clustered regressions, assuming that
the errors are independent across banks, but allowing them to be correlated within banks.

49

Appendix B: A simple analytical framework
The model
It is helpful to consider the incentives of a bank to issue a CoCo in a simple formal analytical
framework. The formal analysis can also clarify the e¤ects of the CoCo issuance on the value
of other bank’s claims and its incentives to take risk.
We take as given the balance sheet of the bank at date 0, and we consider a two-period
model. On the asset side, the bank has assets in place with book value . Except for an
aggregate risk exposure with two states of the world–a crisis state and a boon state–these
are well diversi…ed assets. They yield positive earnings

at  = 1 in the boon state, which

occurs with probability (1 ¬ ), and a positive loss  in the crisis state with probability
. Under risk-neutral preferences (or probabilities) the ex-ante market value of the bank’s
assets is then
[1 +

¬ ( + )]

On the liability side, the bank has deposits with face value  and senior unsecured debt
with face value . The bank’s equity is therefore given by  = [1 + ¬ ( + )] ¬  ¬ ,
and its equity to capital ratio is

0

=

[1 +

We denote the required capital ratio by



¬ ( + )]

and take it that

50

0

, but that, following a loss

at date 1, the bank may be in a situation where

1

 :

At date 0, the bank can issue a CoCo instrument with face value  and a capital-ratio
trigger ~ , with

~

0.

Should the bank’s equity-capital ratio fall below a trigger ~ , the

CoCo instrument reduces bank debt and improves the bank’s equity-capital ratio by either
converting into equity or through a principal write-down.
Consider …rst how conversion to equity CoCos (MC-CoCos) work. These instruments
stipulate that the investor gets a fraction

 0 of the bank’s equity when the bank’s equity-

capital ratio falls below ~ ; and receives the coupon payment  when the capital ratio is
above ~ : We shall restrict attention to situations where the CoCo trigger may be breached
only if the bank incurs a loss at date 1. In that state of the world the pre-conversion equity
value is given by
 = (1 ¬ ) ¬ ( +  + )
and conversion is triggered if

 ~.
(1 ¬ )
Post conversion equity value is

1 = maxf0 (1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )g,

and CoCo holders receive a fraction

of this value. Old equity holders are diluted upon

51

conversion by CoCo holders if and only if 1  0 and





=


.
1

Note that if the terms of the MC-CoCo are such that equity holders are diluted,



,

then the price of the MC-CoCo at date 0 is greater than the par value .
In contrast, if





then equity holders bene…t from the conversion of CoCos, and

CoCo-holders are negatively a¤ected by conversion triggered by the loss . In that case, the
date 0 price of the MC-CoCo is less than the par value .
Consider next principal write-down CoCos (PWD-CoCos). These instruments stipulate
a principal and a coupon payment  as long as the bank’s equity-capital ratio is above ~ .
Should the trigger ~ be breached, however, then the repayment terms are reduced to ,
where 1 

0. By design, shareholders cannot be diluted by conversion of PWD-CoCo

holders. On the contrary, shareholder value always increases upon conversion of a PWDCoCo, and it is decreasing in . Therefore, the price of a PWD-CoCo at date 0 is always less
than the par value . Note that PWD-CoCos can be viewed as a special case of MC-CoCos
with

= 0.

Determinants of CoCo issuance
The leading regulatory motivation for CoCos is the bail-in mechanism: conversion of a CoCo
avoids a costly recapitalization at date 1, following the realization of the loss . Consider

52

this capital strengthening motivation for CoCos and suppose that

(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )
 .
(1 ¬ )
Following the realization of a loss at date 1, the bank must then either be recapitalized or
some of debt must be ‘bailed in’.
Going-concern CoCos and the recapitalization of a well-capitalized bank. First, we consider the case when the loss  is small enough that:

(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )  0.

That is, the bank can be recapitalized without any bail-in (as the point of non-viability or
PONV has not yet been reached). To reduce the number of cases to consider, we also assume
that  is large enough that
(1 ¬ ) ¬ 
 .
(1 ¬ )
Recapitalization of a bank that has not reached the PONV can be done by either (i) shrinking
the bank’s balance sheet, (ii) reducing debt or (iii) raising new equity. Suppose that the bank
issues a CoCo in order to be able to reduce its senior unsecured debt in the loss state to the
^ such that
point 
^
(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )
= .
(1 ¬ )
Let  denote the amount raised by the bank issuing an MC-CoCo at date 0, and suppose

53

without loss of generality that the bank uses these proceeds to reduce its senior unsecured
^ =  ¬  , so that it is just able to meet its capital requirements following
debt from  to 
a loss in the crisis state.
Under Modigliani-Miller assumptions this MC-CoCo is worth

 = (1 ¬ ) +

[(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( +  ¬  )],

or
 =

(1 ¬ ) +

[(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )]
.
1¬

And ( ) are such that

( + ) ¬ (1 ¬ ) = (1 ¬ )(1 ¬ (1 ¬

)).

In a Modigliani-Miller world there are no issuance costs, so that all banks at risk of a
future recapitalization would weakly prefer to issue a CoCo. In practice, however, banks
face CoCo issuance costs that are given by a combination of underwriting fees and negative
…nancial market reaction to the CoCo issue (the market may interpret issuance of a CoCo
as a signal of …nancial weakness of the issuing bank). This can be modeled in a simple way
by assuming that investors overestimate the true size of potential losses: When true losses
are , they believe the losses to be equal to

, where

an expected issuance cost of:
( ¬ 1)
54

 1. A CoCo issuer will then incur

The bank compares the expected issuance costs of a CoCo to the alternative of recapitalizing the bank following a loss (to meet its minimum equity-capital constraint) through
asset sales. The bank then sells

of its assets at a discounted (…re-sale) price

, where

 1 and uses the proceeds to retire some of its senior unsecured debt , so that its new
equity-capital ratio becomes

(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( +  ¬
(1 ¬ ) ¬

)

.

Such a recapitalization is also costly for shareholders, as they incur the …re-sale cost (1¬ ) .
The ex ante expected …re-sale costs are

(1 ¬ ) ,

where

is given by
=

 +  ¬ (1 ¬ )(1 ¬ )
.
+

The CoCo issuance cost is set against the expected bene…t of avoiding a costly recapitalization in a crisis. Thus, shareholders of a well-capitalized bank are better o¤ issuing a
CoCo if:
( ¬ 1)  (1 ¬ )

 +  ¬ (1 ¬ )(1 ¬ )
.
+

Issuing a CoCo is more attractive to shareholders, the less the CoCo issue is underpriced by
the market, the lower the fraction of equity promised to CoCo investors upon conversion,

55

and the higher the asset sales discount at the time of …nancial distress.
These predictions are broadly robust to the design of the CoCo instrument and also apply to PWD-CoCos. An important di¤erence between an MC-CoCo and a PWD-CoCo for
a bank issuer is that the latter is less likely to be undervalued by the market. First, the loss
upon conversion is contractually speci…ed and, therefore, less likely to be overestimated by
investors. Second, a PWD-CoCo is a 100% …xed income security, which is more straightforward to value and which has greater appeal to institutional investors specializing in …xed
income investments.
Gone-concern CoCos and recapitalization of a PONV bank. Next, we consider the case
when the loss  is such that shareholders anticipate to be wiped out in the crisis state,

(1 ¬ ) ¬ ( + )

0.

We assume that the restructuring then involves bail-in of the senior unsecured debt. In
practice, there are many di¤erent ways of restructuring a PONV bank. Moreover, the restructuring burden will not necessarily be entirely borne by senior unsecured debt. Much of
our analysis, however, is not a¤ected by how a PONV bank is restructured. When shareholders anticipate a large loss  that wipes them out in the crisis state then they do not bene…t
from a CoCo issue. However, CoCo issuance may bene…t the holders of senior unsecured
debt.
The empirical predictions of the model about a bank’s propensity to issue CoCos then
depend on the design of the CoCo contract, and the ex-ante probability that the bank’s
56

losses are low enough that the bank remains a going concern, or that they are so high that
the bank is a gone concern following the realization of the loss . The better capitalized a
bank is, the lower the probability that it could become a gone concern, and the stronger its
shareholders’ incentives to issue a CoCo, especially a PWD-CoCo. Shareholders of banks
that anticipate reaching a PONV following the realization of the loss , however, have no
incentives to issue a CoCo.

CoCo issuance and bank’s risk-taking incentives
Next we analyze how CoCo issuance a¤ects banks incentives to engage in risk-taking activities. Consider the bank’s incentive post CoCo issuance to invest in a project that has a
mean return of zero but provides a positive return
¬

in the boon state and a negative return

in the crisis state,
(1 ¬ ) ¬

= 0.

Suppose that the loss ^ in the crisis state is such that
(1 ¬ ^) ¬ ( + )
(1 ¬ ^)

.

Would the CoCo issuer have an incentive to make the same bet as above if it now means
that
(1 ¬ ^ ¬ ) ¬ ( + )
 ?
(1 ¬ ^)
Under an MC-CoCo the bank shareholders would have no incentive to take this risk if
57

the CoCo is su¢ ciently dilutive. Furthermore, the incentives to engage in risk taking will
be lower the higher is the trigger ratio at which the MC-CoCo converts into equity. In
contrast, under a PWD-CoCo, the shareholders would have a strict incentive to take this
bet as it would allow them to gain something both in the boon state ( ) and in the crisis
^
state ( ¬ ).

CoCo issuance and the value of other bank claims
The e¤ect of a CoCo issue should be to lower credit default swap spreads, given that the
probability of the worst outcome of a haircut imposed on senior unsecured debt is decreased
by the CoCo issuance. It should also result in a (weak) increase in the value of senior
unsecured bonds, given that the bank is better capitalized after the CoCo issue.
The predicted stock price reaction, however, is harder to pin down. CoCo issuance
induces both a positive e¤ect on the expected value of the bank (due to the lower risk of
recapitalization at …re-sale prices) and a negative signaling impact about potential losses
(when there is asymmetric information about the size of potential losses between the bank’s
managers and investors).
Consider the situation in which the bank may face three types of losses in a crisis,
 2 f     g. If expected losses in the crisis state are low,  , then the bank remains
robustly capitalized even after incurring these losses

(1 ¬  ) ¬ ( + )
(1 ¬  )
58

.

If the losses are larger,  , then the bank will need to recapitalize in the midst of the crisis
but its PONV is not reached,

0

(1 ¬  ) ¬ ( + )
 .
(1 ¬  )

And if the losses are very large,  ,

(1 ¬  ) ¬ ( + )
 0,
(1 ¬ ^)
then the bank reaches the PONV.
Suppose that the bank is privately informed about its losses in the crisis, but investors do
not know the true size of losses  2 f     g. Investor beliefs are given by  = Pr( =  ),
 = Pr( =  ), and  = Pr( =  ). In addition, investors believe the losses to be
equal to

, where

 1, when in fact they are only equal to . The bank’s managers do

know the true value of . The managers’remuneration is tied to the future share value of
the bank so that their objective is to maximize the date 1 value of the bank’s equity.
In this situation, the bank with losses  or  has no incentives to issue a CoCo. In the
former case, the CoCo issuance only bene…ts senior unsecured bondholders and has no value
for shareholders, as their equity is wiped out in the crisis state. In the latter case, the bank
does not face a risk of recapitalization in the crisis and would avoid a costly CoCo issuance.
A partially separating equilibrium may then be obtained at date 0 in which a bank-type
with losses  issues a CoCo and bank-types  and  do not. The announcement of the

59

CoCo can then trigger a positive or a negative stock price reaction depending on prior beliefs
 and  . If  is large then the announcement of a CoCo issue is good news. The
CoCo issuance signals that the bank’s potential losses are smaller than originally expected,

   =   +   +   

As a result, CoCo issuance triggers a positive stock price reaction. In contrast, if  is large
and
  
then CoCo issuance is bad news. The announcement of the CoCo then triggers a negative
stock price reaction, as losses in the crisis are revealed to be higher than expected. Note that
in either case, the bank  has incentives to issue a CoCo to avoid a costly recapitalization.
To summarize, the announcement of a CoCo issue induces a positive reaction in credit
markets. It reduces the bank’s credit default spread and increases the value of senior unsecured debt. The impact of CoCo issuance on the stock price is indeterminate. A CoCo issue
bene…ts banks with medium-sized losses and is not favored by banks with large or small
losses. The stock price reaction can be either positive or negative depending on the prior
distribution of losses for potential CoCo issuers.

60

Structure of CoCos

Figure 1

Main design features of CoCos

and

Trigger

Mechanical

Bookvalue

or

and/or

Loss absorption mechanism

Conversion
to equity

Discretionary

or

Principal
writedown

Marketvalue

CoCos’ Position in Basel III Capital Requirements1

Figure 2

Tier 2 (T2)
 Subordinated debt instruments with a DT (and optionally an MT of any level)

Additional Tier 1 (AT1)
 Subordinated debt instruments with a DT and an MT ≥ 5.125%
 Preferred shares
CET 1+AT1+T2
≥ 8% RWA

Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1)

 Common shares
 Retained earnings

CET 1+AT1
≥ 6% RWA
CET 1
≥ 4.5% RWA

DT = discretionary trigger; MT = mechanical trigger.
1

The list of instruments in this graph is not exhaustive and is included solely for illustrative purposes. For a complete list of instruments and
the associated criteria for inclusion in each of the three capital buckets, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2011). The above shares
of risk-weighted assets (RWA) represent the bare minimum capital requirements and do not account for any add-ons, such as the capital
conservation buffer, the countercyclical buffer, and the systemically important financial institution (SIFI) surcharge. All instruments other than
those in CET1 are optional – the inclusion of an instrument in one of the above three capital buckets implies that banks have the option (but
not the requirement) to use that instrument to meet the respective minimum capital requirement (i.e. banks have the option to meet all their
capital requirements using only CET1).

CoCo Issuance
Issued amount, 2009–15, in USD billions
By nationality of issuer

Figure 3
By currency of issuance

Sources: Bloomberg; Dealogic; authors’ calculations.

The Evolution of the CoCo Market
Issued amount, in USD billions
By tier classification

Figure 4
By loss absorption mechanism

Note: In some periods, there are minor differences between the quarterly issued amounts in the left- and right-hand panels due to incomplete
information (on tier classification or loss absorption mechanism) for a small number of CoCos issued in the respective periods.
Sources: Bloomberg; Dealogic; authors’ calculations.

Table 1. CoCo Issuance, 2009–15
This table reports the amount issued (in billions of US dollars) of CoCos that (i) were issued by banks between January 2009 and December 2015 and (ii) have at least one (mechanical or
discretionary) contractual trigger. The number of issues is indicated in parentheses. Individual subcategories do not always add up to the respective reported totals due to missing data and/or
rounding. The G-SIB designation refers to a global systemically important bank. The trigger threshold of 5.125% is the minimum required for a CoCo to qualify as additional tier 1 (AT1) capital
under Basel III. Sources: Bloomberg; Dealogic.

GSIB designation
GSIB
Advanced economies

124.4 (108)

Non-GSIB
155.6 (277)

Loss absorption mechanism

Trigger

Principal
write-down

Mandatory
conversion

Mechanical

Mechanical

All levels

<=5.125

124.3 (182)

154.7 (194)

206.7 (243)

125.7 (174)

Tier classification

Mechanical

Discretionary
only

AT 1

Tier 2

81.0 (69)

73.3 (142)

188.3 (228)

73.2 (117)

>5.125

Total

280.0 (385)

Euro area

36.7 (32)

48.8 (67)

43.6 (56)

41.7 (41)

73.1 (83)

55.2 (61)

17.9 (22)

12.5 (16)

75.7 (83)

8.1 (15)

85.6 (99)

Non-euro area Europe

69.3 (43)

50.6 (115)

58.1 (84)

61.2 (68)

111.9 (136)

48.7 (89)

63.1 (47)

8.1 (22)

75.6 (86)

27.6 (33)

111.9 (158)

Switzerland

33.6 (18)

4.5 (16)

29.4 (28)

8.4 (4)

33.8 (30)

24.9 (22)

8.9 (8)

4.3 (4)

19.2 (20)

18.9 (14)

38.1 (34)

United Kingdom

32.7 (19)

29.7 (47)

10.7 (6)

51.7 (60)

62.4 (66)

16.9 (37)

45.5 (29)

0 (0)

41.5 (27)

4.2 (3)

62.4 (66)

3.0 (6)

16.4 (52)

18.0 (50)

1.0 (4)

15.7 (40)

6.9 (30)

8.7 (10)

3.7 (18)

14.9 (39)

4.5 (16)

19.4 (58)

18.4 (33)

56.1 (95)

22.6 (42)

51.8 (85)

21.8 (24)

21.8 (24)

0 (0)

52.7 (104)

37.0 (59)

37.5 (69)

74.5 (128)

Other
Non-European AEs
Emerging market economies
Emerging Asia
Other EMEs
Total

69.4 (24)

172.0 (322)

158.6 (258)

65.1 (26)

85.6 (72)

79.5 (53)

6.1 (19)

155.9 (274)

86.6 (75)

147.8 (264)

241.5 (346)

69.1 (18)

129.7 (225)

130.0 (193)

62.2 (20)

64.7 (32)

62.5 (19)

2.2 (13)

134.1 (211)

68.7 (53)

123.5 (188)

198.8 (243)

0.4 (6)

42.3 (97)

28.6 (65)

2.9 (6)

20.9 (40)

16.9 (34)

3.9 (6)

21.8 (63)

17.9 (22)

24.2 (76)

42.7 (103)

327.7 (599)

282.9 (440)

292.3 (315)

205.2 (227)

87.1 (88)

229.2 (416)

274.9 (303)

221.0 (381)

521.5 (731)

193.8 (132)

219.8 (220)

Table 2. Propensity to Issue CoCos: Duration Analyses
This table analyses the propensity of banks to issue CoCos using duration analysis. The sample consists of “potential” issuers, defined
as the 500 banks with the highest total assets in CoCo-issuing advanced economy jurisdictions, plus the advanced economy CoCo
issuers in our sample that are not among the top 500. The sample is from January 2009 through December 2015. Panel A presents
results from regressions using a Tobit regression where the dependent variable is Time to Issue (in months from January 2009). Panel
B presents results from the Cox (1972) proportional hazards model using time-varying covariates at the bank-month level. Panel C
(D) presents results from the Fine and Gray (1999) competing risk hazards model, at the bank-month level, where the issuance of
any principal write-down (mandatory conversion) CoCos is the “main risk” and the issuance of any mandatory conversion (principal
write-down) CoCos is the “competing risk.” For Panels B–D, observations drop out of the sample right after a bank issues any CoCo
for the first time. Banks without any issuance are treated as being censored at the end of the sample period. All dependent variables
except Total assets and G-SIB are scaled by total assets, expressed in percentage points. The independent variables are as follows:
Total assets (in logarithm), Tier 1 (Tier 1 capital), G-SIB (indicating a global systemically important bank), Gross loans, Trading
Securities, Long-term funding, Deposits (the sum of bank deposits and customer deposits), Tier 1 ^ 2 (the square of Tier 1), Customer
deposits, Bank deposits, Interbank borrowing (the sum of deposits from banks, repos, and cash collateral), and Interbank assets (the
sum of loans and advances to banks, reverse repos, and cash collateral). The t-statistics are in parentheses. *, **, and *** indicate
statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
Panel A: Duration to First CoCo Issuance

Total assets

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-11.019***

-14.317***

-10.844***

-9.641**

-16.537***

(-4.36)

(-4.63)

(-3.53)

(-3.22)

(-4.65)

-3.760**

-3.834**

2.821

-2.974*

-2.682

(-2.29)

(-2.26)

(0.57)

(-1.79)

(-1.44)

-14.859

-13.531

-19.052*

-12.933

(-1.33)

(-1.22)

(-1.71)

(-1.14)

Gross loans

-0.605**

-0.885***

-0.853***

-0.663**

(-2.78)

(-3.60)

(-3.46)

(-2.59)

Trading securities

-0.873**

-0.732*

-0.942**

-1.225**

(-2.28)

(-1.90)

(-2.32)

(-2.89)

-0.156

0.378

0.312

-0.114

(-0.79)

(1.42)

(1.21)

(-0.56)

Tier 1
G-SIB

Long-term funding

0.810**

Deposits
(Bank+Customer)

(3.30)

Tier 1 ^ 2

-0.385
(-1.24)
0.684**

Customer deposits

(2.92)
2.025***

Bank deposits

(4.14)
0.833**

Interbank borrowing

(2.44)
-0.154

Interbank assets

(-0.45)
Number of observations

512

510

510

510

506

Panel B: Hazards to First CoCo Issuance

Total assets
Tier 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.449***

0.530***

0.515***

0.429***

0.581***

(6.19)

(6.10)

(5.16)

(4.59)

(5.94)

0.002

0.002

0.461*

0.002

0.048

(0.29)

(0.34)

(1.91)

(0.36)

(0.88)

0.330

0.355

0.285

0.253

(1.06)

(1.13)

(0.89)

(0.80)

0.018***

0.032***

0.034***

0.022***

(3.92)

(4.38)

(4.33)

(2.81)

0.037***

0.033**

0.040***

0.055***

(3.02)

(2.48)

(2.66)

(3.92)

0.013**

-0.004

-0.004

0.009

(2.16)

(-0.47)

(-0.52)

(1.45)

G-SIB
Gross loans
Trading securities
Long-term funding

-0.026***

Deposits
(Bank+Customer)

(-3.86)

Tier 1 ^ 2

-0.026
(-1.52)

Customer deposits

-0.018***

Bank deposits

-0.117***

(-2.68)
(-4.94)
-0.036***

Interbank borrowing

(-2.98)
-0.017

Interbank assets

(-1.35)
Number of observations

3323

3323

3323

3323

3296

Panel C: Hazards to First Principal Write-Down Issuance (with Mandatory Conversion as Competing Risk)

Total assets
Tier 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.419***

0.473***

0.495***

0.350**

0.588***

(3.49)

(3.30)

(3.27)

(2.27)

(4.48)

0.002**

0.002**

0.461**

0.002**

0.097**

(2.05)

(2.36)

(2.28)

(2.51)

(2.04)

0.580

0.633*

0.591

0.505

(1.55)

(1.65)

(1.51)

(1.29)

0.016***

0.026***

0.028***

0.015*

(3.23)

(3.21)

(3.21)

(1.71)

0.036***

0.032**

0.038***

0.046***

(3.54)

(2.51)

(2.58)

(3.28)

0.019***

0.006

0.004

0.020***

(3.47)

(0.76)

(0.54)

(3.03)

G-SIB
Gross loans
Trading securities
Long-term funding

-0.025***

Deposits
(Bank+Customer)

(-3.74)

Tier 1 ^ 2

-0.020*
(-1.95)

Customer deposits

-0.017***

Bank deposits

-0.103***

(-2.69)
(-4.07)
-0.023**

Interbank borrowing

(-2.11)
-0.018

Interbank assets

(-1.63)
Number of observations

3323

3323

3323

3323

3296

Panel D: Hazards to Mandatory Conversion Issuance (with Principal Write-Down as Competing Risk)

Total assets
Tier 1

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.399***

0.505***

0.396**

0.423**

0.482**

(2.98)

(2.83)

(2.04)

(2.08)

(2.33)

-0.002

-0.019

1.160

-0.022

-0.034

(-0.04)

(-0.22)

(1.62)

(-0.31)

(-0.36)

-0.303

-0.241

-0.304

-0.216

(-0.51)

(-0.40)

(-0.50)

(-0.36)

0.019***

0.038***

0.041***

0.031**

(3.92)

(4.07)

(2.98)

(2.12)

0.035**

0.031

0.037*

0.061***

(2.18)

(1.55)

(1.71)

(3.23)

-0.002

-0.028***

-0.022**

-0.009

(-0.30)

(-2.76)

(-2.15)

(-1.17)

G-SIB
Gross loans
Trading securities
Long-term funding

-0.030***

Deposits
(Bank+Customer)

(-4.18)

Tier 1 ^ 2

-0.103*
(-1.76)

Customer deposits

-0.019***

Bank deposits

-0.122***

(-2.75)
(-3.06)
-0.053**

Interbank borrowing

(-2.33)
-0.011

Interbank assets

(-0.57)
Number of observations

3323

3323

3323

3323

3296

Table 3. Impact of CoCo Issuance on Issuers’ CDS Spreads: Cumulative Prediction Error (CPE) Analyses
This table examines the impact of CoCo issuance on issuing banks’ CDS spreads using the methodology of James (1987). The average
cumulative prediction errors (ACPE) for each category are calculated as equally-weighted averages of the cumulative prediction
errors (CPEj) for the set of CoCo instruments that belong to each category. The weighted average cumulative prediction errors
(WACPE) are calculated as issued, amount-weighted averages of the CPE for the set of CoCo instruments that belong to each
category. For each CoCo instrument j, CPEj is defined as the cumulative prediction error (derived from a CAPM model, estimated
over a period of 200 business days, excluding the 40 business days centered around the event date) of its issuer’s CDS spread over
the event window, which starts 10 business days before the issuance date (t-10) and ends on the issuance date (t). The “Z-value” is
defined as Z = √N (ACSPE), where ACSPE is the average cumulative standardized prediction error and N is the sample size.
“Proportion negative” is the proportion of negative CPEj. The test statistic is a Wilcoxon signed rank statistic. The null hypothesis is
that the proportion of negative prediction errors equals 0.5. The trigger threshold of 5.125% is the minimum required for a CoCo
to qualify as additional tier 1 (AT1) capital under Basel III. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively. The sample covers CoCo instruments issued by banks in advanced economies between January 2009 and December
2015.
ACPE
All CoCos

Z-value

-2.66***

-2.70

Proportion
negative

WACPE

Sample
size

0.57**

-4.81

136

Loss absorption
Principal write-down (PWD)

-1.35

-1.07

0.54

-2.40

87

Mandatory conversion (MC)

-4.97***

-3.07

0.63***

-8.37

49

Mechanical trigger

-3.25**

-2.22

0.55**

-4.80

83

<=5.125

-3.36

-1.38

0.60

-5.57

50

>5.125

-3.08*

-1.83

0.48

-3.91

33

Discretionary trigger only

-1.08

-1.15

0.58

-2.14

50

-1.61

-1.18

0.55

-2.36

53

Trigger

PWD and mechanical trigger
PWD and trigger<=5.125

-0.82

-0.63

0.57

-0.67

37

PWD and trigger>5.125

-3.42

-1.20

0.50

-6.38

16

-0.89

-0.22

0.52

-2.51

33

-6.15**

-2.13

0.57*

-8.26

30

-10.58

-1.64

0.69

-21.71

13

-2.76

-1.39

0.47

-2.43

17

-1.46*

-1.66

0.71*

-1.24

17

-4.17***

-2.63

0.57**

-6.69

75

-0.67

-1.00

0.57

-0.35

60

-1.76

-1.46

0.58*

-1.66

79

PWD and discretionary trigger only
MC and mechanical trigger
MC and trigger<=5.125
MC and trigger>5.125
MC and discretionary trigger only
Additional Tier 1
Tier 2
CoCo issue size

<median

(amount issued/ RWA)

>=median

-4.36**

-2.56

0.57*

-7.21

54

Issuer size

<$1000bn

-4.04***

-2.63

0.62***

-8.97

68

(total assets)

>=$1000bn

-1.54

-1.25

0.54

-2.18

65

Issuer

G-SIB

-1.53

-1.15

0.53

-2.03

72

-3.93***

-2.72

0.63***

-9.74

64

-3.15**

-2.20

0.55*

-5.33

93

Non-G-SIB
European issuance
Non-European issuance

-1.59

-1.58

0.63

-2.38

43

Distance to trigger

<median

-5.78

-1.37

0.55

-9.13

31

(Regulatory T1 capital/RWA)

>=median

-2.13*

-1.84

0.57*

-1.83

49

-2.90

-0.40

0.48

-6.17

40

-2.55***

-2.93

0.61***

-4.01

94

First-time issuer
Repeat issuer

Table 4. Impact of Coco Issuance on Issuers’ CDS Spreads: Cross-Sectional Regression Analyses
This table examines the impact of CoCo issuance on issuing banks’ CDS spreads using multivariate, cross-sectional regression
analysis. The dependent variable (CPEj) in all specifications is the cumulative prediction error (derived from a CAPM model, estimated
over a period of 200 business days, excluding the 40 business days centerred around the event date) of the CDS spread of the issuer
of the CoCo instrument j over the event window, which starts 10 business days before the issuance date (t-10) and ends on the
issuance date (t). The independent variables are: a dummy variable for CoCos with a principal write-down (PWD) loss absorption
mechanism; a dummy variable for CoCos with a high trigger (HT), defined as a mechanical trigger>5.125, the minimum for a CoCo
to quality as Tier 1 capital; a dummy variable for CoCos with a low trigger (LT), defined as a mechanical trigger<=5.125; a dummy
variable for CoCos with only a discretionary trigger (DT); a dummy variable for CoCos classified as Tier 1 instruments (Tier 1); a
dummy variable for CoCos issued by a globally systemically important bank (G-SIB); a dummy variable for CoCos issued by a bank
with no prior CoCo issuances (first-time issuer); CoCo issue size (defined as the CoCo amount issued/the risk-weighted assets of the
issuing bank) and the Tier 1 ratio, leverage ratio and size of the issuing bank (measured by the log of total assets)). All continuous
variables are demeaned. *, ** and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively, based on a standard t-test for individual
coefficients and on a Wald test for the sums of coefficients; t-statistics (in parentheses) are clustered by issuing bank. The sample
covers CoCo instruments issued by banks in advanced economies between January 2009 and December 2015.
Panel A: Loss Absorption Mechanism
(1)
Constant
Principal write-down (PWD)
Tier 1/ RWA
Amount issued/ RWA
Log (total assets)
Leverage ratio

(2)

(3)

(4)

DC: Tier 1

DC: G-SIB

DC: First-time issuer

-5.60**

-2.40*

-5.04*

-5.61**

(-2.40)

(-1.86)

(-1.88)

(-2.51)

3.87

1.28

3.09

3.83

(1.34)

(0.60)

(0.96)

(1.25)

0.15

0.19

0.19

0.15

(0.42)

(0.53)

(0.49)

(0.41)

-2.35

-1.21

-2.54

-2.21

(-0.85)

(-0.45)

(-0.92)

(-0.77)

-0.02

0.64

-1.45

0.08

(-0.01)

(0.46)

(-0.87)

(0.06)

0.28

0.53

0.56

0.35

(0.20)

(0.37)

(0.40)

(0.26)

-6.50

2.81

-0.47

(-1.60)

(0.70)

(-0.07)

4.55

1.23

0.56

(0.97)

(0.29)

(0.08)

PWD; DC=0

-1.11

-1.95

-1.78

MC; DC=0

-2.40*

-5.04*

-5.61**

PWD; DC=1

-3.07

2.09

-1.69

-8.90**

-2.23

-6.08

133

131

Dummy control (DC)
PWD*DC
Overall impacts
PWD
MC

-1.73
-5.60**

MC; DC=1
Number of observations

133

132

Panel B: Trigger Type
(1)
Constant
Discretionary trigger only (DT)
Tier 1/ RWA
Amount issued/ RWA
Log (total assets)
Leverage ratio

(2)
DC: G-SIB

(3)
DC: First-time issuer

(4)
DC: PWD

-4.80**

-5.60**

-6.09**

-8.07**

(-2.13)

(-2.13)

(-2.46)

(-2.21)

1.81

3.83

3.38

5.35

(0.84)

(1.37)

(1.51)

(1.36)

0.63

0.62

0.72*

0.52

(1.62)

(1.54)

(1.89)

(1.33)

-5.06

-4.44

-6.06*

-5.10

(-1.41)

(-1.26)

(-1.71)

(-1.35)

0.16

-1.66

0.09

0.24

(1.42)

(1.69)

(1.40)

(1.49)

-0.06

0.28

-0.08

0.30

(-0.05)

(0.21)

(-0.06)

(0.22)

5.77**

3.43

5.31

(2.33)

(1.29)

(1.54)

-1.86

-6.08

-5.87

(-0.58)

(-1.47)

(-1.41)

DT; DC=0

-1.77

-2.71

MT; DC=0

-5.60**

-6.09**

DT; DC=1

2.14

-5.36

MT; DC=1

0.17

-2.66

Dummy control (DC)
DT*DC
Overall impacts
DT
Mechanical trigger (MT)

-3.00
-4.80**

PWD;MT

-2.75

MC;MT

-8.07**

PWD;DT

-3.28

MC;DT

-2.72

Number of observations

130

130

129

130

Panel C: Trigger Level
(1)
Constant
Low trigger (LT)
Discretionary trigger only (DT)
Tier 1/ RWA
Amount issued/ RWA

(2)

(3)

DC: G-SIB

DC: First-time issuer

-4.20*

-2.39

-7.44***

(-1.72)

(-0.95)

(-2.60)

-0.97

-6.00

2.02

(-0.29)

(-1.12)

(0.68)

1.22

0.92

4.77

(0.55)

(0.38)

(1.62)

0.63*

0.64

0.81*

(1.65)

(1.62)

(1.93)

-5.16

-4.65

-6.31*

(-1.38)

(-1.27)

(-1.70)

0.10

-2.08

0.03

(0.07)

(-1.08)

(0.02)

-0.12

0.56

-0.05

(-0.08)

(0.39)

(-0.04)

3.33

6.93*

(0.82)

(1.95)

6.40

-6.42

(1.09)

(-0.96)

1.26

-9.54**

(0.29)

(-2.03)

LT; DC=0

-8.38*

-5.42*

DT; DC=0

-1.46

-2.67

HT; DC=0

-2.39

-7.44***

LT; DC=1

1.35

-4.91

DT; DC=1

3.13

-5.28

HT; DC=1

0.94

-0.51

Log (total assets)
Leverage ratio
Dummy control (DC)
LT*DC
DT*DC
Overall impacts
LT

-5.16*

DT

-2.98

HT

-4.20*

Number of observations

130

130

129

Table 5. Impact of CoCo Issuance on Issuers’ Equity Prices: Cumulative Prediction Error (CPE) Analyses
This table examines the impact of CoCo issuance on issuing banks’ equity prices using the methodology of James (1987). The average
cumulative prediction errors (ACPE) for each category are calculated as equally-weighted averages of the cumulative prediction
errors (CPEj) for the set of CoCo instruments that belong to each category. The weighted average cumulative prediction errors
(WACPE) are calculated as issued amount-weighted averages of the CPE for the set of CoCo instruments that belongs to each
category. For each CoCo instrument j, CPEj is defined as the cumulative prediction error (derived from a CAPM model, estimated
over a period of 200 business days, excluding the 40 business days centered around the event date) of its issuer’s equity price over
the event window, which starts 5 business days before the issuance date (t-5) and ends on the issuance date (t). The “Z-value” is
defined as Z = √N (ACSPE), where ACSPE is the average cumulative standardized prediction error and N is the sample size.
“Proportion negative” is the proportion of negative CPEj. The test statistic is a Wilcoxon signed rank statistic. The null hypothesis is
that the proportion of negative prediction errors equals 0.5. *, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels, respectively. The sample covers CoCo instruments issued by banks in advanced economies between January 2009 and
December 2015.
ACPE
All CoCos

Z-value

Proportion
negative

WACPE

Sample
size

0.15

0.76

0.35

0.27

170

Principal write-down (PWD)

0.27

1.03

0.29

1.16

103

Mandatory conversion (MC)

-0.04

-0.07

0.88

-0.74

67

Mechanical trigger

0.40

1.02

0.23

0.60

97

<=5.125

-0.17

0.73

0.29

0.04

65

>5.125

1.55

0.73

0.55

1.32

32

Discretionary trigger only

-0.24

-0.07

0.95

-0.38

67

0.69

1.56

0.15

1.91

60

PWD and trigger<=5.125

-0.19

0.66

0.36

0.20

47

PWD and trigger>5.125

Loss absorption

Trigger

PWD and mechanical trigger

3.87**

2.10

0.22

7.33

13

PWD and discretionary trigger only

-0.44

-0.44

0.69

-0.57

39

MC and mechanical trigger

-0.08

-0.35

0.92

-0.82

37

MC and trigger<=5.125

-0.12

0.32

0.65

-0.34

18

MC and trigger>5.125

-0.04

-0.80

0.66

-1.07

19

MC and discretionary trigger only

0.04

0.41

0.86

-0.11

28

Additional Tier 1

0.23

0.71

0.26

0.35

92

Tier 2

0.06

0.35

0.79

0.13

78

CoCo issue size

<median

0.33

1.44

0.12

0.14

92

(amount issued/ RWA)

>=median

0.37

-0.17

0.99

0.43

69

Issuer size

<$1000bn

0.65

1.30

0.27

1.75

96

(total assets)

>=$1000bn

-0.04

0.09

0.85

-0.74

67

Issuer

G-SIB

0.06

0.35

0.79

-0.27

74

Non-G-SIB

0.22

0.70

0.48

1.13

96

European issuance

0.17

0.37

0.58

0.43

111

Non-European issuance

0.11

0.78

0.46

-0.24

59

Distance to trigger

<median

1.40*

1.65

0.19

1.66

40

(Regulatory T1 capital/RWA)

>=median

0.29

0.50

0.38

-0.26

51

0.76

1.62

0.10

1.36

57

-0.23

-0.45

0.78

-0.41

108

First-time issuer
Repeat issuer

Table 6. Impact of Coco Issuance on Issuers’ Equity Prices: Cross-Sectional Regression Analyses
This table examines the impact of CoCo issuance on issuing banks’ equity prices using multivariate, cross-sectional regression
analysis. The dependent variable (CPEj) in all specifications is the cumulative prediction error (derived from a CAPM model, estimated
over a period of 200 business days, excluding the 40 business days centered around the event date) of the equity price of the issuer
of CoCo instrument j over the event window, which starts 5 business days before the issuance date (t-5) and ends on the issuance
date (t). The independent variables are: a dummy variable for CoCos with a principal write-down (PWD) loss absorption mechanism;
a dummy variable for CoCos with a high trigger (HT), defined as a mechanical trigger>5.125, the minimum for a CoCo to qualify as
Tier 1 capital; a dummy variable for CoCos with a low trigger (LT), defined as a mechanical trigger<=5.125; a dummy variable for
CoCos with only a discretionary (DT); a dummy variable for CoCos classified as Tier 1 instruments (Tier 1); a dummy variable for
CoCos issued by a globally systemically important bank (G-SIB); a dummy variable for CoCos issued by a bank with no prior CoCo
issuances (first-time issuer); CoCo issue size (defined as CoCo amount issued/ risk-weighted assets of the issuing bank) and the Tier
1 ratio, leverage ratio and size of the issuing bank (measured by the log of total assets)). All continuous variables are de-meaned. *,
** and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5% and 1%, respectively, based on a standard t-test for individual coefficients and on a Wald
test for sums of coefficients; t-statistics (in parentheses) are clustered by issuing bank. The sample covers CoCo instruments issued
by banks in advanced economies between January 2009 and December 2015.
Loss Absorption Mechanism and Trigger Level
(1)

Constant
Principal write-down (PWD)
High trigger (HT)
Low trigger (LT)

(2)
DC: G-SIB

(3)
DC: First-time
issuer

Amount issued/ RWA
Log (total assets)
Leverage ratio

PWD*HT
PWD*DT

(6)
DC: First-time
issuer

-0.71

-0.63

0.40

0.98

-0.05

(-0.77)

(-1.07)

(-1.06)

(0.55)

(1.3)

(-0.05)

-0.10

0.50

-0.28

1.07

1.32

1.08

(-0.16)

(0.59)

(-0.41)

(1.02)

(1.16)

(1.04)

0.61

1.38

0.37

(0.63)

(1.01)

(0.37)

-0.78

-1.78*

-0.55

(-0.98)

(-1.75)

(-0.66)

1.05

1.59*

0.92

(1.37)

(1.88)

(1.18)

-0.27*

-0.28

-0.24

-0.28*

-0.29

-0.24

(-1.71)

(-1.58)

(-1.59)

(-1.69)

(-1.51)

(-1.58)

-0.28

-0.40

-0.46

-0.29

-0.44

-0.49

(-0.23)

(-0.32)

(-0.38)

(-0.21)

(-0.34)

(-0.38)

-0.36

-0.16

-0.34

-0.42

-0.10

-0.40

(-0.96)

(-0.33)

(-0.87)

(-1.03)

(-0.18)

(-0.95)

-0.51*

-0.52*

-0.55*

-0.60*

-0.60**

-0.64**

(-1.81)

(-1.88)

(-1.92)

(-1.92)

(-2.03)

(-2.04)

Dummy control (DC)
PWD*LT

(5)
DC: G-SIB

-0.44

Discretionary trigger only (DT)
Tier 1/ RWA

(4)

-1.11

0.83

-1.68

0.96

(-1.07)

(1.18)

(-1.44)

(1.4)

0.15

-0.10

0.29

(0.16)

(-0.10)

(0.3)

4.09**

3.33*

4.24**

(2.07)

(1.67)

(2.04)
-1.22

-0.56

-1.44

(-1.11)

(-0.49)

(-1.23)

Overall impacts
PWD*HT

4.16**

4.51**

3.71**

MC*HT

0.17

0.67

-0.26

PWD*LT

0.66

1.28*

0.30

MC*LT

0.62

0.88

0.29

PWD*DT

-0.54

-0.21

-0.91

-0.53

-0.04

-0.95

MC*DT

-0.44

-0.71

-0.63

-0.38

-0.80

-0.59

1.47**

2.30**

1.04

0.40

0.98

-0.05

PWD*MT
MC*MT
Number of observations

155

155

154

155

155

154

