                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    TEMPERATURE EFFECTS ON PRODUCTIVITY AND FACTOR REALLOCATION:
      EVIDENCE FROM A HALF MILLION CHINESE MANUFACTURING PLANTS

                                           Peng Zhang
                                        Olivier Deschenes
                                         Kyle C. Meng
                                          Junjie Zhang

                                       Working Paper 23991
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w23991


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We thank Chris Costello, Jonathan Dingel, Soloman Hsiang, Charlie Kolstad, Peter Kuhn,
Mushfiq Mobarak, Paulina Oliva, and Chris Severen for their comments and suggestions. This
paper also benefited from seminar participants at UCSB, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Wuhan
University, Renmin University of China, and the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Any
remaining errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w23991.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Peng Zhang, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle C. Meng, and Junjie Zhang. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Temperature Effects on Productivity and Factor Reallocation: Evidence from a Half Million
Chinese Manufacturing Plants
Peng Zhang, Olivier Deschenes, Kyle C. Meng, and Junjie Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 23991
November 2017
JEL No. L60,O14,O44,Q54,Q56

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper uses detailed production data from a half million Chinese manufacturing plants over
1998-2007 to estimate the effects of temperature on firm-level total factor productivity (TFP),
factor inputs, and output. We detect an inverted U-shaped relationship between temperature and
TFP and show that it primarily drives the temperature-output effect. Both labor- and capital-
intensive firms exhibit sensitivity to high temperatures. By mid 21st century, if no additional
adaptation were to occur, we project that climate change will reduce Chinese manufacturing
output annually by 12%, equivalent to a loss of $39.5 billion in 2007 dollars. This implies
substantial local and global economic consequences as the Chinese manufacturing sector
produces 32% of national GDP and supplies 12% of global exports.

Peng Zhang                                     Kyle C. Meng
School of Accounting and Finance               Bren School of Environmental
M507C Li Ka Shing Tower                        Science and Management
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University           Department of Economics
Hung Hom Kowloon, Hong Kong                    University of California, Santa Barbara
peng.af.zhang@polyu.edu.hk                     4416 Bren Hall
                                               Santa Barbara, CA 93106
Olivier Deschenes                              and NBER
Department of Economics                        kmeng@bren.ucsb.edu
2127 North Hall
University of California, Santa Barbara        Junjie Zhang
Santa Barbara, CA 93106                        Duke Kunshan University
and NBER                                       Office: CC #1076
olivier@econ.ucsb.edu                          No.8 Duke Avenue, Kunshan Jiangsu,
                                               China 215316
                                               junjie.zhang@duke.edu
1     Introduction

High temperatures have been linked with lower aggregate economic output in many parts
of the world (Hsiang, 2010; Dell et al., 2012; Deryugina and Hsiang, 2014; Burke et al.,
2015; Chen and Yang, 2017). The design of climate change adaptation policy requires un-
derstanding the mechanisms responsible for these temperature-driven output losses. If they
are due to costly factor reallocation, adaptation investments should focus on lowering factor
adjustment costs. If they are due to direct productivity effects, investments should prioritize
reducing the sensitivity of productivity to temperature.
    We address this question by conducting the first joint empirical analysis of temperature
effects on total factor productivity (TFP), factor inputs, and output using firm-level data.
Specifically, we estimate the effects of temperature on manufacturing activity using plausibly
exogenous year-to-year variation in a firm’s exposure to the annual distribution of daily
temperatures. Using a detailed dataset covering the near-universe of Chinese manufacturing
plants during 1998-2007, we find an inverted U-shaped relationship between temperature
and TFP with particularly large negative effects at high temperatures. In our benchmark
specification, a day with temperature above 90◦ F decreases TFP by 0.56%, relative to a day
with temperature between 50-60◦ F.
    Importantly, we find that the response function between daily temperature and manu-
facturing output is nearly identical to that of TFP. Compared to a day with temperature
between 50-60◦ F, a day with temperature above 90◦ F lowers manufacturing output by 0.45%,
or by $8,160 in 2007 dollars for the average firm. In contrast, temperature effects on labor
and capital inputs are less responsive. This implies that TFP losses in response to high tem-
peratures is the primary channel through which temperature alters manufacturing output in
our setting.
    Projecting future climate change onto our empirical estimates, we consider the impact of
climate change on the Chinese manufacturing sector. Like other climate impact calculations
in the empirical literature, our calculations assume no additional adaptation that could

                                              1
potentially reduce the sensitivity of output to high temperatures. Under this scenario, we
find that climate change will reduce Chinese manufacturing output annually by 12% on
average during the 2040-2059 period. At the national level, if China’s manufacturing output
share remains at its current 32% of GDP, climate-driven losses in manufacturing alone could
reduce annual Chinese GDP by 3.8% by mid-century. This is equivalent to a loss of $39.5
billion in 2007 dollars. Such projected losses could also have large consequences for the global
economy given that China’s manufacturing sector currently supplies 12% of global exports
(World Bank, 2013a).
   Our analysis provides several contributions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first study to jointly examine the effects of temperature fluctuations on TFP, factor inputs,
and output within the same data environment. By detecting temperature effects on TFP, we
improve our understanding of how temperature directly affects an economic parameter that
is essential for economic growth (Aghion and Durlauf, 2005; Syverson, 2011).1 Furthermore,
by demonstrating the similarity between TFP and output effects, we quantify the limited
extent to which factor reallocation dampens the temperature-TFP relationship.
   Examining TFP allows us to look at the combined effect of labor and capital produc-
tivity. High temperatures could reduce labor productivity by causing discomfort, fatigue,
and cognitive impairment in workers. In addition, high temperatures could also affect ma-
chine performance and lower capital productivity. Previous studies have largely focused on
labor productivity (e.g., see Adhvaryu et al. (2014) and Somanathan et al. (2014)), without
examining capital productivity. Although one cannot explicitly disentangle TFP as labor
and capital productivity, we look for differential TFP effects for labor- and capital-intensive
firms. Our results suggest that high temperatures affect both labor and capital productivity.
   Finally, most prior sectoral analyses of temperature impacts have focused on agriculture
(Mendelsohn et al., 1994; Schlenker et al., 2005, 2006; Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007;
   1
     A growing literature in macroeconomics, industrial organization, labor, and trade seeks to understand
the determinants of productivity across firms and nations Syverson (2011). This paper documents that
temperature may be a new cause of productivity dispersion.



                                                    2
Schlenker and Roberts, 2009). However, focusing solely on the agricultural sector cannot fully
explain GDP losses given its relatively small output share in many national economies. For
example, agriculture accounts for only 1% and 10% of U.S. and China’s GDP, respectively.
By contrast, the manufacturing sector constitutes 12% and 32% of each country’s GDP (U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013; China Statistical Yearbook, 2014). This paper adds to
recent firm-level studies (Adhvaryu et al., 2014; Somanathan et al., 2014; Chen and Yang,
2017) along with subnational (Colmer, 2017) and national-level (Hsiang, 2010; Dell et al.,
2012; Burke et al., 2015) studies that have examined temperature effects on manufacturing
activity around the world. In particular, consistent with Hsiang (2010) and Dell et al. (2012)’s
evidence from other parts of the world, we find that a 1◦ F shift in the annual distribution
of daily temperature reduces China’s GDP by 0.92% through manufacturing sector impacts
alone. For China specifically, a recent parallel paper by Chen and Yang (2017) examines
temperature effects on firm-level manufacturing output over the same period. Our paper
complements Chen and Yang (2017) and provides new insights by isolating the mechanism
underlying the temperature-output relationship.
   Several policy implications may be drawn from this paper. First, our results can help
inform climate adaptation policy. If high temperatures only affected labor productivity, then
the Chinese manufacturing sector could adapt by shifting from labor- to capital-intensive
production. However, our results suggest that temperature increases could induce shifts in
production isoquants rather than along isoquants. Thus, the Chinese manufacturing sector
may be less able to avoid damages under climate change simply by reallocating labor and
capital inputs. Instead, technologies that expand the possibilities frontier for all inputs
are needed to offset the temperature-driven TFP losses. Second, these new estimates of
manufacturing sector damages could help revise cost-benefit analyses underlying Chinese
climate mitigation policy. This may be globally consequential given China’s position as the
world’s largest greenhouse gas emitter.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple conceptual


                                               3
framework that informs our empirical analysis. Section 3 describes the data sources and
summary statistics. Section 4 presents our empirical strategy while Section 5 describes our
results. Section 6 predicts mid-century climate change impacts on manufacturing output
and TFP. Section 7 offers policy implications and concludes.



2     Conceptual Framework

To illustrate the channels through which temperature can affect output, we consider a stan-
dard firm-level Cobb-Douglas production function for manufacturing output Q, taking labor
L and capital K as inputs:
                                   Q = (AL L)σL (AK K)σK

where AL and AK denote labor and capital productivity. Output elasticities for labor and
capital are captured by σL and σK . Taking natural logs:


                             ln Q = ln T F P + σL ln L + σK ln K                          (1)

where log total factor productivity (TFP) is defined as ln T F P = σL aL + σK aK . It is
the average of labor and capital productivity, weighted by the output elasticities of each
input. Temperature can potentially affect log output, ln Q, directly through productivity
and indirectly through factor reallocation.
    Temperature effects on labor productivity are well documented. High temperatures not
only cause physical discomfort and fatigue but can also affect cognitive functioning (Hancock
et al., 2007). Existing studies have documented these biological effects in both laboratory
(Niemelä et al., 2002; Seppanen et al., 2003, 2006) and observational data settings (Adhvaryu
et al., 2014; Somanathan et al., 2014; Graff Zivin et al., Forthcoming). Temperature can also
affect capital productivity, as suggested by various engineering studies. For example, higher
temperatures lower the ability of lubricants to reduce surface friction between mechanical



                                              4
components (Mortier et al., 1992); increase failure rates by expanding the volume of input
materials (Collins, 1963); and lower the processing speed of computers (Lilja, 2000).
        Some of these direct productivity effects may be offset by adjustments in factor inputs.
Previous work has documented the effects of high temperatures on reduced labor supply in
the U.S. (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2014) and India (Somanathan et al., 2014).2 It is also
possible that firms respond to extreme temperature by adjusting capital input.
        Our objective is to assess how temperature’s impact on log output is decomposed along
each components shown in equation 1. If the temperature-TFP relationship largely mirrors
the temperature-output relationship in magnitude and shape, then adjustments in factor
inputs have played a relatively small role in offsetting the direct productivity effects of
temperature. Conversely, factor inputs that respond to temperature suggest that factor
reallocation may have dampened temperature’s direct productivity effects.



3         Data

3.1        Firm Data

The firm level data used in this study come from the annual surveys conducted by the
National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) in China. This survey covers all industrial firms with
annual sales over nominal CNY 5 million (USD 0.66 million) from 1998 to 2007 (hereafter
referred to as the “above-scale” industrial firms).3 The industrial sectors included in the NBS
data are mining, manufacturing, and public utilities, of which manufacturing represents 94%
of the total observations. Given that manufacturing is by far the largest industrial sector in
the NBS data, we use the terms manufacturing sector and industrial sector interchangeably
throughout the paper.
    2
     See Heal and Park (2013) for a conceptual framework regarding the effects of temperature on labor
supply.
   3
     According to the census of manufacturing firms conducted by NBS in 2004, above-scale firms contribute
over 91% of total output.




                                                    5
      We process the NBS data to address several issues. First, each firm in the NBS data
has a unique numerical ID. However, firms may change their IDs because of restructuring,
acquisition, or merging. We use the matching algorithm provided in Brandt et al. (2012) to
match firms over time.4
      Second, the NBS data contain outliers which we address by following procedures estab-
lished in prior papers that have used this data (Cai and Liu, 2009; Brandt et al., 2012;
Yu, 2014). In particular, we drop observations with missing or negative values for value
added output, employment, and capital stock. We then drop observations with employment
less than 10, because these small firms may have unreliable accounting. We also drop ob-
servations that violate basic accounting principles such as when liquid, fixed, or net fixed
assets are larger than total assets and when current depreciation is larger than cumulative
depreciation. Finally, we drop observations for which our key variables - value added output,
employment, and capital stock - have values outside the 0.5 to 99.5 percentile range. Overall,
we remove approximately 10% of the initial NBS sample.
      Third, each firm is classified using a four-digit Chinese Industry Classification (CIC)
code, which is similar to the U.S. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) code. However,
in 2003, the NBS adopted a new CIC system, during which several existing sectors were
combined and new sectors were created. Following Brandt et al. (2012), we reclassify the
pre-2003 codes to make them consistent with post-2003 codes. The final estimation sample
contains 39 two-digit sectors, 193 three-digit sectors, and 497 four-digit sectors.


3.2      Measuring Firm-level TFP

Several approaches were used to estimate firm-level TFP. These methods are debated in the
literature as each requires a different set of assumptions (Van Biesebroeck, 2007). We use the
Olley-Pakes estimator (Olley and Pakes, 1996) as the primary approach to estimate TFP.
We also use the index number approach (Syverson, 2011) as a robustness check.
  4
    This algorithm involves first matching firms according to their IDs and then linking them over time
using information on firm names, staff member names, industry codes, and other characteristics.

                                                  6
       To estimate log TFP, we recast the log-linearized Cobb-Douglas production function in
equation 1 for firm i in county c during year t as


                                ln Qict = σL ln Lict + σK ln Kict + µict ,                                (2)


where from the NBS, ln Qict is log value added output, ln Lict is log employment, and ln Kict
is log fixed capital stock. µict is a residual term. The estimated residual µ̂ict = ln Qict −
σ̂L ln Lict − σ̂K ln Kict captures log TFP, where σ̂L and σ̂K are estimated output elasticities
of labor and capital. Equation (2) is estimated separately for each two-digit industry.
       The OLS estimates of the parameters from equation (2) may be biased because of simul-
taneity and sample selectivity. Simultaneity bias arises when firms can observe productivity
and endogenously choose labor and capital inputs. In that case, ln Lict and ln Kict would be
correlated with µict . Furthermore, firms with lower productivity may be more likely to exit,
resulting in the remaining firms observed in the sample having higher productivity.
       Olley and Pakes (1996) propose an estimator that addresses both simultaneity and se-
lection biases. Their basic idea is to use investment as a proxy for unobserved productivity
shocks, and use a firm’s survival probability to correct for selection bias.5 The Olley-Pakes
estimator is widely used in the literature,6 and thus serves as our baseline TFP measure-
ment.7
       A limitation of the Olley-Pakes estimator is that it requires parametric estimation of the
production function. As an alternative, the index number approach is less parametrically
restrictive. Rather, it uses the share of the wage bill on value added output to measure the
output elasticity of labor, σL , and use 1 − σL to measure the output elasticity of capital, σK .
However, the index number approach requires assuming perfect competition and constant
   5
     Investment is constructed using the perpetual inventory method. All monetary variables are deflated
using industry-level price indexes following Brandt et al. (2012).
   6
     For example, see Pavcnik (2002); Javorcik (2004); Amiti and Konings (2007); Brandt et al. (2012).
   7
     Levinsohn and Petrin (2003) argue that the use of investment to control for unobserved productivity
shocks may be inappropriate in certain empirical settings because investment must be strictly positive in
the Olley-Pakes estimator. We think this is a relatively minor issue in our empirical setting as there are few
observations with negative or zero investment.


                                                      7
returns to scale in production. As these assumptions may be overly strong for our empirical
setting, we use the index number approach as a robustness check.


3.3       Weather Data

The weather data are drawn from the National Climatic Data Center (NCDC) at the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The NCDC data reports global station-
level weather data at three-hour intervals from 1901-2015. We extract data from the roughly
400 stations covering China from 1998-2007.8 Auffhammer et al. (2013) note the importance
of keeping a continuous weather record when using daily weather data because missing values
may contaminate annual estimates derived from daily data. As such, we choose stations with
valid weather records for 364 days in a year.9
       The NCDC data contain temperature, precipitation, dew point temperature, visibility,
and wind speed. Relative humidity is not reported in the NCDC data, but is instead con-
structed using a standard meteorological formula provided by combining temperature and
dew point temperature (see Appendix A). We use the daily mean values of each weather
variable calculated as the average of three-hour values as our daily weather variable. The
exception is precipitation which is constructed as the daily hourly total.


3.4       Climate Prediction Data

To project the future impact of of climate change on productivity and output in the Chinese
manufacturing sector, we obtain predictions for the future daily distribution of all weather
variables used in our empirical analysis. These predictions come from the Hadley Centre’s
Third Coupled Ocean-Atmosphere General Circulation Model (HadCM3), which is com-
monly used in the literature (Schlenker et al., 2006; Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Deschênes
   8
    Figure 6 shows the geographical distribution of the weather stations.
   9
    We do not choose stations that are operational for all 365 days because all stations are missing one day’s
weather records for the years 1999 and 2007. Temperature for the remaining missing day is interpolated
using temperature from preceding and subsequent days.



                                                      8
and Greenstone, 2011). We do not use data from other Global Circulation Models because
other models typically produce only temperature and precipitation projections. HadCM3
reports global grid-level daily temperature, precipitation, relative humidity, and wind speed
from 1990 to 2099. The grid points are separated by 2.5◦ latitude and 3.75◦ longitude. We
focus on the A1FI scenario, a “business-as-usual” scenario and choose the 2040-2059 horizon
for our predictions.
       In order to account for any systematic error in the HadCM3 model, we implement the
error-correction method proposed by Deschênes and Greenstone (2011). This approach al-
lows for any baseline difference between the observed weather from NOAA and the modeled
weather from HadCM3 over the 1998-2007 period.


3.5       Matching Firm and Weather Data

The NBS firm-level data and station-level weather data are merged by year and county,
the smallest geographical unit available for each firm.10 We transform weather data from
station to county level by using an inverse-distance weighting method. Specifically, we assign
weather measures to counties by using a weighted average of data from weather stations
that lie within a 200 km radius of each county’s centroid. The weights are defined as the
inverse distance between each station and the centroid. A similar inverse-distance weighting
approach (using a radius of 300 km) is used to transform the HadCM3 data from the grid
to the county level. The final merged sample is an unbalanced panel from 1998-2007 with
511,352 firms. It has nearly two million observations.
       Table 1 presents summary statistics for the estimation sample. The sample contains all
state-owned firms and non-state-owned firms with sales over CNY 5 million (USD 0.66 mil-
lion) from 1998 to 2007 for which we can match weather data. The industrial sectors include
mining (3.81%), manufacturing (93.52%), and utilities (2.67%). The unit of observation is
  10
    The NBS data are collected at the firm level, not at the plant level, and so the assigned weather to
multiple-plant firms may be mis-measured. Crucially, more than 95% of firms in the sample are single-plant
firms (Brandt et al., 2012), and thus measurement error is unlikely to have a large impact on our results.


                                                    9
a firm-year and all monetary units are expressed in 2007 dollars.11
      Firm output is measured by valued added, which is the difference between total output
and the value of intermediate inputs. From 1998 to 2007, the annual average output of
each firm in the sample is $1.82 million. As shown in Figure 7 there is notable geographical
heterogeneity in the average level of output across firms over the sample period. Generally,
aggregate output is larger in the south and the east.
      The average log TFP is 2.9, but varies from -3.6 to 8.8, suggesting a large degree of
dispersion of TFP across firms. Labor is measured by total employment, with an average of
204 workers per firm. Capital is measured by fixed capital stock and averages $2.26 million
in value.
      Table 1 reports summary statistics for observed historical weather variables during 1998-
2007 and for predicted weather variables during 2040-2059 from HadCM3.12 The average
observed temperature during 1998-2007 is 61.5◦ F and average precipitation is 73.2 inches.
HadCM3 predictions indicate that average temperature will reach 65.2 in 2040-2059, an
increase of 3.6◦ F (2.0◦ C). Precipitation is expected to increase by 10.8 inches over the same
time horizon. Average relative humidity and wind speed are mostly unchanged during this
period.



4       Empirical approach

4.1       Measuring the Effect of Daily Temperature on Annual TFP

Our firm-level variables are observed annually. To estimate the effects of daily tempera-
tures on annual outcomes, we employ a widely-used method which discretizes the annual
distribution of daily temperatures into a fixed set of temperature bins (e.g. Deschênes and
Greenstone (2011); Deryugina and Hsiang (2014)). This semi-parametric approach allows
 11
      The USD to CNY exchange rate in 2007 was 7.61.
 12
      the HadCM3 model does not predict for visibility.




                                                    10
flexible estimation of nonlinear temperature effects across various daily temperature values.
       In practice, we divide the annual distribution of daily temperature in each county, mea-
sured in degrees Fahrenheit, into m = 1...10 bins. Tctm is the number of days in year t
experienced by county c with daily temperature that fall in bin m. Tct1 is the number of days
in county c during year t with daily temperature below 10◦ F (-12◦ C). Each interior bin is
10◦ F wide. At the upper tend, Tct10 is the number of days with temperature above 90 ◦ F
(32◦ C).
       Figure 1 plots the annual distribution of daily temperatures averaged across Chinese
counties and years in our sample. The height of each bar represents the number of days in
a year with daily temperature falling in each temperature bin, Tctm , averaged across counties
and years. Blue bars indicate the average daily temperature distribution for our 1998-2007
sample period. To preface our projections of future climate-driven effects in Section 6, the
red bars indicate the average daily temperature distribution for 2040-2059 projected under
a business-as-usual climate change scenario. Climate change is expected to shift the daily
temperature distribution to the right, replacing cold with hot days.


4.2       Empirical specification

We estimate the effects of temperature on each term in the production function shown in
equation 1: output, TFP, labor and capital. For firm i in county c in year t, we model
outcome yict ∈ {ln Qict , ln T F Pict , ln Lict , ln Kict } using the following regression specification


                                       X
                              yict =       β m Tctm + δ 0 Wit + θ0 Zict + εict                        (3)
                                       m

where the vector Wct include other county-year level weather controls including precipitation,
relative humidity, wind speed, and visibility.13 Zict is a vector of semi-parametric controls.
  13
     Zhang et al. (2017) demonstrate the importance of additional weather variables beside temperature
and precipitation for predicting crop yields in China. This motivates our inclusion of relative humidity
and wind speed as control variables. Additionally, air pollution can be correlated with weather, and may
affect productivity (Graff Zivin and Neidell, 2012). To address this, we use visibility as a proxy for air



                                                    11
It contains firm fixed effects to control for time-invariant firm-level characteristics; year-
by-geographical region fixed effects to control for annual shocks common to each region,
such as regional economic policy;14 and year-by-two-digit-sector controls for annual shocks
common to each manufacturing subsector such as input and output prices. To address
potential spatial and serial correlation in the error term εict , we cluster standard errors at
both firm and county-year levels (Cameron et al., 2011). This permits arbitrary forms of
serial correlation within a firm and spatial correlation across firms within a given county and
year.
    Our coefficient of interest is the semi-elasticity β m , the marginal effect of an extra day
with temperature in bin m relative to a day in the reference temperature bin between 50-
60◦ F, which is omitted from equation 3.15 Identification of β m in equation 3 requires that
year-to-year temperature fluctuations experienced within a firm to be exogenous (Deschênes
and Greenstone, 2007). Additionally, our identifying temperature variation is purged of
potential correlation with other weather variables which has been shown to be important for
the temperature-cereal yield relationship in China (Zhang et al., 2017).



5       Results

5.1     Main Results

We first present baseline regression results estimated using equation (3). To visualize these
estimates, Figure 2 plots the response function between daily temperature and output, as
well as the three components of output: TFP, labor, and capital inputs. Specifically, it plots
the point estimates and associated 95% confidence intervals for β m in equation (3) for each
pollution since we do not have national Chinese daily air pollution data (Ghanem and Zhang, 2014). Each
non-temperature weather term is modeled quadratically to account for potential nonlinear relationships.
  14
     Geographical
             P region     classifications are shown in Table 7.
  15                m
     Because m Tct    = 365 for every county and year, dropping one of the m temperature bins is required
to avoid multicollinearity. We omit the 50-60◦ F bin because it is in the middle of our temperature range.
Our results do not depend on this choice.




                                                   12
outcome. Estimates are relative to daily temperature between 50-60◦ F, the omitted reference
group, and are shown for each temperature bin in degrees Fahrenheit as well as in degrees
Centigrade.16
       Panel A in Figure 2 depicts the temperature-output relationship and shows an inverted
U-shaped relationship. The negative effects of extremely high temperatures (above 90◦ F) are
both economically and statistically significant. The point estimate suggests that an extra
day with temperature larger than 90◦ F decreases output by 0.45%, relative to an extra day
with temperature between 50-60◦ F.
       To put this in value terms, the average output of a sample firm was $1.82 million in
2007 dollars. Thus, the effect of an extra day with temperature above 90◦ F lowers output by
$8,160 for the average firm. At the aggregate level, the average total output of manufacturing
firms in our sample during 1998-2007 was $334 billion in 2007 dollars. If all firms in our
sample were to jointly experience an extra day with temperatures above 90◦ F instead of a
day between 50-60◦ F, total output would decrease by $1.50 billion.
       To provide a point of comparison with prior other studies, if there were a 1◦ F shift to
the entire annual distribution of daily temperature and the manufacturing output share of
Chinese GDP were to remain 32%, our results imply a 0.92% reduction in Chinese GDP
from temperature impacts in the manufacturing sector alone. This is consistent with Hsiang
(2010) and Dell et al. (2012)’s evidence from other parts of the world.
       We next turn to exploring which component of output drives the temperature-output rela-
tionship shown in panel A. Panels B, C, and D of Figure 2 plot the response function between
daily temperature and TFP, labor, and capital inputs, respectively. The temperature-TFP
relationship closely mirrors the shape of the temperature-output relationship. The magni-
tudes of each set of point estimates are also mostly similar. The extreme high temperature
effect depicted in panel B is slightly larger than in panel A, though the two point estimates
do not appear to be statistically different.
  16
    Centigrade bin boundaries are converted from Fahrenheit and rounded to the nearest integer to conserve
space.


                                                   13
   On the other hand, the response function of labor (panel C) and capital (panel D) to
temperature appear much flatter. Furthermore, the estimates for most temperature bins are
not statistically significant. There is, however, a small and marginally statistically significant
increase in labor input under extremely high temperatures. This suggests that firms may be
employing additional labor in response to extremely high temperatures though this response
is much smaller than the TFP effect. Overall, the evidence in FIgure 2 suggests that TFP
effects it the primary driver of the temperature-output relationship. For this reason, the
remainder of this paper will focus only on output and TFP effects.
   Table 2 further documents the effects of daily temperatures on output (panel A) and
TFP (panel B) using various specifications. Due to space limitations, we only report the
coefficients on the two highest temperature bins: 80-90◦ F and above 90◦ F. We also report
the F statistic testing the null hypothesis that all temperature bin coefficients are jointly
zero.
   Columns (1a) to (1d) test the robustness of our results to the inclusion and exclusion of
different sets of fixed effects. In column (1a), we start with a specification that includes only
firm and year fixed effects. Identification in this model comes form within firm temperature
variation and purges the potential biases due to annual nation-wide shocks such as policy,
technological, and price changes common to all counties. To allow spatial heterogeneity
in these annual shocks, the model in column (1b) replaces year fixed effects with year-by-
geographical region fixed effects. In column (1c), we replace year fixed effects with year-
by-sector fixed effects to control for shocks that are common to two-digit industries in a
given year. Finally, column (1d) shows our preferred specification as shown Figure 2, which
includes both year-by-region and year-by-sector fixed effects. The negative effects of high
temperatures are evident across the four different sets of controls. Estimates are generally
more negative when year-by-region fixed effects are included while year-by-sector fixed effects
do little to alter our estimates.
   Temperature bins are constructed using daily mean temperature across columns (1a)-


                                               14
(1d). In column (2a), we alternatively construct temperature bins using daily maximum
temperature to isolate the effects of peak temperatures within a day. The estimated coeffi-
cients becomes attenuated possibly because maximum daily temperature may not adequately
capture the full exposure of temperature during the course of a day. Finally, in column (2b),
we construct temperature bins using a daily heat index (see Appendix A for details), which
jointly incorporates the effects of temperature and humidity. The estimated coefficients are
relatively unaffected.
   The TFP measure used in columns (1a) to (2b) of panel B is constructed using the
Olley-Pakes estimator (Olley and Pakes, 1996). As a further robustness check, column (3)
estimates the same model as in column (1d) but uses a TFP measure constructed following
the index number approach (Syverson, 2011). These coefficients have a smaller magnitude
but remain statistically significant.
   To conserve space, Table 2 suppresses the coefficients on other weather variable controls,
Wct . Quadratic coefficients on precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and visibility are shown
in Table 8 and come from the benchmark model in column (1d) of Table 2.
   Past temperatures may affect current economic outcomes and may be correlated with
current temperature. To examine this potential source of bias, we add one-year lagged
temperature bins into our baseline regression model in equation 3. Figure 8 presents the
effects of jointly estimated current and lagged temperatures on output (panels A and B)
and on TFP (panels C and D). When controlling for lagged temperature, the shape of the
output (panel A) and TFP (panel C) response to contemporaneous temperature is similar
to that of our benchmark model in panels A and B of Figure 2. Furthermore, there does not
appear to be a systematic pattern in the lagged temperature-output (panel B) and lagged
temperature-TFP (panel D) relationships.




                                             15
5.2      Heterogeneity Across Labor and Capital-Intensive Firms

Figure 2 and Table 2 show that the negative effects of high temperature on output are
primarily driven by TFP losses. Given that TFP is a weighted average of labor and capital
productivity, we now turn to exploring whether these negative effects primarily originate
from labor productivity, capital productivity, or both. Previous studies have predominantly
focused on labor productivity (e.g., see Adhvaryu et al. (2014); Somanathan et al. (2014)).
Because TFP cannot be separated into labor and capital productivity in our production
function approach, we instead indirectly test for the relative role of each component. The
intuition is as follows. Recall from Section 2 that ln T F P = σL aL + σK aK . Suppose that the
negative effects of high temperature on TFP operate primarily through its effects on labor
productivity, aL . In that case, one should expect the effects on TFP to be more negative in
labor-intensive firms where the output elasticity of labor, σA , is typically larger.
   We use two measures of labor intensity to classify firms. The first measure is wage
bill over output, a common measurement of labor intensity. The second measure is labor
over sales, following Dewenter and Malatesta (2001). Both measures are defined using the
firm-level average across sample years.
   Table 3 presents the effects of temperature on TFP between labor- and capital-intensive
firms. In columns (1a)-(1c), labor intensity is measured by wage bill over output. In columns
(2a)-(2c), labor intensity is measured by employment over sales. To capture the heteroge-
neous impacts across labor- and capital-intensive firms, we interact the two highest temper-
ature bins (80-90◦ F and above 90◦ ) with variables that distinguish firms as either labor- or
capital-intensive. In columns (1a) and (2a), we interact two highest temperature bins with
raw labor intensity. In columns (1b) and (2b), we define a dummy variable equal to one if
a firm’s labor intensity is above the median for all firms, indicating it is a labor-intensive
firm. In columns (1c) and (2c), labor intensity is classified based on the mean labor intensity
value.
   If the effects of high temperatures on TFP were mostly through labor productivity,


                                               16
capital-intensive firms would be relatively unaffected and one should see much smaller effects
for the two uninteracted high temperature bins. However, each specification in Table 3
shows statistically significant negative effects for the uninteracted high temperature terms
suggesting that high temperatures lower capital productivity. In general, we detect similar
high temperature effects for labor and capital intensive firms though the relative magnitudes
of these two effects depend on the measure of labor intensity.


5.3       Heterogeneity Across Industrial Sectors

The effects of temperature on output and TFP may differ across industrial sectors because of
differences in temperature exposures and sensitivity to temperatures. To explore heterogene-
ity across industrial sectors, Figure 3 depicts point estimates and 95% confidence intervals
for the effect of temperatures above 90◦ F on output (panel A) and TFP (panel B) within
each two-digit sector. The regression models underlying Figure 3 are estimated separately
for each two-digit sector using equation (3).17 The average output share for each sector is
shown in parentheses with sectors sorted according to their shares. Each sector is classified
as either a light (labeled in red) or a heavy (labeled in blue) industry.18
       We find that temperatures above 90◦ F have statistically significant negative effects on
output for 15 out of the 33 industries. There is, however, strong heterogeneity across sectors.
One more day with temperatures above 90◦ F reduces output in timber manufacturing sector
by 1.26%, but has insignificant impacts on certain sectors such as medicine manufacturing.
These output effects are largely patterned by sector-specific TFP effects in panel B.
       Figure 3 suggests that temperatures above 90◦ F have significantly negative effects on
both light and heavy industries. Light industries, such as food processing, food manufac-
turing, and timber, are typically labor-intensive. By contrast, heavy industries, such as
non-metallic minerals, general machinery, raw chemicals, transport equipment, are generally
  17
     We exclude sectors with fewer than 10,000 observations. This includes the oil and natural gas mining,
other mining, tobaccos, chemical fibers, waste recycling, and gas utility, sectors.
  18
     The classification is based on the standards published by the Shanghai Bureau of Statistics. http:
//www.stats-sh.gov.cn/tjfw/201103/88317.html.

                                                   17
capital-intensive. Consistent with findings in Section 5.2, these results demonstrate that
high temperatures may be affecting both labor and capital productivity.
      Finally, we examine the heterogeneity in temperature effects across high and low-technology
industries as defined by the NBS.19 High-technology industries include medicine manufactur-
ing, electronic and telecommunication manufacturing, aviation and aerospace manufactur-
ing, computer manufacturing, medical equipment manufacturing, and information chemicals
manufacturing. Table 4 reports estimates on log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B)
for the full sample (column (1)), firms in high-technology industries (column (2)), and firms
in low-technology industries (column (3)). The coefficients are quite similar across these two
subsample of firms. This is striking as firms in high-technology industries tend to operate
in air-conditioned environments.


5.4      Heterogeneity Across Firm Ownership Types

Firms in China are required to implement protective measures such as providing hydration,
air conditioning, and bonus pay for workers during extremely hot days.20 Because enforce-
ment of labor regulations is typically more stringent in state-owned firms than in private
firms, the effects of high temperatures on TFP and output may be weaker in state-owned
firms. To explore heterogeneity by type of firm ownership, Table 5 presents the effects of
temperature on log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B) across ownership types. The
regression models underlying the estimates in Table 5 are estimated separately using equa-
tion (3) for each type of ownership. The coefficients are identified from deviations from the
mean within each firm, not by a change in ownership. Table 5 also shows that the mean
annual temperature faced by each subsample of firms is very similar.
      Private firms constitute the largest share in the Chinese manufacturing sector and bear
the most severe damages induced by high temperatures. An additional day with temperature
 19
   See http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/tjbz/201310/P020131021347576415205.pdf) for details.
 20
   See, for example: http://www.chinasafety.gov.cn/newpage/Contents/Channel_20697/2012/0704/
173399/content_173399.htm.



                                               18
above 90◦ F reduces output and TFP by 1.12% and 1.05%, respectively. The second largest
ownership type is foreign firms, which comprise 19.03% of the entire sample and experience
moderate damages from high temperatures. Collectively owned firms constitute 12.98% of
the entire sample, and the negative effects of high temperatures on output and TFP are
generally small or statistically insignificant. State-owned firms comprise the smallest share,
at 9.14%, and the effects of temperature above 90◦ F on output and TFP are significantly
positive. These results demonstrate the potential importance of labor regulations; private
firms may be bearing higher damages from high temperatures because of weaker enforcement
of labor regulations.


5.5    Heterogeneity Across Regions

Firms in different geographical regions may exhibit varied responses to high temperatures.
For example, regions that are hotter on average may have differentially adapted to extreme
hot days than regions that are cooler on average. To detect whether there is geographical
heterogeneity, Table 6 presents the effects of high daily temperature log output (panel A)
and log TFP (panel B) estimated separately for each region. The average daily temperature
for each region is also reported.
   The northeast has the lowest annual mean temperature, whereas the south has the highest
annual mean temperature. As shown in column (6) of panel A, the negative output effects of
temperatures above 90◦ F for firms in the south are larger in magnitude than the full sample
estimates in column (1) of panel A and statistically significant. Conversely, we do not detect
statistically significant output effects for firms in the much cooler northeast. Panel B shows
a similar pattern when the outcome variable is log TFP. This evidence indicates that firms in
locations that are warmer on average are more sensitive to extreme heat than those located
in cooler places. This suggests that adaptation based on long-term average temperature may
be incomplete.




                                             19
6     Predicted Impacts of Climate Change

We now interpret the main empirical results of the paper through the lens of ongoing climate
change to assess the vulnerability of the Chinese manufacturing sector to climate change.
To this end, we combine the estimated relationship between temperature fluctuations and
manufacturing output and TFP with predictions about future climate change.
    To predict impacts of climate change on output and TFP, we use the regression coefficient
estimates for each weather variable from equation (3). We then calculate the predicted
difference in each weather variable between the periods 2040-2059 (as projected by HadCM3
A1FI) and 1998-2007 for each firm. The firm-specific differences in the weather variables are
then averaged to a representative firm. For example, Figure 1 reports the predicted number
of days in each temperature bin by 2040-2059, for the average firm in the sample. In that
case, the predicted difference is simply the difference in the height of the bars representing
the number of days in each temperature bin. These predicted differences are then multiplied
by the relevant estimated regression coefficient to infer the impacts of climate change on
output for the average firm in the sample. Standard errors are calculated using the delta
method. In addition, we predict the impact on TFP using the same method.
    It is important to note the strong assumptions behind these calculations. Namely, while
we allow climate change to alter the distribution of temperature, precipitation, relative hu-
midity and wind speed, we hold all other determinants of manufacturing output fixed to
mean values over our 1998-2007 sample period. This includes, among other things, fixing
baseline productivity and technology to historical levels. Furthermore, our calculations as-
sume that firm entry, exit, and location decisions are not affected by climate change. Finally,
our calculations rely on predictions from a single climate model, which does not allow for
uncertainty associated with climate predictions (Burke et al., 2015).
    The predicted mid-century impacts suggest that climate change will reduce manufac-
turing output by 12% and TFP by 9% annually for the average firm. Both estimates are



                                              20
statistically significant at the 5% level.21 At the national level, if China’s manufacturing
output share remains fixed at 32% of national GDP, climate-driven losses in manufacturing
alone could reduce Chinese GDP by 3.8% annually by mid century.
      The climate change impact on output can be converted into monetary damages by mul-
tiplying the percent impact by the average annual aggregate output for all firms during
1998-2007 period. This amounts to a predicted loss of $39.5 billion in 2007 dollars.22 To
put this large estimate in perspective, we can compare it to country-level GDP data from
the World Bank (World Bank, 2013b). In 2007, 129 countries had GDP below this amount.
The predicted output loss under climate change in the Chinese manufacturing sector roughly
corresponds to the GDP of Tunisia or Lithuania.


6.1       Industry-Specific Predicted Impacts

As shown in Figure 3, there is considerable heterogeneity in the effects of high temperatures
on output and TFP across manufacturing subsectors. It is interesting to consider if such
heterogeneity is also detectable in the predicted climate impacts. Figure 4 presents the
predicted impacts on output (panels A and B) and on TFP (panel C), for 33 two-digit
sectors along with the 95% confidence intervals. Like in Figure 3, the underlying regression
models are estimated separately for each two-digit sector and the average output share for
each sector is shown in parentheses with sectors sorted according to their shares. Panel B
monetizes the predicted climate impacts on output for each sector by multiplying by the
average annual aggregate output.
      Several findings emerge from Figure 4. First, there is a high degree of heterogeneity in
both the sign and magnitude of the predicted impacts across sectors. The point estimates
vary from negative 24.85% for rubber to positive 6.12% for ferrous metal mining. Conse-
quently, the monetized climate damages in panel B greatly vary across sectors as well. Textile
will bear the largest climate change damage, with a loss of $4.30 billion, while the impacts
 21
      The 95% confidence intervals are [-15.76, -7.93] and [-11.79, -6.32] for output and TFP, respectively.
 22
      The 95% confidence interval is [-51.16, -26.92] billion USD.

                                                       21
on water utility, non-ferrous and ferrous metal mining, smelting of non-ferrous metals, and
coal mining are all negligible.
   Second, most sectors are predicted to have reduced output under climate change. In 20
of the 33 sectors, the predicted effects of climate change in percentage points (panel A) are
statistically significantly negative at the 5% level.
   Third, for large manufacturing subsectors, climate change impact predictions are both
economically and statistically significant. Sectors with output shares greater than 5% are
expected to face 10.48-17.01% output losses, with corresponding $1.93-4.30 billion losses.
In addition, both light (in red) and heavy industries (in blue) exhibit negative responses
to climate change. This is consistent with findings in Section 5.2 showing both labor and
capital productivity effects as light industries are typically more labor-intensive while heavy
industries are more capital-intensive.
   Lastly, the sector-specific predicted impacts on TFP shown in panel C are similar to the
predictions on output in panel A.


6.2    Region-Specific Predicted Impacts

The HadCM3 A1FI scenario predicts a warmer climate in China in the foreseeable future.
As shown in Table 1, between now and the 2040-2059 period, average temperatures are
predicted to increase by 3.64◦ F (2.02◦ C). There are also notable differences across region in
the extent of warming. For example, panel A of Figure 5 displays the difference in number of
days with temperatures above 90◦ F between the 1998-2007 and 2040-2059 periods. Eastern
and southern China are expected to gain more extremely hot days. As a result, the impact of
climate change on manufacturing activity could vary spatially across China. To demonstrate
such regional heterogeneity, Figure 5 presents the climate change predictions on output in
percentage points (panel B), in million USD (panel C), and on TFP in percentage points
(panel D) for each county. The county-specific effects are calculated as the county-level




                                               22
averages of the firm-level prediction detailed earlier.23
       The predicted climate damages in southern and eastern China are particularly severe
with losses of 15% or more, corresponding to roughly $260 million in most of the counties.
Notably, those regions are where most manufacturing firms are located. On average, the
northern and northeastern China are subject to more moderate output losses.
       The predicted damages on TFP are generally similar to the ones on output. Southern
China and eastern China are expected to experience severe losses, whereas the damages
are more muted for northern China. A large area in northwestern China is predicted to
experience moderate TFP increases. Overall, the results indicate strong heterogeneity across
geographical regions and suggest that an important response to climate change in China
could be the relocation of manufacturing plants to areas where damages are expected to be
lower. The analysis of such long-run responses is beyond the scope of this paper.



7        Discussion

This paper estimates the effects of temperature on manufacturing activity in China using
data from the near-universe of Chinese manufacturing firms. Over 1998-2007, we find that
one day with temperature above 90◦ F reduces manufacturing output by 0.45%, or by $8,160
in 2007 dollars for the average firm.
       To better understand the mechanism behind this temperature-output relationship, we
implement the first study that examines how temperature affects three components of out-
put: TFP, labor input, and capital input. We show that the temperature-TFP relationship
largely mirrors that of the temperature-output relationship while factor inputs are much less
sensitive to temperature. This implies that in our context, high temperatures lower output
primarily through productivity losses with factor reallocation playing a more limited role.
Finally, we find similar productivity effects across both labor- and capital- intensive firms
  23
    Thus, the county-specific predictions reported here only capture the effect of county-level heterogeneity
in the predicted changes in the weather variables, and not the heterogeneity in the historical relationship
between output and temperature.

                                                     23
suggesting that high temperature may be lowering both labor and capital productivity.
       Taking our historical estimates into a climate change projection, we calculate that climate
change would reduce manufacturing output by 12% annually by mid 21st century or by
$39.5 billion in 2007 dollars. If China’s manufacturing output share remains fixed at 32% of
national GDP, climate-driven losses in manufacturing alone would reduce Chinese GDP by
3.8% annually by mid century. These projected damages assume nothing else changes in the
future besides the climate. Additional climate adaptation during this future period could
ultimately reduce climate damages.
       These results have several policy implications. First, climate change adaptation policy
for the Chinese manufacturing sector should prioritize investments that reduce the respon-
siveness of productivity to high temperatures. In particular, investments should be made to
reduce both the sensitivities of labor and capital productivity to temperature.
       Second, even with adaptation, optimal policy is unlikely to completely eliminate climate
damages. The resulting climate damages on the Chinese manufacturing sector could have
global consequences. China is currently the world’s largest exporter. It provides 13% of
global exports in 2016 of which manufacturing goods comprise 94%.24 As a consequence,
any climate change damage to the Chinese manufacturing sector is likely to affect global
prices and thus welfare around the world.
       Third, China is currently the world’s largest emitter of greenhouse gases (U.S. Energy
Information Administration, 2012) and thus plays a major role in global climate mitigation
efforts. While China currently has policies to reduce emissions,25 these new estimates of
manufacturing sector damages could inform revised cost-benefit analyses of Chinese climate
policy. We leave such an exercise, which includes estimating the cost of Chinese climate
policy, for future research.



  24
    See: http://stat.wto.org/CountryProfile/WSDBCountryPFView.aspx?Country=CN
  25
    For example, under the Paris Agreement, China proposed to peak CO2 emissions, increase non-fossil
energy share to 20%, and lower carbon intensity by 60%, all by 2030.


                                                 24
References
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Namrata Kala, and Anant Nyshadham, “The Light and the
 Heat: Productivity Co-benefits of Energy-saving Technology,” Unpublished Manuscript,
 2014.

Aghion, Philippe and Steven Durlauf, Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1, Elsevier,
 2005.

Amiti, Mary and Jozef Konings, “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Pro-
 ductivity: Evidence from Indonesia,” The American Economic Review, 2007, pp. 1611–
 1638.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon M Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam
 Sobel, “Using Weather Data and Climate Model Output in Economic Analyses of Climate
 Change,” Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2013, p. ret016.

Biesebroeck, Johannes Van, “Robustness of Productivitiy Estimates,” The Journal of
  Industrial Economics, 2007, 55 (3), 529–569.

Brandt, Loren, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, and Yifan Zhang, “Creative Accounting
 or Creative Destruction? Firm-level Productivity Growth in Chinese Manufacturing,”
 Journal of Development Economics, 2012, 97 (2), 339–351.

Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David B Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker
 Satyanath, “Incorporating Climate Uncertainty into Estimates of Climate Change Im-
 pacts,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2015, 97 (2), 461–471.

Cai, Hongbin and Qiao Liu, “Competition and Corporate Tax Avoidance: Evidence from
 Chinese Industrial Firms,” The Economic Journal, 2009, 119 (537), 764–795.

Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller, “Robust Inference with
 Multiway Clustering,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 2011, 29 (2).

Chen, Xiaoguang and Lu Yang, “Temperature and Industrial Output: Firm-level Evi-
 dence from China,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2017, forth-
 coming.

China Statistical Yearbook, 2014.           http://www.stats.gov.cn/tjsj/ndsj/2014/
 indexeh.htm.

Collins, JG, “On the Calculation of the Temperature Variation of the Coefficient of Thermal
 Expansion for Materials of Cubic Structure,” Philosophical Magazine, 1963, 8 (86), 323–
 332.

Colmer, Jonathan, “Weather, Labor Reallocation, and Industrial Production: Evidence
 from India,” Unpublished Manuscript, 2017.



                                            25
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F Jones, and Benjamin A Olken, “Temperature Shocks and
 Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century,” American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics, 2012, pp. 66–95.

Deryugina, Tatyana and Solomon M Hsiang, “Does the Environment Still Matter?
 Daily Temperature and Income in the United States,” 2014.

Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone, “The Economic Impacts of Climate
 Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather,” The
 American Economic Review, 2007, pp. 354–385.

   and , “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adaptation: Evidence from Annual Fluctua-
  tions in Weather in the US,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3,
  152185.

Dewenter, Kathryn L and Paul H Malatesta, “State-owned and Privately Owned
 Firms: An Empirical Analysis of Profitability, Leverage, and Labor Intensity,” American
 Economic Review, 2001, pp. 320–334.

Ghanem, Dalia and Junjie Zhang, “’Effortless Perfection:’ Do Chinese Cities Manipulate
 Air Pollution Data?,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2014, 68
 (2), 203–225.

Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell, “The Impact of Pollution on Worker Pro-
 ductivity,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102(7), 3652–73.

   and , “Temperature and the Allocation of Time: Implications for Climate Change,”
  Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (1), 1–26.

Graff Zivin, Joshua S, Solomon M Hsiang, and Matthew J Neidell, “Temperature
 and Human Capital in the Short-and Long-Run,” Journal of the Association of Environ-
 mental and Resource Economists, Forthcoming.

Hancock, Peter A, Jennifer M Ross, and James L Szalma, “A Meta-analysis of
 Performance Response under Thermal Stressors,” Human Factors: The Journal of the
 Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 2007, 49 (5), 851–877.

Heal, Geoffrey and Jisung Park, “Feeling the Heat: Temperature, Physiology & the
 Wealth of Nations,” 2013.

Hsiang, Solomon M, “Temperatures and Cyclones Strongly Associated with Economic
 Production in the Caribbean and Central America,” Proceedings of the National Academy
 of Sciences, 2010, 107 (35), 15367–15372.

Javorcik, Beata Smarzynska, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productiv-
  ity of Domestic Firms? In Search of Spillovers Through Backward Linkages,” American
  Economic Review, 2004, pp. 605–627.



                                          26
Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin, “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to
  Control for Unobservables,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 317–341.

Lilja, David J, Measuring computer performance: a practitioner’s guide, Cambridge Uni-
  versity Press, 2000.

Mendelsohn, Robert, William D Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw, “The Impact of
 Global Warming on Agriculture: a Ricardian Analysis,” The American Economic Review,
 1994, pp. 753–771.

Mortier, Roy M, Stefan T Orszulik, and Malcolm F Fox, Chemistry and Technology
 of Lubricants, Springer, 1992.

Niemelä, Raimo, Mika Hannula, Sari Rautio, Kari Reijula, and Jorma Railio,
 “The Effect of Air Temperature on Labour Productivity in Call CentresA Case Study,”
 Energy and Buildings, 2002, 34 (8), 759–764.

Olley, G. Steven and Ariel Pakes, “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommuni-
 cations Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64, 1263–1298.

Pavcnik, Nina, “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements: Evidence
 from Chilean Plants,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2002, 69 (1), 245–276.

Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael J Roberts, “Nonlinear Temperature Effects Indicate
  Severe Damages to US Crop Yields under Climate Change,” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of sciences, 2009, 106 (37), 15594–15598.

  , W Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C Fisher, “Will US Agriculture Really Bene-
  fit from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic Approach,” American
  Economic Review, 2005, pp. 395–406.

  ,    , and    , “The Impact of Global Warming on US Agriculture: an Econometric
  Analysis of Optimal Growing Conditions,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2006, 88
  (1), 113–125.

Seppanen, Olli, William J Fisk, and David Faulkner, “Cost Benefit Analysis of the
  Night-time Ventilative Cooling in Office Building,” Lawrence Berkeley National Labora-
  tory, 2003.

  , , and QH Lei, “Effect of Temperature on Task Performance in Office Environment,”
  Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, 2006.

Somanathan, E, Rohini Somanathan, Anant Sudarshan, and Meenu Tewari, “The
  Impact of Temperature on Productivity and Labor Supply: Evidence from Indian Manu-
  facturing,” 2014.

Syverson, Chad, “What Determines Productivity?,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2011,
  49:2, 326–365.


                                          27
U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, 2013. http://www.bea.gov/industry/gdpbyind_
 data.htm.

U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2012.           http://www.eia.gov/cfapps/
 ipdbproject/iedindex3.cfm?tid=90&pid=44&aid=8.

World Bank, 2013. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/TX.VAL.MANF.ZS.UN.

  , 2013. http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD.

Yu, Miaojie, “Processing Trade, Tariff Reductions and Firm Productivity: Evidence from
 Chinese Firms,” The Economic Journal, 2014.

Zhang, Peng, Junjie Zhang, and Minpeng Chen, “Economic Impacts of Climate
 Change on Agriculture: The Importance of Humidity and Other Climatic Variables,”
 Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2017, 83, 8–31.




                                         28
Figure 1: Daily Temperature Distribution (1998-2007) and Predicted Daily Temperature
Distribution (2040-2059)
                                  100
Average Number of Days per Year
                                  80
                                  60
                                  40
                                  20
                                  0




                                        <10F    10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F   >90F
                                        <-12C   -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C    >32C

                                                               1998-2007              2040-2059


Notes: Daily temperature distribution averaged across all firms and years. Blue (red) bars
correspond the 1998-2007 (2040-2059) periods. Predicted climate variables are obtained
from the HadCM3 model running the A1FI scenario.




                                                                       29
          Figure 2: Estimated Effects of Daily Temperature on Manufacturing Output, TFP, Labor Input, and Capital Input


                                                    A: Temperature-Log Output                                                                                   B: Temperature-Log TFP




                                                                                                                                     .002




                         .002
                                                                                                                                     0




                         0
                                                                                                                       Log TFP




            Log Output
                         -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002
                                                                                                                                     -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002
                                                   <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F                                           <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F
                                                   <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C                                           <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C

                                                                          Daily Temperature                                                                                           Daily Temperature




30
                                                    C: Temperature-Log Labor                                                                                    D: Temperature-Log Capital



                                                                                                                                     .002




                         .002
                                                                                                                                     0




                         0

            Log Labor
                                                                                                                       Log Capital




                         -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002
                                                                                                                                     -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002




                                                   <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F                                           <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F
                                                   <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C                                           <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C

                                                                          Daily Temperature                                                                                           Daily Temperature

     Notes: Panels show the estimated temperature-log output relationship (panel A), temperature-log TFP relationship (panel B),
     temperature-log labor relationship (panel C), and temperature-log capital relationship (panel D). Figures show point estimates
     in blue and the associated 95% confidence intervals in gray. Each panel is a separately estimated regression using equation (3)
     and includes firm fixed effects, year-by-region fixed effects, and year-by-sector fixed effects. 50-60◦ F is the omitted
     temperature category. Standard errors are clustered at firm and county-year levels.
           Figure 3: Estimated Effects of Temperatures Above 90◦ F on Output and TFP for Each Manufacturing Subsector


                                                             A: Output (%)                                                            B: TFP (%)
                                                       -2   -1    0      1   2                                              -2   -1      0         1   2
                                   Textiles (8.41%)                                                     Textiles (8.41%)
                    Non-metallic minerals (8.17%)                                        Non-metallic minerals (8.17%)
                       General machinery (7.33%)                                            General machinery (7.33%)
                           Raw chemicals (6.95%)                                                Raw chemicals (6.95%)
                      Processing of foods (5.78%)                                          Processing of foods (5.78%)
                      Electrical machinery (5.56%)                                         Electrical machinery (5.56%)
                                     Metal (5.05%)                                                        Metal (5.05%)
                                   Plastics (4.40%)                                                     Plastics (4.40%)
                                   Apparel (4.35%)                                                      Apparel (4.35%)
                     Transport equipment (4.31%)                                          Transport equipment (4.31%)
                        Special machinery (3.76%)                                            Special machinery (3.76%)
                                    Paper (2.88%)                                                        Paper (2.88%)
               Communication equipment (2.83%)                                      Communication equipment (2.83%)
                                   Leather (2.22%)                                                      Leather (2.22%)




31
                     Manufacture of foods (2.21%)                                         Manufacture of foods (2.21%)
                Smelting of ferrous metals (2.19%)                                   Smelting of ferrous metals (2.19%)
                                   Timber (2.09%)                                                       Timber (2.09%)
                                Medicines (1.98%)                                                    Medicines (1.98%)
                                   Printing (1.88%)                                                     Printing (1.88%)
                       Electricity and heat (1.81%)                                         Electricity and heat (1.81%)
                   Manufacture of artwork (1.76%)                                       Manufacture of artwork (1.76%)
           Smelting of non-ferrous metals (1.66%)                                Smelting of non-ferrous metals (1.66%)
                              Coal mining (1.58%)                                                  Coal mining (1.58%)
                                Beverages (1.55%)                                                    Beverages (1.55%)
                   Measuring instruments (1.31%)                                        Measuring instruments (1.31%)
            Articles for cultures and sports (1.20%)                             Articles for cultures and sports (1.20%)
                                   Rubber (1.14%)                                                       Rubber (1.14%)
                                 Furniture (1.11%)                                                    Furniture (1.11%)
                         Nonmetal mining (0.92%)                                              Nonmetal mining (0.92%)
                                Petroleum (0.78%)                                                    Petroleum (0.78%)
                                    Water (0.74%)                                                        Water (0.74%)
                 Nonferrous metal mining (0.66%)                                      Nonferrous metal mining (0.66%)
                     Ferrous metal mining (0.61%)                                         Ferrous metal mining (0.61%)




     Notes: Panels show estimated effect of temperature above 90◦ F on log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B). Average
     output shares for each manufacturing subsector shown in parentheses. Sectors are sorted according to their shares.
     Temperature effects estimated using equation (3). Light (heavy) industries labeled in red (blue).
                                Figure 4: Predicted Climate Change Impacts on Output and TFP for Each Manufacturing Subsector


                                                           A: Output (%)                                            B: Output (USD Billion)                                                                         C: TFP (%)
                                                   -40 -30 -20 -10   0     10 20                                              -5   -4   -3    -2   -1   0   1                                              -40 -30 -20 -10   0   10   20
                               Textiles (8.41%)                                                           Textiles (8.41%)                                                             Textiles (8.41%)
                Non-metallic minerals (8.17%)                                              Non-metallic minerals (8.17%)                                                Non-metallic minerals (8.17%)
                   General machinery (7.33%)                                                  General machinery (7.33%)                                                    General machinery (7.33%)
                       Raw chemicals (6.95%)                                                      Raw chemicals (6.95%)                                                        Raw chemicals (6.95%)
                  Processing of foods (5.78%)                                                Processing of foods (5.78%)                                                  Processing of foods (5.78%)
                  Electrical machinery (5.56%)                                               Electrical machinery (5.56%)                                                 Electrical machinery (5.56%)
                                 Metal (5.05%)                                                              Metal (5.05%)                                                                Metal (5.05%)
                               Plastics (4.40%)                                                           Plastics (4.40%)                                                             Plastics (4.40%)
                               Apparel (4.35%)                                                            Apparel (4.35%)                                                              Apparel (4.35%)
                 Transport equipment (4.31%)                                                Transport equipment (4.31%)                                                  Transport equipment (4.31%)
                    Special machinery (3.76%)                                                  Special machinery (3.76%)                                                    Special machinery (3.76%)
                                Paper (2.88%)                                                              Paper (2.88%)                                                                Paper (2.88%)
           Communication equipment (2.83%)                                            Communication equipment (2.83%)                                              Communication equipment (2.83%)
                               Leather (2.22%)                                                            Leather (2.22%)                                                              Leather (2.22%)
                 Manufacture of foods (2.21%)                                               Manufacture of foods (2.21%)                                                 Manufacture of foods (2.21%)
            Smelting of ferrous metals (2.19%)                                         Smelting of ferrous metals (2.19%)                                           Smelting of ferrous metals (2.19%)
                               Timber (2.09%)                                                             Timber (2.09%)                                                               Timber (2.09%)
                            Medicines (1.98%)                                                          Medicines (1.98%)                                                            Medicines (1.98%)
                               Printing (1.88%)                                                           Printing (1.88%)                                                             Printing (1.88%)




32
                   Electricity and heat (1.81%)                                               Electricity and heat (1.81%)                                                 Electricity and heat (1.81%)
               Manufacture of artwork (1.76%)                                             Manufacture of artwork (1.76%)                                               Manufacture of artwork (1.76%)
        Smelting of non-ferrous metals (1.66%)                                     Smelting of non-ferrous metals (1.66%)                                       Smelting of non-ferrous metals (1.66%)
                          Coal mining (1.58%)                                                        Coal mining (1.58%)                                                          Coal mining (1.58%)
                            Beverages (1.55%)                                                          Beverages (1.55%)                                                            Beverages (1.55%)
               Measuring instruments (1.31%)                                              Measuring instruments (1.31%)                                                Measuring instruments (1.31%)
        Articles for cultures and sports (1.20%)                                   Articles for cultures and sports (1.20%)                                     Articles for cultures and sports (1.20%)
                               Rubber (1.14%)                                                             Rubber (1.14%)                                                               Rubber (1.14%)
                             Furniture (1.11%)                                                          Furniture (1.11%)                                                            Furniture (1.11%)
                     Nonmetal mining (0.92%)                                                    Nonmetal mining (0.92%)                                                      Nonmetal mining (0.92%)
                            Petroleum (0.78%)                                                          Petroleum (0.78%)                                                            Petroleum (0.78%)
                                Water (0.74%)                                                              Water (0.74%)                                                                Water (0.74%)
             Nonferrous metal mining (0.66%)                                            Nonferrous metal mining (0.66%)                                              Nonferrous metal mining (0.66%)
                 Ferrous metal mining (0.61%)                                               Ferrous metal mining (0.61%)                                                 Ferrous metal mining (0.61%)




     Notes: Panels show predicted average annual climate impact in 2040-2059 on output in percentage points (panel A), output in
     2007 billion USD (panel B), and TFP in percentage points (panel C). Average output shares for each manufacturing subsector
     shown in parentheses. Sectors are sorted according to their shares in panels A and C. Sectors are sorted by climate impacts in
     panel B. Light (heavy) industries labeled in red (blue). Predicted climate variables are obtained from the HadCM3 model
     running the A1FI scenario.
                  Figure 5: Predicted Climate Change Impacts on Temperature, Output, and TFP for Each County

                                     A:                                                  B:
                                                    Abov e90F
                                                                                                        Out
                                                                                                          put(
                                                                                                             %)
                                                      (Day)




                                                       .
                                                       00-.
                                                          41                                               -
                                                                                                           15.
                                                                                                             64--
                                                                                                                14.
                                                                                                                  52
                                                       .
                                                       42-2.
                                                           03                                              -
                                                                                                           14.
                                                                                                             51--
                                                                                                                12.
                                                                                                                  75
                                                       2.
                                                        04-5.
                                                            51                                             -
                                                                                                           12.
                                                                                                             74--
                                                                                                                8.42
                                                       5.
                                                        52-10.
                                                             64                                            -
                                                                                                           8.41--
                                                                                                                4.11
                                                       10.
                                                         65-46.
                                                              52                                           -
                                                                                                           4.10-10.
                                                                                                                  28
                                                       NoPr
                                                          oduct
                                                              ion                                          NoPr
                                                                                                              oduct
                                                                                                                  ion
                                                       No Data                                             No Data




33
                                     C:                                                  D:

                                                      Out
                                                        put                                             TFP(
                                                                                                           %)
                                                    (
                                                    USDMi l
                                                          l
                                                          ion)




                                                       -
                                                       527.
                                                          84--
                                                             14.
                                                               93                                          -
                                                                                                           15.
                                                                                                             97--
                                                                                                                12.
                                                                                                                  16
                                                       -
                                                       14.
                                                         92--
                                                            6.24                                           -
                                                                                                           12.
                                                                                                             15--
                                                                                                                9.23
                                                       -
                                                       6.23--
                                                            2.63                                           -
                                                                                                           9.22--
                                                                                                                5.17
                                                       -
                                                       2.62--
                                                            .68                                            -
                                                                                                           5.16--
                                                                                                                1.47
                                                       -
                                                       .67-3.
                                                            67                                             -
                                                                                                           1.46-8.
                                                                                                                 40
                                                       NoProduct
                                                               ion                                         NoPr
                                                                                                              oduct
                                                                                                                  ion
                                                       No Data                                             No Data




     Notes: Panel A shows change in days per year with temperatures above 90◦ F between 1998-2007 and 2040-2059 periods.
     Panel B shows average annual climate change impact in 2040-2059 on output in percentage points. Panel C shows average
     annual climate change impact in 2040-2059 on output in 2007 million USD. Panel D shows average annual climate change
     impact in 2040-2059 on TFP in percentage points. Predicted climate variables are obtained from the HadCM3 model running
     the A1FI scenario.
                                              Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                      Historical (1998-2007)        Predicted (2040-2059)
                                      Mean     Min        Max       Mean      Min      Max          Obs        Firms
      Firm Data
      Output (thousand USD)           1,820     11       54,218       —        —         —       1,833,408    511,352
      TFP                             31.25    0.03     6,887.59      —        —         —       1,833,408    511,352
      Log TFP                         2.90     -3.56      8.84        —        —         —       1,833,408    511,352
      Labor (person)                   204      10        3,013       —        —         —       1,833,408    511,352
      Capital (thousand USD)          2,258      9       51,906       —        —         —       1,833,408    511,352
      Weather Data
      Temperature (◦ F)               61.54    23.84     80.57      65.18    29.06    81.99      1,833,408    511,352
      Precipitation (inch)            73.17     0.06     845.07     84.01     0.01    833.54     1,833,408    511,352
      Relative humidity (%)           68.75    10.79      99.93     68.99    12.49     99.99     1,833,408    511,352




34
      Wind speed (mile/hour)          5.79      0.56     16.70       5.80    0.44     16.19      1,833,408    511,352
      Visibility (mile)                6.64     2.97      10.00       —        —        —        1,833,408    511,352
     Notes: Unit of observation is a firm-year. Sample includes state- and non-state owned firms with sales greater than
     nominal CNY 5 million during 1998-2007. Output is measured by value added. TFP is obtained using the Olley-
     Pakes approach. Labor is measured by employment. Capital stock is constructed following Brandt et al. (2012). All
     monetary units are in 2007 USD. Temperature, wind speed, visibility, and relative humidity are calculated as annual
     mean value from daily observations. Precipitation is calculated as the annual sum from daily observations. Predicted
     climate variables are obtained from the HadCM3 model running the A1FI scenario.
                                Table 2: Estimated Effects of Temperature on Manufacturing Output and TFP

      A: Output                                        Mean Temperature                       Max Temp      Heat Index
                                          (1a)          (1b)          (1c)          (1d)          (2a)          (2b)

      80-90◦ F                         -0.0009**    -0.0034***     -0.0007**    -0.0034***       0.0005      -0.0024***
                                        (0.0004)     (0.0004)       (0.0004)     (0.0005)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)
      >90◦ F                          -0.0028***    -0.0047***    -0.0022***    -0.0045***     -0.0010**     -0.0046***
                                        (0.0008)     (0.0009)       (0.0008)     (0.0009)       (0.0004)      (0.0005)
      p-value of joint test              0.0000       0.0000         0.0000       0.0000         0.0000        0.0000

      B: TFP                                                   TFP using Olley-Pakes method                                TFP using Index method
                                                       Mean Temperature                       Max Temp      Heat Index        Mean Temperature




35
                                          (1a)          (1b)          (1c)          (1d)          (2a)          (2b)                   (3)

      80-90◦ F                        -0.0011***    -0.0024***    -0.0009***    -0.0024***      0.0007*      -0.0018***            -0.0015***
                                       (0.0003)      (0.0004)      (0.0003)      (0.0004)      (0.0004)       (0.0004)              (0.0003)
      >90◦ F                          -0.0041***    -0.0057***    -0.0036***    -0.0056***    -0.0010***     -0.0033***            -0.0029***
                                       (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0007)      (0.0008)      (0.0004)       (0.0004)              (0.0007)
      p-value of joint test             0.0000        0.0000        0.0000        0.0000         0.0000        0.0000                0.0000

      Observations                     1,833,408     1,833,408     1,833,408     1,833,408     1,833,408     1,833,408              1,833,408
      Firm FE                             YES           YES           YES           YES           YES           YES                    YES
      Year FE                             YES           NO            NO            NO            NO            NO                     NO
      Year-by-region FE                   NO            YES           NO            YES           YES           YES                    YES
      Year-by-two-digit-sector FE         NO            NO            YES           YES           YES           YES                    YES
     Notes: Dependent variables are log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B). Models include all temperature bins. Only coefficients on 80-90◦ F and
     >90◦ F bins are shown. In columns (1a)-(2b), log TFP is measured using the Olley-Pakes method. In column (3), TFP is measured using Index method.
     In columns (1a)-(1d), bins are constructed using daily mean temperature. In columns (2a) and (2b), bins are constructed using daily maximum tem-
     perature and daily heat index. The estimates in column (1d) correspond to Figure 2. Standard errors are clustered at firm and county-year levels. ∗
     p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.
   Table 3: Estimated Effects of Temperature on TFP across Labor- and Capital-Intensive Firms

                                 Labor Intensity = Wage Bill/Output              Labor Intensity = Labor/Sales
                                     (1a)          (1b)           (1c)           (2a)          (2b)           (2c)

 80-90◦ F                        -0.0035***     -0.0015***     -0.0017***    -0.0024***     -0.0023***    -0.0025***
                                  (0.0003)       (0.0004)       (0.0004)      (0.0004)       (0.0004)       (0.0005)
 >90◦ F                          -0.0042***     -0.0050***     -0.0052***    -0.0055***     -0.0068***    -0.0061***
                                  (0.0008)       (0.0009)       (0.0009)      (0.0008)       (0.0009)       (0.0008)
 80-90◦ F × Labor Intensity      0.0041***          —               —          -0.0001           —             —
                                  (0.0003)          —               —         (0.0002)           —             —
 >90◦ F × Labor Intensity          -0.0008          —               —          -0.0094           —             —
                                  (0.0016)          —               —         (0.0060)           —             —
 80-90◦ F × Above Median              —         -0.0016***          —             —           -0.0002          —
                                      —          (0.0002)           —             —          (0.0002)          —
 >90◦ × Above Median                  —          -0.0012*           —             —         0.0023***          —
                                      —          (0.0007)           —             —          (0.0007)          —
 80-90◦ F × Above Mean                —             —          -0.0016***         —              —         0.0006**
                                      —             —           (0.0002)          —              —          (0.0003)
 >90◦ × Above Mean                    —             —            -0.0008          —              —         0.0030***
                                      —             —           (0.0007)          —              —          (0.0008)

 Observations                     1,833,408      1,833,408     1,833,408      1,833,408      1,833,408     1,833,408
Notes: Dependent variable is log TFP. Regression models based on equation (3) and include firm fixed effects, year-
by-region fixed effects, and year-by-sector fixed effects. Models include all temperature bins. Only coefficients on 80-
90◦ F and >90◦ F bins are shown. In columns (1a)-(1c), labor intensity is measured using wage bill over output. In
columns (2a)-(2c), labor intensity is measured using labor over sales. Columns (1a) and (2a) interact temperature with
labor intensity. In columns (1b) and (2b), labor-intensive firms are classified as having above median labor intensity.
In columns (1c) and (2c), labor-intensive firms are classified as having above mean labor intensity. Standard errors are
clustered at firm and county-year levels. ∗ p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.




                                                     36
Table 4: Estimated Effects of Temperature on Output and TFP Across Tech-
nology Types

                        Full sample      High-tech industries       Low-tech industries
                             (1)                 (2)                       (3)
 A: Output
 80-90◦ F                -0.0034***               -0.0020                 -0.0035***
                          (0.0005)               (0.0015)                  (0.0004)
 >90◦ F                  -0.0045***             -0.0040**                 -0.0045***
                          (0.0009)               (0.0018)                  (0.0009)
 B: TFP
 80-90◦ F                -0.0024***            -0.0033***                 -0.0023***
                          (0.0004)              (0.0009)                   (0.0004)
 >90◦ F                  -0.0056***            -0.0051***                 -0.0056***
                          (0.0008)              (0.0015)                   (0.0008)

 Mean Temp (◦ F)            61.54                  62.81                     61.46
 Percentage                 100%                   6.51%                    93.49%
 Observations             1,833,408               119,304                  1,714,104
Notes: Dependent variables are log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B). Regression
models are estimated separately for the full sample, for firms in high-technology industries,
and for firms in low-technology industries using equation (3) and include firm fixed effects,
year-by-region fixed effects, and year-by-sector fixed effects. Models include all temperature
bins. Only coefficients on 80-90◦ F and >90◦ F bins are shown. Following NBS definitions,
high-technology industries include medicine manufacturing, electronic and telecommunica-
tion manufacturing, aviation and aerospace manufacturing, computer manufacturing, med-
ical equipment manufacturing, and information chemicals manufacturing. Standard errors
are clustered at both firm and county-year levels. ∗ p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.




                                             37
Table 5: Estimated Effects of Temperature on Output and TFP Across Ownership
Types

                        Full sample        Private        Foreign       Collective     State-Owned
                             (1)             (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)
 A: Output
 80-90◦ F                -0.0034***      -0.0067***        -0.0009      -0.0039***         0.0009
                          (0.0005)        (0.0007)        (0.0015)       (0.0007)         (0.0008)
 >90◦ F                  -0.0045***      -0.0112***       -0.0026*       -0.0025*        0.0033***
                          (0.0009)        (0.0012)        (0.0015)       (0.0014)         (0.0012)
 B: TFP
 80-90◦ F                -0.0024***      -0.0050***   0.0004   -0.0028***                  0.0009
                          (0.0004)        (0.0007)   (0.0008)   (0.0007)                  (0.0005)
 >90◦ F                  -0.0056***      -0.0105*** -0.0049***   -0.0020                  0.0022**
                          (0.0008)        (0.0011)   (0.0015)   (0.0013)                  (0.0011)

 Mean Temp (◦ F)           61.54            61.64          64.52           60.25            59.03
 Percentage                100%            38.46%         19.03%          12.98%            9.14%
 Observations            1,833,408         705,078        348,985         237,942          167,648
Notes: Dependent variables are log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B). Regression models are
estimated separately for each ownership category using equation (3) and include firm fixed effects,
year-by-region fixed effects, and year-by-sector fixed effects. Models include all temperature bins. Only
coefficients on 80-90◦ F and >90◦ F bins are shown. Column (1) reports estimates for the full sample.
Columns (2)-(5) report estimates for each ownership type. Standard errors are clustered at both firm
and county-year levels. ∗ p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.




                                                   38
                            Table 6: Estimated Effects of Temperature on TFP Across Geographical Regions

                               Overall         North       Northeast         East          Central         South       Southwest      Northwest
                                (1)             (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)            (6)           (7)            (8)
      A: Output
      80-90◦ F               -0.0024*** -0.0059***           -0.0004      -0.0041***     -0.0052***   -0.0022            0.0004         -0.0002
                              (0.0004)   (0.0013)           (0.0019)       (0.0007)       (0.0013)   (0.0013)           (0.0008)       (0.0013)
      >90◦ F                 -0.0056*** -0.0118***           0.0187       -0.0081***       -0.0023  -0.0213***           0.0016         0.0025
                              (0.0008)   (0.0045)           (0.0174)       (0.0012)       (0.0017)   (0.0058)           (0.0015)       (0.0032)

      B: TFP
      80-90◦ F               -0.0034*** -0.0061***           -0.0013      -0.0060***     -0.0078*** -0.0047***           0.0012         -0.0014
                              (0.0005)   (0.0015)           (0.0022)       (0.0008)       (0.0015)   (0.0015)           (0.0009)       (0.0013)
      >90◦ F                 -0.0045*** -0.0164***           0.0289       -0.0066***       -0.0029  -0.0256***          0.0038**        0.0022
                              (0.0009)   (0.0048)           (0.0192)       (0.0014)       (0.0018)   (0.0071)           (0.0016)       (0.0036)




39
      Mean Temp (◦ F)          61.54           53.99         46.77          62.27           61.45          73.20          61.74          50.93
      Percentage               100%            9.94%         6.08%         51.08%          10.93%         13.45%          5.82%         2.71%
      Observations           1,833,408        182,189       111,506        936,478         200,397        246,515        106,676        49,647
     Notes: Dependent variables are log output (panel A) and log TFP (panel B). Regression models are estimated separately for each geographical
     region and include firm fixed effects and year-by-sector fixed effects. Models include all temperature bins. Only coefficients on 80-90◦ F and
     >90◦ F bins are shown. See Table 7 for regional definitions. Column (1) reports estimates for the full sample. Columns (2)-(8) report estimates
     for each region. Standard errors are clustered at both firm and county-year levels. ∗ p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.
                                Online Appendix

A     Calculating relative humidity and heat index
Relative Humidity
Our weather dataset from NOAA does not report relative humidity. Instead, we use the
following formula to calculate relative humidity:26
                                           112 − 0.1T + Td 8
                               RH ≈ 100(                  )                               (4)
                                             112 + 0.9T
where RH denotes relative humidity in percent, T is temperature in ◦ C, and Td is dew point
temperature in ◦ C.

Heat Index
The heat index, or apparent temperature, measures the combination of temperature together
with relative humidity. The human body can cool itself through perspiration; however, this
process is hard in a humid environment. For example, if temperature is 90◦ F and the relative
humidity is 60%, then the apparent temperature can feel like a dry 100◦ F.27
   To calculate heat index, HI, in ◦ F, when T < 80◦ F , we use the following formula:28

                HI = 0.5 ∗ (T + 61.0 + ((T − 68.0) ∗ 1.2) + (RH ∗ 0.094)).                (5)

where T denotes temperature in ◦ F, and RH indicates relative humidity. When T ≥ 80◦ F ,
we use:
        HI = −42.379 + 2.04901523 ∗ T + 10.14333127 ∗ RH − .22475541 ∗ T ∗ RH
            −.00683783 ∗ T ∗ T − .05481717 ∗ RH ∗ RH + .00122874 ∗ T ∗ T ∗ RH             (6)
               +.00085282 ∗ T ∗ RH ∗ RH − .00000199 ∗ T ∗ T ∗ RH ∗ RH + adj,

where adj is an adjustment term. When RH < 0.13 and T ∈ [80, 112◦ F ], adj = −((13 −
RH)/4) ∗ ((17 − |T − 95|)/17)0.5 . When RH > 0.85 and T ∈ [80, 87◦ F ], adj = ((RH −
85)/10) ∗ (87 − T )/5). Otherwise, adj = 0.




 26
    http://www.erh.noaa.gov/bgm/tables/rh.shtml
 27
    http://www.srh.noaa.gov/ama/?n=heatindex
 28
    http://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/html/heatindex_equation.shtml


                                             40
                Figure 6: Distribution of Weather Stations in China




Notes: Each dot represents a weather station and each polygon represents a county.




                                        41
                Figure 7: Geographical Distribution of Output, 1998-2007

                                                                    Out
                                                                      put
                                                                  (
                                                                  USDBill
                                                                        i
                                                                        on)




                                                                           .
                                                                           00-.
                                                                              01
                                                                           .
                                                                           02-.
                                                                              03
                                                                           .
                                                                           04-.
                                                                              06
                                                                           .
                                                                           07-.
                                                                              15
                                                                           .
                                                                           16-3.
                                                                               90
                                                                           NoProduct
                                                                                   ion
                                                                           No Data




Notes: Maps shows the average annual aggregate output, in 2007 billion USD, for each
county during the 1998-2007 sample period.




                                          42
                                 Figure 8: Estimated Effects of Current and Lagged Temperature on Manufacturing Output and TFP

                                                    A: Current Temperature-Log Output                                                                          B: Lagged Temperature-Log Output




                          .002
                                                                                                                                    .002




                          0
                                                                                                                                    0




                          -.002
                          -.004


            Log Output
                                                                                                                       Log Output




                          -.006
                          -.008
                                                                                                                                    -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002
                                                   <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F                                          <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F
                                                   <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C                                          <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C

                                                                          Daily Temperature                                                                                          Daily Temperature




43
                                                     C: Current Temperature-Log TFP                                                                            D: Lagged Temperature-Log TFP




                         .002
                                                                                                                                    .002




                         0
                                                                                                                                    0




            Log TFP
                                                                                                                       Log TFP




                         -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002
                                                                                                                                    -.008 -.006 -.004 -.002




                                                   <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F                                          <10F 10-20F 20-30F 30-40F 40-50F 50-60F 60-70F 70-80F 80-90F >90F
                                                   <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C                                          <-12C -12--7C -7--1C -1-4C 4-10C 10-16C 16-21C 21-27C 27-32C >32C

                                                                          Daily Temperature                                                                                          Daily Temperature
     Notes: Panels show the estimated current temperature-log output relationship (panel A), lagged temperature-log output
     relationship (panel B), current temperature-log TFP relationship (panel C), and lagged temperature-log TFP relationship
     (panel D). Figures show point estimates in blue and the associated 95% confidence intervals in gray. Panels A and B (C and
     D) are from the same estimated regression using equation (3) and includes firm fixed effects, year-by-region fixed effects, and
     year-by-sector fixed effects. 50-60◦ F is the omitted temperature category. Standard errors are clustered at firm and
     county-year levels.
                             Table 7: Region Classification

Geographical Regions Provinces
North                Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei, Shanxi, Nei Mongol
Northeast            Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang
East                 Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi, Shandong
Central              Henan, Hubei, Hunan
South                Guangdong, Guangxi, Hainan
Southwest            Chongqing, Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunan, Xizang (Tibet)
Northwest            Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai, Ningxia Hui, Xinjiang Uygur




                  Table 8: Regression Results for Weather Vari-
                  ables Other than Temperature

                                           Output                  TFP
                                              (1)                   (2)
                   Precipitation        -0.0005***            -0.0004***
                                          (0.0002)              (0.0001)
                   Precipitation Square     0.0000                0.0000
                                          (0.0000)              (0.0000)
                   Humidity                -0.0011               -0.0015
                                          (0.0010)              (0.0009)
                   Humidity Square          0.0000                0.0000
                                          (0.0000)              (0.0000)
                   Wind Speed              -0.0116             -0.0202**
                                          (0.0104)              (0.0094)
                   Wind Speed Square     -0.0016**               -0.0001
                                          (0.0008)              (0.0007)
                   Visibility             -0.0456*               -0.0341
                                          (0.0277)              (0.0241)
                   Visibility Square        0.0032                0.0025
                                          (0.0020)              (0.0018)

                   Observations                1,833,408       1,833,408
                  Notes: This table shows the other weather coefficients
                  from column (1d) of Table 2. Dependent variables are log
                  output and and log TFP. Regression models estimated
                  using equation (3) and includes firm fixed effects, year-
                  by-region fixed effects, and year-by- sector fixed effects.
                  Standard errors are clustered at both firm and county-
                  year levels. ∗ p <0.10, ∗∗ p <0.05, ∗∗∗ p <0.01.



                                              44
