                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             CONTRACTION AND EXPANSION:
                          THE DIVERGENCE OF PRIVATE SECTOR
                       AND PUBLIC SECTOR UNIONISM IN THE U.S.




                                 Richard B. Freeman




                              Working Paper No. 2399




                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
                                              NBER Working Paper #2399
                                              October 1987




                       Contraction and Expansion:

The Divergence of Private Sector and Public Sector Unionism in the U.S.




                               ABSTRACT



This paper contrasts the differing experience of public sector unionism,

which has expanded in the United States, and private sector unionism,

which has contracted, in the past several decades.   It uses the experi-

ence of other countries, particularly Canada, to rule out some explana-

tions of the divergent trends. The paper finds that the major reason

for the private sector decline is increased management Opposition to

union organization, motivated in part by profit-seeking behavior, and

augmented by trade union responses; and that the major reason for the

public sector union expansion is decreased market opposition due to pas-

sage of comprehensive collective bargaining laws and motivated in part

by vote—seeking behavior.




                                            Richard B. Freeman
                                            NBER
                                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                            Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         —1—




       The institutional     structure of the American labor
                                                          market changed
  remarkably from the l950s and 1960s to the l980s. In the '50s and
                                                                    '60s
  trade Unions seemed
                       permanently established in the private sector of the
  economy: a third of nonagricultural
                                      wage and salary workers, and over half
  of blue-collar workers,
                            were union members; hundreds of thousands of
 workers voted annually in           National Labor Relations Board       (NLRB)
 representation elections to join
                                        unions; most large firms sought stable
 collective bargaining relations with their Unions. By
                                                            contrast, in the
 public sector only 10-12 percent of workers were union members;
                                                                  fewer were
 covered by collective bargaining contracts; and most
                                                            experts regarded
 public employees as
                       intrinsically nonorganizable. According to AFL-CIO
 president George Meany, it was "impossible to bargain
                                                       collectively with the
 government.

      The massive contraction of unionism in the private
                                                                    sector and
expansion in the public sector in the l970s and l980s (see Exhibit
                                                                     1) has
produced an utterly different
                               situation today. In the private sector, the
proportion of wage and salary workers
                                       in unions plummeted to 14 percent in
1986 -. a
            level comparable to that in the Great Depression;
                                                                    only a
minuscule number of workers
                                  joined unions through NLRB elections;    and
national companies      openly proclaimed their intent        to establish a
"union-free environment ft
                             y   contrast, in the public sector over a third of
the work force was unionized
                                   some 40 percent were covered by collective
contracts;2 and public sector unions such as the
                                                 American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees, National Education Association,
         EXHIBJLI: Changing Percent of Non_Agricultural
                        Workers Who Are Union, by Sector




0/ Unionized                          Public Sector (BLS)
  40                                  Unions and
                                      Assoc.                Public Sector (CPS)
   38                                                              and Assoc.
   36
  34
   32
   30
   28
   26
   24
   22
   20
    18
    16         Public Sector                                    Private
                                                                 Sector
    14         (BLS)UniOflS Only

    12

    10
         E1



                              Workers in Unions and Assoc. in Public Sector,
   Sources: Percentage of
                (BLS) U.S. Dept of Labor, 1979.
                                         Unions and Pssoc. in Public Sector,
                Percentage of Workers in
                                             1973-1.984, (1982 not available).
                (cP5) U.S. Bureau of Census,
                                                                  1956-1.982,
                Percentage of Workers in Union in Private Sector
                Troy, Leo and Neil Sheflin, Union Sourcebook.
                 Private Sector 1984-86 from CPS, U.S. Dept. of Labor, Employ-
                                         1985-87, Spliced with Sourcebook at 1.983.
                 ment and Earnings, Jan.
                                          —2—


   Service Employees International, (which became largely public
                                                                 sector in the
  period), and the American Federation
                                         of Teachers were among the largest in
  the country. With one in three
                                  union members working in the public sector,
  women with master's degrees
                               (largely schoolteachers) more highly organized
  than male high school
                         graduates, and police and firefighters the exemplars
  of craft unionism, the union
                               movement differed drastically from that headed
  by Meany in the l9GOs.

       Because   the private       sector     employs     nearly 85 percent of
  nonagricultural wage and salary workers             in the United States,3    the
  contraction of Unionization in the
                                          private sector dominates the trends for
  the economy as a whole, with the result that the union
                                                         proportion of
 nonagrjcultur employees fell from 36 percent in 1956 to 18 percent in
 1986. This decline in union
                               density was larger than that of the l920s, and
 thus arguably represents the      most significant change in labor market
 institutions since the Depression    -   - the   effective de-unionization of most
 of the U.S. labor force.

      What explains the decline in
                                     union representation of private wage and
 salary workers? Why have unions expanded in the public sector while

contracting in the private sector? Is the economy-wide fall in density a
phenomenon common to developed
                               capitalist economies, or is it unique to the
United States? To what extent should economists alter their
                                                               views about
what unions do to the
                       economy in light of the fact that they
                                                               increasingly
do it in the public sector?

     To answer these questions I
                                   examine a wide variety of evidence on the
union status of public and private workers. I contrast trends
                                                                               in
unionization in the United States with trends in other developed
                                                                       countries,
Particularly Canada, and use these contrasts amid the divergence between
                                           -3-



                                          sectors of the United States to evaluate
unions in the public and private

proposed explanations.
        Because standard economic theory is not normally used to analyse
                                  institutional structure of an economy, many may
massive changes in the
                                                 union density requires extensive
think that an explanation of changing
                                                             that this is
reliance on social factors that go beyond economics. I argue
                                    on economic forces and behavior. The
not the case and base my analysis
                                              does, however, dictate a       catholic
complexity of institutional change
                                                                    rather
analytic approach; and I use several lines of argument and evidence
                                                      test to reach conclusions; in
than a single econometric model or hypothesis
                                                    residual remains that can and
addition, I recognize that a significant
                                          to 'non-economic' factors     such as the
perhaps should be attributed
                                                    and the like.
 abilities of union leaders, public opinion,


 I. The Dimensions of Change


                                                  in advance of the facts."
        "It is a capital mistake to theorize
                                                                 words of S. Holmes.
                             Arthur Conan Doyle, recording the

        Three firm   observations      can be made about the change in union density

                                                             the private
 in the United States: first, that the decline in density in
                                                     encompassing workers in all
 sector has been virtually ubiquitous,

  industries,   regions, and occupations during the 1980s and earlier; second,
  that by contrast uniofl expansion in the public            sector has been highly


  uneven,   occurring rapidly in some states and occupations but not in others;
                                        union density - - the de-unionization of
  and   third, that the overall drop in

                         -   is    distinctly American,   contrasting sharply with
  the    economy     -



  developments     in most Western countries.
         Exhibit   2 documents the claim that union density has fallen among
                                         -   -

           EXHIbIT 2: Percentage of Private
                                            Wage and Salary Workers Who
                         Are Members of Unions, by Industry and Occupation



                                         2 Organized
  Indust                            80                  86
  Mining                            32                  14

  Construction                      31                 22

 Manufacturing                      32                 24

 Transporttjo, Communication,
  and Public Utilities              48                 35

 Trade                              10                  7

 Service                             9                  6


 Occupation
 Professional Tech & Kindred        23                 19

 Mangers and Administrators         8                   7

 Clerical and Kindred               16                 14

 Sales                              4                   6
 Craft and Kindred                 39                  29

 Operatives, except Transport      40                  33

 Transport & Equipment             45                  31

Non—farm Laborers                  33              25
Service workers, except
  Protective Service*              13              10


*Protectjve Service excluded because they are largely in the public
sector.

Occupations based on 1980 titles with 1985 estImates for:
  Professional, Tech & KindredProfessjonal Specialty + Tech and
related support, weighted by employemnt
  Managers & AdmjnjstrationExecutjve administrator and managers
  Clerical & Kindredprecjsjon production, craft & repair
  Operatives, except transport=Machjne operators, assemblers &
inspectors
  Transport Equipment=transporj0 & material moving occupations
  Non—farm laborers handlers, equipment cleaners, helpers &
laborers

Source: U.S. Department of Labor, 1980 arid 1987
                                   —5—



virtually all workers during the
                                    l980s when the rate of decline was

exceptionally severe. The industry figures show the union proportion of
                              of traditional union strength         such as
workers falling in areas
                                                 trucking which the Teamsters
transportation and public utilities (including
                                      the preserve of craft unions); and
once dominated); construction (long

manufacturing (where industrial unions have held sway since the organizing

drives of the 1930s and j.940s); as well as in services and trade where

proportions organized were so low that even a modicum of union success

would raise the union shares.      The occupation data (which understate

declines in private sector density because they include public sector

labor) reveal a similar trend,     with sizeable drops in density among

operatives, craft workers, and laborers.         As for the longer run, the

                           workers in metropolitan areas with collective
percentage of production
bargaining contracts fell from 73% in 1960-61 to 51% in 1984, with massive

 declines in every region of the country ranging from -16 points in the

 South (48 percent to 32 percent) to -32 points in the West (80 percent to
                                   These declines show that much more is
 48 percent, Goldfield, 1987).

 involved in the contraction of union density in the private sector than

 changes in the regional mix or production worker share of employment.

      Overall, the data indicate that an explanation of the decline in

 private sector union density should focus on factors that affect all

 private employees as opposed to factors that affect employees in some

 segments of the labor market rather than others.

 The Rise in Public Sector Union Density

      Measuring changes in unionism in the U.S. public sector is difficult.

 One difficulty is that each American state (and the federal government)

 regulates public sector labor in its own jurisdictions producing labor
                                       —6—



  organizatio with different legal rights. Whereas in the private sector

  union membership, collective bargaining representation, and the
                                                                  right to
  strike are coterminus under the
                                   same legal code, in the public sector a
  worker can be a union member but
                                     not be covered by a collective contract in
  some states (because
                        management can refuse to bargain or to sign an
  agreement with a union) while being covered in others; be covered
                                                                    by a
  contract that does not include
                                        wages and salaries, as in federal
  employment; be allowed to strike in
                                          some jurisdictions but obligated to
 resolve disputes through arbitration elsewhere, and so Ofl. Historically,

 moreover, public sector worker organizations
                                                have ranged from associations
 opposed to collective bargaining to
                                       aggressive unions, with the
 same organization serving as a union in some localities but not in
                                                                    others
 (the American Association of
                              University Professors is a case in point).
 Indicative of the measurement
                               problem, the figures on public sector density
 in exhibit 1 show discontinuities when the relevant
                                                     surveys first included
'associations' with unions in their definition of collective
                                                              organisation.
While it might seem
                     misleading to compare union membership in early years
with union plus association
                            membership in later years, this comparison does
in fact accurately
                     measure the magnitude (though not the timing) of change.
This is because in the l950s and early 1960s most associations        -   - for
instance the NEA or the various
                                     police and firefighters organisations- -
did   not engage in collective         bargaining, often rejecting it        as
'unprofessional' wheras in the l980s
                                       they embraced bargaining and the other
attributes of traditional trade unions.

      A final complexity is that the legal environment under which public

sector unions operate has changed over time. From the 1960s through the

early l970s, when public sector workers joined unions or saw their associa-
                                   —7—



                                                labor laws did not require
tions turn into unions, most public sector
                                        and outlawed the strike weapon that
employers to bargain/resolve impasses
                                                          As a result many
unions use to force employers to come to agreement.

workers who joined unions did not work under collectively bargained

contracts. By contrast, from the mid-l970s to the 1980s more and more union
                                              workplaces) were able to gain
workers (and nonunion workers in organized

contracts from their employers (35 percent of state and local government
                                                       l975). At the same
workers were covered in 1982 compared to 26 percent in
                                                however, the proportion of
time that contract coverage was increasing,

public sector workers in unions       stabilized or fell. In this case,

                                          tell different stories about the
statistics on membership and coverage
                                                      resulting in a contract
trend in union strength. As collective bargaining

has been the essence of American union activity, I stress increased

contract coverage rather than membership trends in assessing the l980s.

     Given differences in state regulations of public sector collective

bargaining it is perhaps not surprising to find that the extent and, by

 extension, expansion of bargaining has varied across states and among

                        3). In states with laws favorable to collective
 occupations.(Exhiblt
 bargaining (arbitration or strike permitted laws, and duty to bargain),
                                                   bargaining units than in
 proportionately more workers are represented by

 states that permit but do not require employers to bargain while

 representation by unions is low in states that have no collective

 bargaining provisions and lowest in those that prohibit bargaining.

 Though these data relate to cross-section differences at a point in time

 rather than changes over time, we can infer patterns of growth from them.

 We can do this because contract coverage was sufficiently slight in the
                                                    density in the l980s
 earlier period that states/occupations with high
                                       —8—


            Exhibit 3: Qographic Varlaatlon
                                                    in percentage o Employees
                          presented by arga2n1ng
                          y Occupation and State Law, 198
                                                         Un
State Laws ro Most
                                   * o4 States with Given Labor Law
avorao1e to Least
Favorable to                        eeployee represented by bagapjng
                                       unit)1 by Occupation:
                               _____         Fire       Sanitàtj,     Street
rbitratior or Strje
  Fermizte                 15 t947.)    18 947.)         i (9)            1     C49)
Duty to Bargain            12 58        ii    (62Z)      ii 14)           11 71.1
Bargainar,g Permitted     11 45)        13 54Z)          12 23X)          12 (19X)
No royia                   S             5 (3O/j          9 (27)           9 (44Z)
Bara1n1nQ   PrDrbited      4    '1X)     3 (ISZ}          5 ( 8)                 1X)




Scurces: U.S. Bureau of the Census. Survey of
                                                              1932
         BER State Public Sector Collectve 5cvernmentc
                                              Barcair,irg Law Data     Set.
                                    —9—



                                 whereas those in which density was low could
almost always had rapid growth
                            Interpreted in this way, the exhibit shows the
not have had such growth.
                            represent8ti0fl with proportionately
uneven expansion of union
                                      in states (and occupations) having laws
more workers gaining representation
                                      than in other states.
favorable to collective bargaining
                                              implies that an explanation of
     The evidence on geographic divergence
                                     must have a geographic dimension related
union growth in the public sector
                                                                   that seems
to state laws as opposed to the tacrossthe.boards' explanation

appropriate for the private sector.

Cross -Country Contrasts
                                            of union membership differs across
      Pecause the meaning and measurement
                                                                 indicators
 countries, the figures in Exhibit 4 should be regarded as crude
                                    read cautiously, however, they clearly
 of degrees of unionization. Even

 contradict the notion that the    decline in union density in the United

                                          of unions in the developed world: in
 States is part of a general collapse
                                   increased in the l970s and stabilized or
 most countries union density
                                       levels above those in earlier years. In
 declined modestly in the 1980s at
                                                         of decline was half as
 Japan, where density fell in both decades, the rate
                                                                   of the entire
 large as in the United States, and less significant in terms
                                                           nonagricUlt1l
 work force because the proportion of Japanese working as
                           increased, maintaining the union share of total
 wage and salary workers
                                                             unions operate
 employment. In Canada, where many of the same companies and
                                                     and culture (exclusive
 as in the United States and where living standards
                                        went from roughly the same to twice
 of Quebec) are similar, union density
                                                             of the decline
  the U.S. level from 1970 to 1985. A persuasive explanation
                                                                 density did
  in union density in the United States should also explain why

  not decline in Canada in the same time period.
                                     - 10    —




                 Exhibit   4: Levels and Changes in Union Density
                               Across Countries 1970-85


Countries with Sharp
Rises in Density           1970       1979       1984/5     1970-79    1979-85
Denmark                     66         86         98          +20        +12
Finland                     56         84         85          +28        + 1
Sweden                      79         89         95          +10        +12
Belgium                     66         77                     +11
Countries with Moderate
Rises in Density

Italy (?)                   39         51         45          +12        -    6
Germany                     37         42         42          + 5             0
France (?)                  22         28         28          + 6             0
Switzerland                 31         36         35          + 5        -    1
Canada                      32         36         37          + 4        + 1
Australia                   52         58         57          + 6        -    1
New Zealand                 43        46                      +
                                                  ?             3
Ireland                     44        49          51          + 5        + 2
Countries with Stable/
Decline Density

Norway                      59        60          61              +1     +1
United Kingdom              51        58          52           +7        -6
Austria *                   64        59          61          - 5
                                                                         +2
Japan *                     35        32          29          - 3        -3
Netherlands                 39        43          37          +   4      -6
United States               31        25          18          -    6     -7


* No
     Change in share of total employment due to fall in agriculture employment.

Note: Union Density as a percent of nonagricultural
                                                       wage and salary employees.
Source: U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Office of
Productivity and Technology, Division of Foreign Labor Statistics and Trade,
July 1986.
       Center for Labour Economics OECD Data Set.
       Respective Country Statistical Abstracts.
                                          — 11 —




                                                                        is the United
    A third country to which I would like to draw attention

Kingdom, where density fell in the 1980s, probably at rates above those

shown in the Exhibit (the union figures come from the         unions,   who exaggerate

membership in a period of decline); where organization in the strongest

union structure, the closed shop (which requires workers to be union), fell

sharply; where an increasing proportion of private manufacturing firms

operated nonunion; where employment grew more rapidly in low-union density

than in high-union density plants; and where proportions                  covered by

collective contracts also fell noticeably.5 Because density increased in

the 1970s in the United Kingdom, however, these changes have not produced

anything like an American-style drop through 1985.

     Overall, the patterns of change shown in Exhibit 4 highlight the fact.

that dc-unionization is •largely, if not exclusively, a U.S. development.6

This fact has important implications. First, it disallows any broad

explanation of the decline of the form, say, that "unions have become

obsolete in the modern 'post-industrial' market economy" (whatever those

grandiose terms mean). Second, it constitutes powerful evidence against the

structuralist argument that changes in the composition of the work force

and jobs from (traditionally union) male blue collar                        labor to

 (traditionally nonunion) female, white collar, and service labor underlie

 the drop. If "post-industrial" •or structural changes inexorably reduce

unionization, density would have fallen in Canada and other developed

 capitalist countries, all of whom have experienced essentially the same

 structural changes as the United States, as well as in the United States.

 Finally, the divergent country trends also cast doubt on any general
 macro-economic explanation of U.S. de-unionizatiOfl it is hard to argue

 that the economic problems that followed the oil shock, the inflation of
                                      — 12   —




 the l970s, or ensuing deflation caused unions to decline in the
                                                                 U.S. when
 the same forces did not reduce union density elsewhere. Put differently,

 the international data direct attention away from worldwide economic

 developments to the particulars of American labor relations.



 II. How American Workers Organize



 "No. no! The adventures first." said the Gryphon             in   an impatient tone:
 "explanations take such a dreadful time."       --   Lewis   Carro].].




       Before evaluating proposed explanations for the change in union
density in the U.S. it is important to understand the way in which workers

are organized. In contrast to some countries such as the United Kingdom

where unionization is left largely to private parties, state governments in

the United States regulate extensively the process of union representation

in both private and public sectors.

       The National Labor-Management Relations Act (NLRA) of 1935, amended in
1947
        (Taft-Hartley Act) and afterwards, establishes secret ballot

representation elections for private sector workers to choose whether or
not to become union and regulates the labor relations conduct of employers

and unions in several ways. The Act forbids employers to discriminate

against workers for union activity and forbids unions to engage in certain

tactics deemed unfair as well, such as secondary boycotts. '               Under the
National Labor Relations Board process, unionization currently takes the

following form: a union petitions for an election by producing the

signatures of 30 percent or more (in practice a union will petition for an

election only if two-thirds of so the employees are willing to request an
                                   — 13 —




election.   The NLRB decides the set of workers eligible to vote, nd,
                              and appeals that can delay the actual election
subject to legal objections
                                                 If a majority votes for the
for several months, supervises the voting.

union the NLRB will certify it as the collective bargaining representative
                                      the employer to bargain, though not to
of the work force, which obligates
                                            workers can strike while employers
come to agreement. To resolve impasses
                              hire strikebreakers. The NLRB also supervises
can lockout employees or
                                             for unionized workers who wish to
secret-ballot "decertificatiOn" elections

reconsider their status.

     The key to understanding the process is to recognize that although

only workers vote in a representation election, management plays an active
                                                to convince workers to reject
role in most campaigns, generally trying

unions. One study of some 200 organizing campaigns in 1982-83, for example,

 estimated that the direct supervisors of workers played a "sizeable" or

 "extreme" role in two-thirds of the elections, while abstaining in just 6

 percent (AFL-CIO, Appendix, p.37). Many managements employ labor-management
                                             convince workers to vote against
 consulting experts ("union-busters") to

 the union. Determining union status through an adversarial election

 framework which accords management a major role is a distinctly American
                                                              decline of
 process which has contributed, I will argue, to the observed

 private sector union density.

      The fact that each state has its own public sector labor law means

 that there is no uniform method by which workers unionize in the public

 sector.    Indeed, while some states enacted NLRA-type laws that create
                                            workers to decide union status and
 secret ballot election procedures for
                                             with the unions, often mandating
 that require employers to negotiate
 compulsory arbitration to resolve disputes, other states outlaw unions or
                                    — 14 —




 collective   bargaining.8 Because state laws often mimic the NLRA, however,

 the situation is not as chaotic as might first appear. A reasonable

 generalization is that in states with comprehensive public sector labor

 laws, the de jure process of unionization in the public sector is much like

 that in the private sector, with workers deciding union status through

 government sponsored voting procedures. As the method for unionization is

 comparable between the public and private sectors, an explanation of
 divergent sectorial trends must explain why comparable processes produce

 different outcomes in the two sectors.

      U.S. labor law establishes representation elections for workers to

 choose union status but does not outlaw private agreements between workers

and management regarding unionization. Unions and employers can agree that

a given workplace will be organized (as GM, Toyota, and UAW have done for

the Fremont, California plant) with an understanding that if the workers or

another union seek an election, management will remain neutral or encourage

workers to choose the preferred union. Unions can also sign up workers and

demand recognition, threatening a strike should management refuse. In some

sectors, moreover, employers are union because they hire from union hiring

halls. While non-NLR& modes of organization are likely to become more

important in the future, representation elections have been the predominant

mode of organization in the past thirty years, making the outcome of the

election process critical to union growth in the period under study.



Relating New Organization to Density

     The discussion thus far has dealt with the process by which workers

choose to unionize and hence with the flow of new union members. As our

ultimate concern is with changes in union density it is essential to relate
                                       — 15 —




the flows to the "stock" of union members. The following identity, which
makes total union membership a function of the changes in existing
                                                               activity, relates the
membership and of "investment" through organizing

flows to the stocks:



      UNION(t) —   IINION(t-l)   -   r UNION(t-l)   + NEW(t)



     UNION is the number of union members (persons covered by collective

bargaining contracts) in a given year t.

     r is the rate of change in membership due to changes in employment in

organized establishments. The "natural" process by which some union plants
                                                                    that r will be be
close yearly while new plants are born nonunion suggests

positive, implying a natural depreciation in union membership, even in a

growing economy.
     NEW is the number of new members obtained through organization of new

workplaces or lost through decertificatiOn of unions at existing workplaces

in the period from t-l to t. For reasons of data availability NEW is best

 thought of as net members gained through NLRB elections, though in
principal one would like to include the result of all new organizing

 activity.
      Dividing both sides of the identity by the number of employees in year
                                                                 we obtain:
 t to measure union density (UDENS), and manipulating,



      UDENS(t) —   [l/(l÷g)fl(l-r)      UDENS(t-l) + PCTNEW(t))

              l-r-g) UDENS(t-l) + (l-g) PCTNEW(t)



 where PCTNEW is the ratio of workers organized to the work force in t-l;
                                  — 16 —




       g is the rate of growth of total employment;

      -(r+g) is the net depreciation or appreciation of union density

      The steady state level of union density implied by this difference

 equation is:

      UDENS—PCTNEW/(r+g)

     which shows that the permanant level of union density changes whenever

r+g or PCTNEW change; that is, whenever economic conditions cause union

plants to contract/expand relative to the growth of total employment or

when the rate of union organization changes over time.       For example, if
unions organize 1% of the work force per annum, as they did in the 1950s,

and suffer a net depreciation of density of 4%, the union share of
employment would stabilize at 25%.     If, alternatively, new organization

fell to .7% of the work force, as it did in the 1960s, and r+g remained the

same, the union share would drop to 17.5% in the long run.

      How important are changes in new organization versus changes in the

rate of depreciation of existing union membership in the recent collapse of

private sector union density? Crude calculations applying our difference

equation to private sector union membership and number of workers won

through NLRB elections show a rising trend the depreciation rate in recent

years: estimated compound annual rates of r+g for the l950s of 4.0 percent;

for the 1960s, 3.4 percent; for the l970s, 4.7 percent; and for 1980-85,

6.1 percent.9 Two factors are likely to underlie the incease in r+g in the

1970s and l980s: the concentration of unionism in slow-growth areas and

potential increased death of union plants due to the rising union wage

premiums of the seventies. The crudeness of the data underlying the

estimates of r+g makes one leery, however, of taking estimated changes too

seriously. What should be taken serious is the negative value of -(r+g),
                                    — 17 —




which implies that unions, like the Red Queen in Through the Looking Glass
for whom "it takes all the running you can do, to keep in the same place,"

must organize large numbers of workers each year to maintain private sector

density.
       That unions have failed to do this through the NLRS electoral process

is evident from the statistics summarized in Exhibit 5. Columns 1 and 2

measure the success of unions in organizing workers through NLRB
representation elections in selected years from 1950 to 1983: column 1

gives the absolute number of workers won by unions in representation
elections while column 2 gives the number of workers won relative to the

work force. These data show that union success in representation elections

has declined to the point where virtually no workers are organized through

NLRB   procedures.   Whereas in the early 1950s unions organized 1 percent to 2

percent of the work force via government-sponsored elections, in the 1960s

they organized about .7 percent; in the 1970s, about .5 percent; and in

1983, just .1 percent: 91,000 workers in a work force of some 90 million!

Even these figures, moreover, understate union inability to gain members

through NLRB   elections   in the 1980s for a union electoral victory does not

guarantee that workers will obtain a collective bargaining contract. In

recent years, in fact, workers voting to unionize failed to gain a contract

approximately a third of the time (Weiler, 1985), and thus worked under

management-determined rather collectively bargaining conditons.             The

 implication is that in 1983 perhaps only 60,000 workers gained union

representation through the electoral process. When account is taken of the

 25,000 or so workers who chose to decertify unions in elections (NLRB,

 table   13), it is apparent that the legally established mode of organizing

 labor in the private sector of the U.S. has run dry for trade unions.
                                     — 18 —

       EXHIBiT 5: OrganizjflQ Success of Unions Through NLRB
                                                             Elections


           Workers       Workers Won!     Z of Eli9 in    Eli9 Workers!
             Won         Nonar Emp         Union Wins      Nonagr E!L
        (in thousands)


1950           754           2.0              84               2.4
1955           343           1.0              73               1.4
1960           286            .7              59               1.2

1965           316           .7               61               1.1

1970           301           .6               52               1.2

1975           204           .4               38               1.1

1980           173           .2               37                .5

1983            91           .1               43                .3




Source: NLRB Annual Reports.
                                  — 19 —




    Columns 3 and 4 of exhibit 5 decompose the number of workers won by
unions in representation elections relative to the work force into: a

measure of the union success rate -- the number of workers in elections won

by unions relative to the number of workers eligible to vote (column 3);

and a measure of the extent of electoral activity -.   the   number of workers
                                                         (column 4).
eligible to vote in elections relative to the work force A The figures in

column 3 show that one factor in the decline in workers organized through

representation elections has been a fall in the proportion of workers in

elections won by unions (which reflects declines in union win rates and in

the average size of union victories.)10 The figures in column 4 show,

however, an even greater proportionate drop in the extent of electoral

activity: in 1960 some 6000 NLRB elections covered 1.2 percent of the work

force; in 1983 4400 elections covered a bare .3 percent of the work force.

Had unions won all of these elections they would not have gained enough

members to increase density.

     Turning to the public sector, there are good reasons to believe that

both terms in our equation for union density - -   the   net depreciation of

existing density (-(r+g)] and success in organizing new workers --     played a
role in the speed with which unionisation and/or collective bargaining

representation grew in the 1970s and 1980s. First, because few government

departments, union or nonunion, go out of business, that the loss of

density due to closure of union workplaces (reflected in r) will be small.

Second, the relatively moderate growth of public sector employment into new

areas implies that existing unions do not to have to appeal to workers

outside their traditional jurisidictions to maintain their share of

employment, which also should make r+g smaller in the public than in the

private sector, so that any given organizing effort will maintain a larger
                                       - 20   -




 union density. Third, organizing workers into unions has undoubtedly been
 much easier in the public sector.        In part this is because many workers

 have been historically organized into employee associations, which were

 readily transformed into unions without a massive organizing campaign.

 More importantly, however, organization is easier in the public sector

 because politicians and public sector managers do not contest unionization

 to the extent that private employers do, for reasons to be laid out

 shortly.     Finally, state laws that require employers to negotiate and

mandate impasse procedures guarantee that workers who vote union ultimately

receive union representation. Hence, in the public sector, once workers

choose union representation, they get what they choose.

     With this and the information in the preceding section as background,

let us now turn to proposed explanations for the changed union density.



III. Potential Causes of Change



"It's rather hard to understand . . . Somehow it seems to fill my head with

ideas --    only   I don't know exactly what they are! However, somebody killed

something: that's clear, at any rate."

                                        Alice, as reported by Lewis Carroll.

      Researchers have proposed a wide variety of factors to explain the

changes in unionization in the U.S. Among the hypothesized causes for the

decline in private sector density are: structural shifts in the composition

of the work force and mix of jobs; changes in public attitudes toward

unions reflected in opinion polls; increased governmental regulation of the

labor market substituting for union protection; "positive labor relations"

by nonunion firms; the performance of unions in representing workers and
                                    — 21 —




allocating    resources to organizing drives; anti-union policies of the

Reagan administration evinced in the air traffic controllers strike and

selection of members to the NLRB; anti-union campaigns by managements.

     Among the factors said to cause the spurt in public sector unionism

are: extension of NLRA type laws to public sector workers in many states;

extension of some union rights to federal workers by executive order;

pent-up demand for unions by workers whose organizational level was
exceptionally low by U.S. and world standards.

     By examining the impact of factors on the changes in the private and

public sectors at once, and requiring that the factors have a consistent

effect, I eliminate some hypotheses and highlight the role of others.



Structural Changes
     Because the proportion of the work force in traditionally nonunion

occupations     (white   collar),   demographic groups   (females,   college

graduates), industries (service, trade, etc.) and regions (the South) has

increased rapidly, various analysts have explored the possibility that the

changing structure of the work force underlies the drop in union density.

The tool for this exploration is a fixed coefficient model which decomposes

 the workforce into a number of groups with varying degrees of unionization

 at some base time, and explores the impact of changes in the relative size

 of the groups on aggregate unioni density under the assumption that the

 density of each group is fixed at its level.

       Fixed coefficient analyses covering the 1960s through 1980 attribute

 50 percent to 70 percent of the decline in private sector union density to

 compositional factors (Dickens and Leonard, 1985), with the increase in

 white collar employment having a particularly sizeable depressant effect on
                                    — 22 —




 density.   While these calculations would appear to go far toward explaining

 the decline in unionization, I believe the structuralist analysis is mis-

 leading and should be rejected. There are three reasons for rejecting it.

       First, the structuralist hypothesis is inconsistent with the rise in

 union density in other countries (notably Canada) which had structural

 changes in the work force similar to those in the United States. Second,

 surveys of worker desire for unionism show that structural changes cannot

 explain the decline in union success in NLRB elections, since the groups

whose proportion of the work force increased (such as women and young

workers) have as great or greater desire to unionize as do white prime-age

male workers (Freeniand and Medoff, 1984, p. 228). Third, I reject the

structuralist hypothesis because it assumes that the union share of workers

in a sector should remain fixed over time. That assumption is inconsistent

with the history of union growth, which is one of expansion into nonunion

areas, as occurred in the public sector in the period under study. The

claim that public sector workers organized because of pent-up demand for

unionization, indeed, implies that unionism "naturally"       grows in new
sectors over time. Fixed coefficient calculations sidestep the key issue in

the decline in U.S. unionjsatjon, which is why unions failed to organize

historically nonunion workers in the private sector while doing so in the

public sector and in other countries.


Public Opinion Toward Unions

     The decrease in favorable attitudes toward unions shown in public

opinion polls offers another possible explanation for the decline of

unionism in the private sector (Lipset, 1986). While public opinion data

should not be dismissed out of hand, I do not find this hypothesis

persuasive. The timing of the change in opinions and union density are
                                   — 23 —




                                                             the Gallup
weakly related, with public support of unions as measured by
Poll climbing from 62 percent in 1949 to 75 percent in 1953, falling to 64

percent in 1962, rising to 70 percent in 1965, falling to 55 percent in

1981, and rebounding slightly to 58 percent in 1985. Public favorableness

toward unions was 59 percent in 1973 and 58 percent in 1985, but union

density fell sharply during that time. More damaging to this thesis,

perhaps, are responses to the behaviorally more meaningful question of

whether workers would vote for a union at their work place, which show no

decline in worker desire for unions: in both 1977 and 1984 about a third of

nonunion workers said they wanted unions at their workplace.11 Finally, a

public opinion explanation of union decline is          inconsistent with

unionization of the public sector, where public opinion could be expected

to be especially important.

Substitutes for Union Protection

     Workers join unions for protection against unfair treatment, including

low wages, by management. This motivation suggests that the development of

substitute modes of protection in the form of welfare state interventions

in markets (Neumann and Rissman, 1984) or of better personnel practices by

management might reduce worker desire for union representation.          If

government activities substitute for union protection one would expect:

unionism to decline most in countries with the greatest welfare state and

restrictions on management, in American states with extensive protective

labor legislation, and in periods of declining governmental interventions,

as in the 1980s. Further, unions should appeal least to workers who enjoy

special legal protections, such as blacks, women, and public sector

employees protected by civil service rules. Changes in union density by

country, by states, and over time, and the desire for unions by blacks,
                                      — 24 —




  -women,     and public sector workers are uniformly inconsistent with these

  implications (Freeman, 1986). Hence, I reject the view that governmental

  tegulations and growth of the welfare state underlie the decline in

  Jaensity.

        The possibility that "positive labor relations" practices adopted by

 any major companies (but too expensive for smaller ones) - -    paying   union

   evel wages and instituting union-style personnel practices such as

 eniority, job bidding and posting, grievance systems (Foulkes, 1980) --
  ias reduced worker desires for unions at these workplaces finds better

 zupport in the data. Studies of organizing drives show that companies with

  zood personnel practices are more successful than others in defeating

 nions (AFL-CIO, 1984; Kochan, McKersie, and Chalykoff, 1986), although the

 _argest effect of such practices must be in deterring drives in the first

 iace. The increased wage premium associated with size of establishment in

  ne l970s (Brown and Medoff), which could be expected to make unionization

  ess attractive to those workers, is, moreover, consistent with the
 eclining success of unions            in NLRB   elections   involving large
stablishments.12 Still, I doubt that positive labor relations can explain

  uch of the overall decline in union density. Large employers account for a

 ecreasing share of jobs in the U.S. and unions could increase density

T.:reatly without organizing the IBMs of the world.



 overpmen Industrial Relations Policies

       Government industrial relations policies have been cited as causing

_iions to decline in the private sector and to expand in the public sector.

  :r   the    private sector, some blame (credit) the Reagan Administration's

—--eratjon of the NLRB and destruction of the Professional Air Traffic
                                   — 25 —




Controllers   Organization (PATCO) as inducing an anti-union climate in the

business community. The fact that union density began falling in the

private sector before the Reagan Administration and that collective

bargaining coverage has increased in the public sector during the 1980s

would seem to rule out this hypothesis, though it is possible that
administration actions may have contributed to the acceleration of the

decline in the l980s.

     The argument that state policies toward unionism have played a major

role in the expansion of collective bargaining in the public sector has, on

the other hand, considerable research support. Numerous studies have found

that public sector unionization and collective bargaining contracts are

more likely in states with favorable labor laws than in other states

(Freeman, 1986). Other studies -- perhaps more persuasive -- have shown

that unionism has spurted in cities following passage of favorable laws

(Ichniowski, forthcoming; Saltzman, 1985, forthcoming).      Even within a

city, departments for whom state laws are more favorable toward collective

bargaining end up with contracts more frequently than "brother" departments

operating under less favorable state law (Freeman and Valletta,
forthcoming). At the minimum, we have an empirical regularity: public

sector collective bargaining coverage and union density increase markedly

in the presence of laws favorable to collective bargaining. This finding

raises, however, two further questions: why comparable laws induce
different outcomes between the public and private sectors, with which I

will deal in detail shortly, and why many states enacted laws favorable to

unions while "labor law reform" failed at the national level, which I

believe is due in part to the simple fact that a minority of senators,

representing states that are unfavorably disposed to unionism, can stop
                                    — 26 —




 national   legislation but cannot, course, undo legislation in states that

 are favorably disposed to unionism.



 Union Performance

      Union performance may have contributed to the decline in union density

 in three ways. First, unions may have represented members poorly,

 discouraging nonunion workers from organizing. This hypothesis has little

 empirical support; it is inconsistent with union success in obtaining wage

 and benefit increases exceeding those of other workers in the l970s and

 with opinion poll data showing union members to be reasonably satisfied

 with their unions (Kochan, 1979). Second, unions           may have failed to
 allocate sufficient resources to organizing activity in the l9GOs and

 1970s. This claim has some a priori validity, as organizing expenditures

deflated by wages (organizing is labor-intensive) have failed to keep pace

with the growth of the increasingly nonunion labor force and have been

concentrated in sectors in which unions were already strong rather than in

new and growing industries (Paula Voos, 1985, 1986). Because decisions to

allocate resources to organizing depend in part on the organizing

environment and the perceived benefits and costs of organizing campaigns,

however, I am leery of attributing a large independent role to union

organizing efforts. Union failure to embark on major organizing campaigns

may simply reflect rational responses to the low expected success rates.

Third, and paradoxically from the perspective of analyses that treat

unionization as a worker decision, the success of unions in raising union

wage premiums in the 1970s may have contributed to the decline in density

by raising the cost of unionization to firms and thereby intensifying the

anti-union activity of management - -   to   which I turn next.
                                      — 27 —




Aggressive Anti-Union Management
       Given that the NLRB electoral process allows management to influence
                                                              nonunion, it is
results, and that management is likely to prefer to operate
                                                union success in the behavior
logical to seek an explanation for declining

of management. Did anti-union activity by management increase in the

private sector in the period studied? How have public sector managers

behaved?

       Exhibit 6    shows graphically that one Indicator       of management

anti-union activity - -   "unfair"    labor practices under the law - -   has
skyrocketed. While the NLRB    data   in the exhibit measure charges of unfair

activity rather than actions found illegal           in court (raising the

possibility that unions may simply be filing more unfair charges), the

proportion of charges upheld has been roughly constant at 30 to 40 percent

over time (Weiler, 1983), and NLRB statistics on numbers of workers

discharged for union activity and ordered reinstated by the NLRB and courts

 show increases comparable to those in the figure. As for legal management

 opposition, a Conference Board survey reveals that 45 percent of firms in

 their Personnel Practices Forum had operating union free as a labor policy

 goal in 1983 compared to 31 percent in 1977, indicating that even over a

 short period management opposition to unionization has grown substantially

 (Kochan, McKersie and Chalykoff, 1986).

        In the public sector, by contrast, there has been no outburst of

 anti-union activity by management. Charges of unfair labor practices
 concern interpretation of state bargaining laws - -     whether   a particular
                                                                            -
 topic Is subject to collective bargaining or is a management prerogative -

 not   to the existence of unionism per se. Public sector managers rarely hire

 union-preventing firms to discourage organization by their workers. Because
                                      - 28 -




      EXHIBIT 6: Indices of Change of Unfair Labor Practices
                  Against Management and NLRB Elections (16 = 100)




600'-
550 -                                                    Unfoir Chorges/
500 —                                                         Elections
450 -
400
350
                                                                            Unfair
300                                                                         Charges
250
200
150
100
 50
               I    I          I      I                        I       I          I
             1950   55         60     65            70        75       80     83




Data for Exhibit 8:
      ".4                      : cr                      Ct        E
                                                                            !:ê.;fe e:e:tirns
                                               C'
        1c               100               : 00                                       C


                                                                                  20
          70                               I   7
                                                                              I

                                                                              1
      I                  122
      ic' B              110
      1                                        7r                             C.-.'


Source: NLRB Annual Reports
                                    — 29 —




of   changes in state laws, moreover, the trend in the public sector is

toward less rather than more management opposition to collective

bargaining.

      On the basis of these facts, I argue that the anti-union management

offensive in the private sector is the key to de-unionization of the United

States, and that its absence from the public sector explains the successful

organization of public employees. Moreover, I claim that the differential

behavior of management in the public and private sectors is explicable by

the incentives facing them.



IV. Management Offensive, Union Wage Prernia, and Cost of Opposition



      My proposed explanation can be most easily represented with a simple

schematic model (see Exhibit 7), which diverges from many models of union

organization by stressing the role of management in unionization and the

endogeneity of both management opposition and union organizing. I postulate

three basic relations.

       The first relation is a 'production function' for organizing success.

It relates the number of workers newly organized relative to the labor

force to the resources devoted by management to opposing unions, the
resources devoted by unions to organizing, and a vector of all other

factors that might influence the outcome.

       The second relation links the resources management devotes to opposing

unionization to economic factors likely to affect the profitability of such

activity.     One such factor is the union wage premium, which is assumed to

reduce profits and increase management opposition. Another is the cost of

opposing unionism in an NLRB election, which will depend on               the
                                   — 30   —




      Exhibit   7 Deterainants of Union OrQanizlnQ Activity and
Manapet Opposition &nd Their Effect on Unjpjiatp of New Work.rj




                          V

                      COST            MAN

                  WAGEPREII                        PCTNEW

                     UDENS            ORG...I '1'




     Determination of Organizing Success:
                                              PCI'NEWf(MAI4,ORGX)
       where PC NEW=number of workers organizeciJia force;
       MAN—resourc devoted by management to opposing unions;
      ORG—resources devoted by unions to organizing;
      X=other factors that influence outcomes
     Management Opposition:
                              MAN=g(WAGEPREMCOSTOR0y)
      where WAGEpJM=0            wage premiums
      COST=cost of opposing union in NLR.B elections;
      Yother relevant factors, largely relating to product market
       factors such as deregulation of industries, etc., which
      detetmine affect of unionisn on profitability.
    Union and Worker Organizing Effort: ORG=h(WAGEPREMJ.JUDENSZ)
     where tJDENSumon density at the beginning of the period;
     Z=other relevant factors, largely relating to labor market.
                                    — 31 —




"technology"   of battling unions at workplaces, which has changed greatly in

the past fifteen years due to the advent of labor-management consultants

who specialize in training supervisors to pressure workers to oppose unions

and in running anti-union propaganda campaigns; and on the legal penalty

for committing unfair labor practices. In the private sector the legal

penalty is minuscule: the law requires that management reinstate workers

unjustly fired for union activity, pay the workers back pay less whatever

income they earned in the period, and post a notice that the firm will not

engage in such illegal activity again. However, reinstating workers often

occurs only after the representation election and many choose not to

return. Posting a notice about past illegal activity on the part of the

firm which often has the effect of warning workers how far management is

willing to go to defeat unions rather than convincing them that management

will forego such tactics in the future.      Finally, the management decision

is also assumed to depend on the resources the union devotes to organizing,

and, on other unspecified factors, largely relating to product market

conditions, that can be expected to make anticipated union wage premiums

more or less expensive in terms of lost profits.

     The third relationship in my analysis links union (and worker)

organizing activity to:       the wage premium, presumed to raise the
attractiveness of unions to workers and thus increase organizing activity;

the existing density of union workers, with a lower density assumed to

reduce organizing activity because the cost of organizing each nonunion

worker is higher to existing union members when there are proportionately

fewer unionists among whom to spread the cost; the amount of resources

management devotes to opposing unionism; and a catch-all vector of other

relevant factors, largely relating to labor market conditions.
                                   — 32 —




      One   important feature of this model is that the union wage premium

 affects the decisions of both the management and union (workers). In the

 management equation, a higher premium induces more anti-union activity and

 thus reduces union organizing success.     In the union equation, a higher

 premium induces additional organizing activity and thus raises union
         v ucLe95.
 Given opposing tendencies, is the wage premium likely to be
                                                             positively or
 negatively correlated with actual outcomes?     To the extent that unions
 extract rents from finns through monopoly wage increases, the money loss to

 finns will exceed the transfer to workers (due to the 'triangle'

 inefficiency), giving management a potential incentive to spend more

 resources to prevent unionisatjon than unions/workers spend to organize

 (Freeman, 1986b).   If expenditures by the two sides have equal effects on

outcomes, higher union wage premium will reduce organizing success.

     A second important feature of the model is the inclusion of management

and union activity in the equations determining the behavior of the other

side. This highlights the interactive nature of the organizing struggle--

which can be viewed as a two person (three person, if one distinguishes

workers at an organizing cite from the union) game - -   and   thus directs

attention to the potential payoff from game-theoretic analyses of union and

management strategic behavior that goes beyond the scope of this essay.

     A third aspect of the analysis that deserves attention is the

inclusion of union density in the equation for union organizing activity,

for it raises the possibility that a fall in union density will produce a

cumulative decline, as the increased cost of organizing induces unions to

lower organizing activity, while, conversely, rises in union density will

have the opposite cumulative effect.

     How might one use the model embedded in these relationships to explain
                                        — 33 —




the   decline in private sector union density?
                                                   the evidence in section III, is
      The most reasonable hypothesis1 given
                                                 induced by changes in the cost of
that management opposition to unionism,

unionization and the union wage premium, reduced union organizing success,
                                                   and organizing effort. For this
with cumulative effects on union density

explanation to be valid, it is necessary that management activity have an
                                                 and that this activity respond to
important impact on organizing success;

economic incentives.

       With respect to the effectiveness of management opposition, studies by

a diverse set of researchers ranging from management groups to the General

Accounting Office to the AFL-CIO to academics all find that management

activity reduces union success           in NLRB representation elections and

organizing drives (see Exhibit 8). The sole exception (Getman, Goldberg,
                                           considerable controversy, with Dickens
and Herman) has been the subject of

convincingly reversing their conclusion in a re-analysis of the underlying
                                                             of the evidence is that
 data. Even absent this, however, the preponderance
                                                             determineS the outcomes
 the extent of management oposition substantially
                                                                devotes considerable
 of organizing carnpaigns, as posited. As management
                                            and presumably acts rationally, this
 resources to opposing unionization,

 makes intuitive sense.

        Because the studies in Exhibit 8 focus on representation elections!
                                                                      work
 organizing drives, rather than on the workers gained relative to the

 force (PCTNEW) that enters the union density equation, and do not provide

 estimates of the extent to which the downward trend in union success can be
                                                 I have estimated the impact of the
 attributed to management opposition,
                                                 for which time series data exists - -
 one indicator of management opposition

          labor practices - -   on   workers won by unions as a share of nonagricu-
 unfair
                                       — 34 —



        Exhibit   8: Summary of Studies Of Effects of Management Activity
                     on NLRB Representjn Election Resu1t


                                           Measurement of           Does Activity
 Study and Sample                         Mar'.a;ement Activity      Has Effect?


 1. National Industrial conference          Amount of communication           Yes
     Board, 140 union organising drives         by management
     of white collar workers, 1966—67

 2. AFL—CIO, 495 NLRB election,             Amount of oppostion               Yes
     1966—67
                                              by management
 3. Prosten, analysiss of probability      Amount of time delay               Yes
     of union win in 130,701 elections     between eleciton and
     in 1962—77                            petion

 4. Lawler, 155 NLRB elections, 1974—78 Company hires consultant              Yes

 5. Drotning, 41 elections ordered         Amount of Communication            Yes
     void and rerun by NLRB                  by management

6. Roomkjn—Block, 45155 union              Delay between petition             Yes
    representation cases, 1971—77          and election

7. Seeber and Cooke, proportion            Employers object to                Yes
    of workers voting for union            election district
    representation by state, 1970—78

8. US General Accounting Office,           Employer committed                 Yes
    analysis of 8(a)(3) illegal            unfair labor practice
    firings or other discrirrination
    for union involvement in 368
    representation elections

9. Aspin study of 71 NLRB elections        Employer fired worker       Yes, unless
    in which reinstatements were           for union activity         reinstated
    ordered,                                                        before elect

10. Getman, Goldberg, and Herren           Campaign tactics             Not stat
    analysis of 1293 workers in 31         employer.                  sigr;ificant
    elections in 1972—73

11. Dickens study of 966 workers           Legal and illegal                 Yes
    in 31 elections in 1972—73             campaign tactics
    (using data set in #10)                by employer

12. Catler, study of 817 NLRE             Unfair labor practices             Yes
    elections                             and delay

13. Kochan, McKersie and Chalykoff,       Employer emphasizes union          Yes
    225 firms,                            avoidance strategy
                                  — 35 —




itural   employment. My analysis uses pooled state (industry) time series

data, with time dummies included to control for omitted trend and cyclical

factors and state/industry dummies to control for omitted state (industry)

effects, and diverse control variables. The results, summarized in Exhibit

9, show that unfair labor practices reduce the numbers unionized relative

to the work force and that the trend in unfair labor practices can account

for roughly half of the observed drop in that outcome measure. To the

extent that unfair practices substitute for lawful management anti-union

activity, this estimate, while sizeable, understates the full impact of

management's fight against unions. Alternatively, however, if the growth

of unfair practices is positively correlated with the growth of legal

managment opposition, my estimates overstate      the impact of illegal

management activity on the decline in union success, though they may

accurately measure the impact of management opposition, in total.

     The role of changes in the relative cost of union deterrence in

stimulating the management offensive has not been the subject of extensive

research,    making conclusions here more      speculative.   Time series

calculations show that some of the rise in unfair practices is explicable

by the rise in union wage premiums in the 1970s, but the series is short

and the measures are crude (Freeman 198Gb). Estimates of the relation

between decline of union density and union premiums at a one-digit industry

level indicate that where the premium has risen most, union declines have

been greatest (Linneman and Wachter), which may reflect reduced organizing

success or a greater death rate for union plants in those sectors. As for

other factors likely to raise the cost of unionism to firms, it is highly

plausible that such product market developments as the growth of foreign

competition and deregulation have made existing union wages more expensive
                                  — 36 —




           Exhibit 9: Ecti sates of the Effpct     of Manappeent Unfair
              Lakor   Practie on Percentaçe of the NpnJQriculturpl
                 Workforc,    Npp,ly Organized in the   NLRB Elections


                                  Irpact of IOZ Increase       Estirated    Dechne
                                  in Unfair Practices/         in Workiore Organizp
                                  Election on Proportion       in NLR8 Election Due
                                     of Workers Newly          to Increased Margeirert
Corparison of Union Success:      Organized in NLR8 Elect.     Unfair Labor Practices

1. Across States, 19O-78
2. Within States Over Time,
      190—78                               —3.4                          38
3. Across lndustris, 1980                   —
                                                                         36

4. Within Industries Over Time
      196 -80                              -6.2                          62

.   In US Over Tire, 19O-80                —4 6                          C.'




SoLrce: Lines 1 and 2 4ro P. Freeff•?n and J. Medoff, What Dci Unions Dc',
        8asic 8ools, 1984, p.28.
        Lines S to    from P. Freear, 'The Effect cif the Union Wage
Differential on Management Opposition and Union Organizing Success, American
Econoec Revew, May 1986.
                                        — 37 —




in   terms of lost profits. As increased nonunion competition and management

policies against unionised firms in construction indicates, however, new

product market competition from any source, not                 simply trade or

deregulation, can significantly reduce union density.               Finally, with

respect to the determination of union organizing efforts, the major work

here - -   by   Paula Voos - -   suggests   that one can treat organizing behavior

as rational decision-making.

       Is this analysis consistent with the increase in public sector

density?
       There are three basic facts to explain regarding the spread of

collective bargaining to the public sector: the geographic variation in

unionization associated with different labor laws; the spurt in unioniz-

ation that followed passage of the laws; and the different behavior of

public than of private sector managers under comparable laws. If the
benefits to management of operating with a union relative to the cost of

opposing unions are lower in the public than in the private sector, and

those costs have decreased over time, we could account for these facts in

 the same framework used to explain developments in the private sector: in

 terms of the incentives and options for management to oppose unions.

       In fact, the incentives for management to oppose unions do appear to

be lower in the public sector. First, public sector workers constitute an

 especially active political group able to punish or reward the politicians

 who are their employers at the ballot box, even though they are only a

 small proportion of voters in most areas. Second, the cost of illegal

 opposition is likely to be greater for public than for private officials,

 as public officials who break laws are likely to face possible removal from

 office. Third, unions can help public sector employers increase budgets
                                    — 38 —




 through lobbying for additional public expenditures, creating a greater
 jointness of interest than in the private sector. Fourth, wage premiums

 tend to be smaller in the public sector (see Lewis, forthcoming; Freeman,

 1986). Put crudely, management opposition to unions can gain profits in the

 private sector; in the public sector it can cost votes. Given this, and the

 fact that states passed laws favorable to unionization in the l960s and

 1970s that increased the cost of management opposition in the public

 sector, the spurt of unions there is consistent with the model.

       Finally, is this analysis consistent with the differential experience

of Canada? While private sector managers are likely to have similar profit

incentives to oppose unions in Canada as in the United States (there is no

evidence that union wage effects are smaller in Canada than in the U.S.

Anderson and Gunderson), the Canadian system for organizing workers differs

from the American system by giving management less option to express

opposition. Canadian labor boards rely largely on "card checks" in which

unions sign up workers to determine representation at a work place rather

than on adversarial elections and impose harsher penalties on managements

that break the laws (Weiler, 1983; Meltz), with the result that Canada has

not eexperienced anything like the massive outburst of management unfair

labor practices that characterizes U.S. labor relations. The difference in

institutional procedures highlights the fact that the decline in private

sector unionism in the U.S. required two factors: increased incentive for

management to oppose unions, and the opportunity to turn that incentive
into action.
                                   — 39 —




Conclus ion

     As the reader will undoubtedly have observed, not all the pieces for a

complete explanation of the decline in private sector union density and rise

in public sector density in the United States are in place. But the avail-

able evidence seems consistent with an explanation for private sector de-

cline that stresses increased management opposition to union organization,
                                                                 trade union
motivated in part by profit—seeking behavior, and augmented by

responses; and an explanation of growth in the public sector that stresses

reduced management opposition due to passage of comprehensive collective bar-

gaining laws and motivated in part by vote—seeking behavior.

     As for the likely impact of the change in unionization on the perfor-
                                       worth attention. The first is that the
mance of the economy, two points are

increasingly public sector locus of Anierican unionism is likely to produce

different union effects and modes of operation than have been found for the

traditionally private sector union movement.    Public sector unions have, for

example, smaller wage effects and strike rates than private sector unions and

 appear to increase rather than reduce employment in union activities (see

 Freeman and Ichniowski, forthcoming). Second, without making any judgment
                                              will perform better or not, one
 of whether a less unionized private sector

 thing should be perfectly clear: analysts who have attributed national econo—

 miC problems ranging from unemployment to wage inflation to low productivity

 to unions will have to find a new culprit to blame: unless there is a remark-
                                         won't have unions to kick around any
 able renaissance in unionism, critics

 more.
                                   — 40 —



 REFERENCES



 American Federation of Labor — Congress of Industrial Organizations Depart-

 ment of Field Services, AFL—CIO Organizing Survey, April 1984, Washington, D.C.


 Anderson, John and Morley Gunderson, Union Management Relations in Canada,

 (Addison, Wesley, 1982).


 Aspin, Leslie, A Study of Reinstatement Under the National Labor Relations Act,

 Ph.D. dissertation, MIT, 1966.


 Brown, Charles and James Medoff, "The Employers Size Wage Effect", mimeo,

 Harvard University, 1986.


Catler, Susan, "Labor Union Representation Elections: What Determines Who

Wins?" B.A. thesis, Harvard University, 1978.

Dickens, William, "The Effect of Company Campaigns on Certification

Elections," Industrial. and Labor Relations Review, 1983,36, pp.560-75.



Dickens, William, and Jon Leonard, "Accounting for the Decline in Union

Membership, 1950-1980, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, April 1985,

.(3), pp.323-334.

Drotning, John, "NLRB Remedies for Election Misconduct: An Analysis of

Election Outcomes and their Determinants," Journal of Business, April 1967,

40(2), pp.137-48.

Elliot, R. D., and B. N. Hawkins, "Do Union Organizing Activities Affect

Decertification?" Journal of Labor Research, 1982, ,   pp.153-61.


Ellwood, David, and Glenn Fine, "The Impact of Right to Work Laws on Union

Organizing," Journal of Political Economy, Vol 95(2), April 1987.
                                     — 41 —




Farber, H. S., and D. H. Saks, "Why Workers Want Unions: The Role of
Relative Wages and Job Characteristics," Journal of Political Economy,

1980, 88, pp.349-69.



Fiorito, J., and C. R. Greer, "Determinants of U. S. Unionism: Past

Research and Future Needs," Industrial Relations, 1982, Q,     pp.1-32.

Foulkes, Fred, Personnel Policies in Large Nonunion Companies. Englewood

Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1980.


Freeman, Richard, and James Medoff, What Do Unions Dot. New York: Basic

Books, 1984.


Freeman, Richard, "The Effect of the Union Wage Differential on Management

Opposition and Union Organizing Success," American Economic Review, May

1985, pp.92-96.


Freeman, Richard, "Why Are Unions Faring Poorly in NLRB         Representation
Elections?" in Thomas A. Kochan, ed., Challenges and Choices Facing

American Labor. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1985, pp.45-64.



Freeman, Richard, "Unionism Comes to the Public Sector," Journal of

Economic Literature, Vol. XXIV, March 1986, pp.41-86.



Freeman, Richard, and B. Ichniowski, "When    Public   Sector Workers Unionise:

Summary of Findings" in Freeman and Ichniowski, eds., When Public Sector

Workers Unionise. NEER, University of Chicago Press, forthcoming, 1988.


Freeman, Richard,      B. Ichniowski, and J. Zax, "Measuring Collective
                                     — 42 —




 Organization   in the Public Sector," in Freeman and Ichniowski, op. cit.



 Freeman, Richard, and Rob Valletta, "The Effects of Public Sector Labor

 Laws on Unionisatjon, Wages, and Employment," in Freeman and Ichniowski,

 op. cit.


 Cetman, Jules, Stephen Goldberg, and Jeanne Herman, Jnion Representation

 Elections; Law and Reality. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1976.


 Goldfield, M., "The Decline of Organized Labor: NLRB Union Certification

 Election Results," Politics and Society, 1982, fl,   pp.167-210.

Goldfie].d, M., The Decline of Organized Labor, University of Chicago Press,
 1987.



Hirsch, B. "The Determinants of Unionization: An Analysis of Interarea

Differences," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1980, , pp.147-61.



Hunt, J. C., and R. A. White, "The Effects of Right-to-Work Legislation on

Union Outcomes: Additional Evidence," Journal of Labor Research, 1983, ,

pp.47-75.

Ichniowskj, C., "Public Sector Union Growth and Bargaining Laws," in

Freeman and Ichniowski, op. cit.


Kramer, Leo, Labor's Paradox--the American Federation of State. Council.

and Municipal Employees, 1962.


Kochan, Thomas, "How American Workers View Labor Unions," Monthly Labor

Review, 1979, jQ.Z(4),   pp.23-31.
                                    — 43 —




Kochan,    Thomas, Robert McKersie, and John Chalykoff, "The Effects of

Corporate Strategy and Workplace Innovations on Union Representation,

Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1986, (4), pp.487-5Ol.



Lawlor, John, "The Influence of Management Consultants on the Outcome of

Union Certification Elections," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,

1984, , pp.38-Si.

Linneman, Peter and Wachter, M., "Rising Union Premiums and the Declining Boun-

daries among NonCompeting Groups," AER, May 1986, pp.103-108.

Lipset, Seymour M., "North American Labor Movements: A Comparative

Perspective" in Lipset, ed., Unions in Transition. San Francisco: Institute

for Contemporary Studies, 1986.


Lewis, 11. Gregg., "Union/Nonunion Wage Gaps in the Public Sector," in

Freeman and Ichniowski, op. cit.


Medoff, James, "The Public's Image of Labor and Labor's Response,"

manuscript, Harvard   University, 1986.

Meitz,    Noah, "Labor Movements in Canada and the United States: Are They

Really That Different?" in Thomas A. Kochan, ed., Cha11enes and Choices

Facing    Americar Cambridge, MA; MIT, 1985).


Miliward,    Neil and Mark Stevens, British Workplace Industrial Relations

1980-84.    England: Cower Publishing Co. Ltd., 1986. National Industrial
Conference Board, White Collar Unionization. New York: NICB, 1970.


National Labor Relations Board, Annual Report (Washington,DC; USGPO)
                                      — 44 —




 Neumann, George and Ellen Rissman, "Where Have All the Union Members Gone?,"

 Journal of Labor Economics, April 1984, 2(2), pp.175—192.


 Prosten Richard, "The Longest Season:Union Organizing in the Last Decade,"

 Proceedings of the 31st Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research

 Association, Madison, Wisconsin, 1978, pp.240—49.


 Roomkin, Myron, and Richard Block, "Case Processing Time and Outcome of Elec-

 tions: Some Empirical Evidence,", University of Illinois Law Review, 1981,

 vi,   pp.75-97.

Saltzman, C. M., "Bargaining Laws as Cause and Consequences of the Growth

of Teachers' Unions," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 1985, 38,

pp. 335-57.



Saltzinan, C. M., "The Effects of Recent Bargaining Laws in Ohio and

Illinois," forthcoming in Freeman and Ichniowski, op. cit.



Seeber, R., and W. Cooke, "The Decline in Union Success in NLRB
Representation     Elections," Lndustrial Relations, Winter 1983, 22(1).



Troy, Leo, and Neil Sheflin, Union Sourcebook. New Jersey: Industrial

Relations Data and Information Services, 1985.



U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Directory of National

Unions and Enrployee Associations, various editions.



U.S. General Accounting Office, Concerns Regarding Imtact of Employee

Charges Against Employers for Unfair Labor Practices. Washington, D.C.,
                                     — 45 —




CAO-HRD 82-80, June 21, 1982.


Valletta, Rob, and R. Freeman, "The NBER State Public Sector Collective

Bargaining Law   Data   Set," in Freeman and Ichniowski, op. cit.



Voos, Paula, "Union Organizing: Costs and Benefits," Industrial and Labor

Relations Review, 38, pp.52-63.


Voos, Paula, "Trends in Union Organizing Expenditures, 1953-1977,"

ial and Labor Relations Review, , pp.52-63.


Weiler,   P. ,   "Promises    to Keep: Securing Workers' Rights to Self-

Organisation under the NLRA,"        Harvard Law Review, June 1983, 9(8),

pp.1769-1827.


Weiler, P., "Striking A New Balance: Freedom of Contract and the Prospects

for Union Representation," Harvard Law Review, 1985,        pp. 351-420.
                                    — 46   —




 ENDNOTES




 1. The Meany quote is given in Leo Kramer, Labor's Paradox--the American
  Federation of State. Council and Municipal Employees, 1962, p.14.


 2. Estimates of organization in the public sector differ somewhat among
  sources, though all data show greater organization than in the private
 sector. See Freeman, Ichniowski, and Zax (forthcoming) for a detailed
 analysis of the various statistics.


 3. U.S. employment data come from two basic sources: Current Population
 Survey data on individuals and establishment data from the Bureau of Labor
 Statistics. The 85 percent figures comes from the establishment survey.



 4.These data are from the Survey of Governments, which differ from those in
 the Current Population Survey, as described in Freeman, Ichniowski and Zax
 (forthcoming).

 5. Millvard and Stevens (1986)     report a rise in the percentage of
manufacturing    establishments operating nonunion from 18 percent to 29
percent (pp. 58-59) and a drop in the percentage with a closed shop from 30
percent to 18 percent (p. 103).

6. This is not to say that unions throughout the West do not face serious
problems in adjusting to the changing economic climate.       They do. The
difference between the United States and most other countries is that only
in the United States have these problems taken the form of massive
dc-unionization of the private sector.


7.That is, situations where a union tries to pressure an employer by
placing economic pressure on a third party, for instance a customer or
supplier




8. The changes in laws are reviewed in Freeman (1986) and in Valletta and
Freeman (forthcoming) in greater detail. The NBER has a computer file on
regulations across states, departments, and time, which is available to
researchers on request.


9. These estimates are based on the private sector union membership numbers
of Troy and Sheflin for 1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, and a projected 1985 figure
based on his 1983 (updated using CPS figures on the percentage change in
membership from 1983 to 1985); estimates of private nonagricultural wage
and salary workers exclusive of private household     workers from the ELS;
                                 — 47 —




and the number of members won by unions in NLRB             elections in
1951-1960, 1961-1970, 1971-1980, 1981-1985 (with 1984 and 1985 assumed to
be the same as 1983). I calculated the compound annual           rate of
depreciation in union membership by comparing actual membership in, say
1980, with membership in 1970 plus the number of workers won from
1971-1980, and then subtracted the compound annual rate of growth of the
relevant employment.


10. One can use various identities to decompose the decline in members
won/employment (Freeman, 1985).


11. The figures for 1977 are from the Quality of Employment Survey. Those
for 1985 are from the Harris Poll.


12. In the l9SOs unions had a better record in large units than in smaller
ones, but this ptern of success was reversed in the l970s. The small
number of elections in large units in recent years makes the 1980s figures
spotty. For data on union win rates by size of unit, see Goldfield, 1987.
