NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DEVELOPMENT EFFECTS OF THE EXTRACTIVE COLONIAL ECONOMY:
THE DUTCH CULTIVATION SYSTEM IN JAVA
Melissa Dell
Benjamin A. Olken
Working Paper 24009
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24009

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised November 2017

We thank Abdulhamid Haidar, Mateo Montenegro, Roman Zarate and especially Peter Hickman
for providing excellent research assistance in Cambridge, Timo Stibbe for assistance in the
Netherlands, and Muhammad Abduh for assistance in Indonesia. We thank Dave Donaldson,
Rick Hornbeck, Nathan Nunn, Pablo Querubin, and seminar participants at Boston College,
CIFAR, Columbia, NBER Summer Institute, Santa Clara, Stanford, and UC Berkeley for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Melissa Dell and Benjamin A. Olken. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Development Effects of the Extractive Colonial Economy: The Dutch Cultivation System
in Java
Melissa Dell and Benjamin A. Olken
NBER Working Paper No. 24009
November 2017, Revised November 2017
JEL No. N55,N65,N75,O53
ABSTRACT
Colonial powers typically organized economic activity in the colonies to maximize their
economic returns. While the literature has emphasized long-run negative economic impacts via
institutional quality, the changes in economic organization implemented to spur production
historically could also directly influence economic organization in the long-run, exerting
countervailing effects. We examine these in the context of the Dutch Cultivation System, the
integrated industrial and agricultural system for producing sugar that formed the core of the
Dutch colonial enterprise in 19th century Java. We show that areas close to where the Dutch
established sugar factories in the mid-19th century are today more industrialized, have better
infrastructure, are more educated, and are richer than nearby counterfactual locations that would
have been similarly suitable for colonial sugar factories. We also show, using a spatial regression
discontinuity design on the catchment areas around each factory, that villages forced to grow
sugar cane have more village owned land and also have more schools and substantially higher
education levels, both historically and today. The results suggest that the economic structures
implemented by colonizers to facilitate production can continue to promote economic activity in
the long run, and we discuss the contexts where such effects are most likely to be important.

Melissa Dell
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer M-24
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
melissadell@fas.harvard.edu
Benjamin A. Olken
Department of Economics, E52-542
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
bolken@mit.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24009

1

Introduction

Extractive colonial institutions are often thought to be an important reason why some places
remain persistently poorer than others. Colonizers whose focus was on extracting resources
from the colonies plausibly set up weak institutions with poor property right protections to
facilitate this extraction (Acemoglu et al., 2001). The persistence of such institutions can
lower economic performance today.
Counterbalancing this, however, is the fact that colonial powers often established complex
economic systems to create the surplus that they wanted to extract, potentially facilitating
economic activity in the long run. In the case of agricultural extraction, crops needed to be
grown and processed before being transported to the home country. This typically involved
a reorganization of the indigenous economy, technology transfer, and the construction of processing and transport infrastructure. Examples include the large-scale sugar processing and
transport infrastructure that the Japanese created in colonial Taiwan or the tea plantations,
processing plants, and railroads that the British established in colonial India.
This paper examines the persistent local development effects of these types of extractive systems, which combined both coercive agricultural practices with large-scale domestic
processing prior to export, by studying one particularly prominent example - the Dutch
Cultivation System (Cultuurstelsel ) in Java. The island of Java was the main population
center of the vast Dutch colonial empire in the East Indies, and with a modern population
of over 160 million, remains the economic and population center of Indonesia today. From
the early 1830s through the 1870s, the colonial state forced peasants along Java’s northern
coast to cultivate sugar, which was then processed in nearby Dutch factories for subsequent
export to Europe. The revenues extracted from this system made Java among the world’s
most lucrative colonies, and at their peak accounted for over one-third of Dutch government
revenue (Luiten van Zanden, 2010). Sugar production continued after the abolition of the
System but collapsed during the Great Depression, as Indonesia lacked protected markets,
and today Indonesia is one of the world’s largest sugar importers.
Prior to the Cultivation System, the Javanese economy was heavily specialized in rice
cultivation, largely for local consumption. The Cultivation System required a substantial
reorganization of economic life in order to operate. At its heart were 94 water-powered Dutch
sugar factories, which processed raw cane into refined sugar. Over the course of the System,
millions of Javanese worked in sugar processing and transport - via both forced and free
labor - a major shift since factory production had been nearly non-existent initially (Elson,
1994, p. 215). Since raw cane is heavy and needs to be refined quickly after harvest, it had
to be grown nearby. Accordingly, the Dutch constructed a catchment area with a radius of
approximately four to seven kilometers around each factory, and forced all villages within the

1

catchment area to reorganize their land to grow cane. Village officials within the catchment
areas were politically empowered by the colonial government to make this happen.
This study seeks to examine the effects of the two main changes the Dutch made to the
economy: 1) the creation of manufacturing in the previously agricultural heartland, through
the construction of the 94 sugar factories, and 2) the reorganization of villages surrounding
the factories that were forced to grow sugar and supply labor for the factories. It is worth
underscoring that this study does not consider the impacts of colonialism more generally,
an inherently speculative question since there is not a good counterfactual for what would
have happened if the Dutch, or other colonial powers, had not shown up at all. Rather, our
aim here is to elucidate whether places subjected to more intensive colonial extraction along
these two important dimensions have experienced a differential development trajectory. We
use two different empirical strategies for each of these two aims.
To examine the impact of the creation of the sugar factories, we combine randomization
inference - which is usually thought of as a purely statistical technique - with economic
insights that allow us to construct counterfactual spatial configurations of sugar production.
The intuition is as follows. Factory catchment areas were often adjacent, and the factories
could not be too close since each required an adequately sized catchment area for cultivating
sugarcane. While many locations were similarly suitable, once one factory was placed, it
constrained the locations of other nearby factories, creating many possible equilibria for
site selection (Salop, 1979). For example, if a factory was shifted by two kilometers, the
neighboring factories (and their neighbors and so forth) would also need to be shifted. Most
of the villages producing sugarcane would remain the same, but the spatial configuration of
factories within cane producing regions would be different.
Specifically, we define a feasible counterfactual configuration for the Cultivation System’s
94 factories as consisting of 94 suitable sites for sugar factories, spaced far enough apart to
have adequately sized catchment areas. Sites within these alternative configurations are selected randomly from the set of suitable locations. We calculate the effect of proximity to
the nearest actual factory and also compute the impact of proximity to the nearest counterfactual factory site, repeating the latter exercise for 1,000 alternative factory configurations.
We compute a p value by comparing the actual effect to the distribution of placebo effects.
We identify suitable counterfactual sites by imposing the following requirements: 1) since
state-of-the-art sugar processing technology was water-powered, sugar factories were located
along rivers; we therefore only consider sites that can be reached by moving upstream or
downstream from the actual factory, 2) the amount of nearby sugar suitable land must be
similar to the amount of suitable land near actual factories. We also constrain placebo
factories in each configuration to be at least as far apart as the 10th percentile in the
distribution of actual factories. Figure 1 illustrates this approach. To separate the effects
2

of Dutch extraction from modern sugar processing, we focus on colonial factories with no
modern sugar factory nearby, though most results are similar if we consider the entire sample.
We document that the colonial sugar industry substantially transformed economic activity in contemporary Java – even in places that no longer produce sugar. SUSENAS household
surveys, collected between 2001 and 2011, show that people living within a few kilometers
of historical sugar factories are much less likely to be employed in agriculture and more
likely to be employed in manufacturing or retail than people living further away. Effects are
similar in Census data from 1980, when Indonesia was more agricultural, suggesting that
impacts are not just driven by recent industrialization. Moreover, households living within
a few kilometers of a historical factory location have per-capita consumption that is about
14 percent higher than those living more than 10 kilometers away. Effects are concentrated
within a few kilometers and after that remain flat at zero when moving further from the
factory. This suggests that the impacts around the factories do not result simply from a
reallocation of economic activity from nearby areas, a scenario that would tend to lead to
negative effects for the latter locations relative to even further places. A similar analysis
using distance to counterfactual locations provides strong evidence that these differences are
not driven by geography or chance.
Agglomeration through input-output linkages and infrastructure investments appear to
be important channels of persistence. During the 1950s and 60s, development economists
hypothesized that linkages between sectors provided a key mechanism for the propagation of
structural change (Rasmussen, 1956; Myrdal, 1957; Hirschman, 1960), and the composition of
industries in these areas indeed suggests agglomeration through input-output linkages as one
important channel of persistence.1 While the Dutch claimed the high quality processed sugar,
the factories were permitted to sell the low quality sugar, which was costly to transport, on
local markets. Using national input-output tables, we classify manufacturing employment
in the 2006 Economic Census into employment that is upstream and downstream from
sugar processing. Upstream manufacturing industries - those whose outputs serve as direct
or indirect inputs to sugar processing - include farm and capital machinery. Downstream
industries - those that use processed sugar as an input - include most other food processing
industries. Areas near historical factories have a higher share of employment in downstream
industries, even when we restrict to locations with no modern sugar factory nearby. Although
the original source of sugar disappeared, downstream industrial centers persisted, plausibly
because of agglomeration of downstream producers and the endogenous concentration of
population near initial production sites.
1

See Acemoglu et al. (2016); Baqaee (2015); Acemoglu et al. (2012); Carvalho (2009) for the role of
input-output linkages in transmitting macroeconomic shocks and Liu (2017); Lane (2017); Bartelme and
Gorodnichenko (2015) for their role in development.

3

The construction of a sugar processing infrastructure also impacted investments in public
infrastructure. We document that the Dutch built road and rail infrastructure to transport
processed sugar to the ports, and this infrastructure has persisted, plausibly promoting
trade and economic activity through the present. Villages located within a few kilometers
of a historical factory were more likely to have a paved road in 1980 and today have a
much higher density of intercity and local roads, as well as railroads, than places just a
few kilometers further away. In the absence of the Cultivation System, this infrastructure
would almost certainly not have been built elsewhere in Java, as the Dutch made these costly
investments only because the extraction of a large surplus ensured a profitable return.
Over time, more industrialized and connected places near historical factories may have
been able to gain access to public goods more generally - i.e. because they could better afford
them or because the returns to public goods used in industrial production were higher. This
would plausibly reinforce the differences in income and industrial structure. Indeed, we find
that villages near a historical factory were much more likely to have electricity in 1980, which
at that time was used primarily for industrial production. They were also more likely to
have a high school in 1980, a time when high schools were very rare. Using the complete
100% sample microdata from the 2000 Census, we document that people in villages within a
few kilometers of colonial factories are more educated. This is true both for cohorts born in
the 1920s, who completed their education during the Dutch era, and for more recent cohorts
who completed their education under an independent Indonesia.
The discussion thus far has focused on the establishment of the factories. The Cultivation
System also subjected villages within a contiguous catchment area surrounding each factory
to forced sugarcane cultivation, fundamentally altering their economic and political organization. To estimate these impacts, we use a different empirical design: a spatial discontinuity
across the borders of the catchment areas. We obtained a 19th century handwritten list of
the over 10,000 villages subjected to forced cultivation from Dutch archives in the Hague and
computed the exact location of the Cultivation System boundaries by matching these villages
with modern georeferenced locations (Figure 2). Inside, villages cultivated sugarcane for the
government, whereas outside they did not. The boundaries form a multi-dimensional discontinuity in longitude-latitude space and allow us to control flexibly for smooth geographic
variation, including in proximity to the nearest historical factory. Identification requires that
pre-determined characteristics change continuously at the catchment area boundaries, and
we provide evidence that this assumption is reasonable.
The Dutch did not have enough officials to directly manage the Cultivation System and
instead empowered Javanese village heads to manage it by giving them considerably greater
command over land and labor than they had exercised previously. Village heads also received
incentive payments proportional to their village’s cane cultivation. The historical literature
4

emphasizes that in response, village heads redistributed land to the village - where they
would firmly control it - and to their cronies. We therefore begin by examining whether
the Cultivation System persistently influenced land allocations. Javanese villages typically
have some amount of land set aside permanently for use by the village for public purposes.
Temporary use rights over some of this land (known as tanah bengkok ) are given to village
officials as compensation for their service; revenues from the use of other land enters the
village treasury. We find that there is about 10 to 15 percent more village public-use land
in Cultivation System villages. This has remained fairly constant over time, with virtually
identical effects in 1980 and 2003. Effects on private land inequality are if anything positive
but not statistically significant.
To the extent that not all the revenues from these public lands were extracted for private
gain, they may have helped villages to overcome the collective action barriers inherent in
funding public goods. We document that households in Cultivation System villages are more
educated, and the impacts go all the way back to the 1920s cohort, which was educated
during the Dutch period. These estimates isolate the impacts of being subjected to forced
cultivation, and are above and beyond the effects of being closer to a factory, which the RD
controls for flexibly. Historically, villages that wanted a school needed to fund the school
building themselves. Cultivation villages appear to have had more school infrastructure prior
to the nationally-funded school construction program begun in the 1970s.
Differences in human capital plausibly impacted economic structure more broadly, as
cultivation villages have a higher percentage of households working in manufacturing and
retail and fewer in agriculture, both in 1980 and today. They also have more manufacturing
firms on average than villages located just outside the discontinuity and are more densely
populated. People living in these villages are no poorer than those living just outside.
This study contributes to an extensive literature on the long-run impacts of colonial institutions and relates to a large body of work that highlights the relevance of persistence
for understanding patterns of economic development.2 While the political economy literature emphasizes the negative long-run development effects of extractive colonial institutions
(Acemoglu et al., 2002, 2001), research on infrastructure and agglomeration underscores that
colonial extraction may have diverse long-run impacts. For example, Jedwab and Moradi
(2016) and Jedwab et al. (2015) provide evidence that colonial railroads persistently affected
the distribution and aggregate level of economic activity in Africa, and Donaldson (2010)
2

See Nunn et al. (2017); Becker et al. (2016); Guiso et al. (2016); Lowes et al. (2015); Acemoglu et al.
(2015); Bukowski (2016); Oto-Peralı́as and Romero-Ávila (2014); Grosjean (2014); Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014); Valencia Caicedo (2014); Acemoglu and Robinson (2013); Spolaore and Wacziarg (2013);
Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013); Alesina et al. (2013); Voigtländer and Voth (2012); Acemoglu et al.
(2011); Nunn and Wantchekon (2011); Luttmer and Singhal (2011); Grosjean (2011); Nunn and Qian (2011);
Tabellini (2010); Iyer (2010); Fernández and Fogli (2009); Tabellini (2008); Nunn (2008); Guiso et al. (2008);
Gennaioli and Rainer (2007); Giuliano (2007); Banerjee and Iyer (2005); Glaeser and Shleifer (2002).

5

documents that railroads in colonial India significantly improved welfare historically.
Contrasting the Cultivation System with other examples of colonial extraction that generated different long-run outcomes highlights that the direction and magnitude of extractive
institutional impacts are inextricably linked with the specifics of how these institutions functioned, since this determines the channels of persistence. Dell (2010) uses a spatial discontinuity to document that forced labor in the Potosi silver mines during Spanish colonization
reduced long-run economic prosperity in Peru. Conscripts within an area known as the mining mita were marched from their communities to a single location in Potosi to mine raw
silver that was exported. Hence the mita did not involve significant construction of processing or transport infrastructure. Moreover, the study shows that the mita weakened property
rights in the long-run, with land grabs by Hispanic settlers leading to lower public goods
provision and worse long-run economic outcomes, whereas in much of Asia (including Java)
and Africa, there were far fewer colonizers relative to the local population.3 An examination
of forced rubber cultivation in the Congo by Lowes and Montero (2016) also documents
persistent negative effects. Around the time of Belgian colonization, the invention of the
inflatable tire greatly increased global rubber demand. The Congo was a rich source of indigenous rubber, but with time trees could be transplanted elsewhere. Hence, the Belgians
had strong incentives to maximize short-run extraction before competition drove revenues
down. They focused on coercive labor practices, with few investments in infrastructure.
The Cultivation System, like the above examples, plausibly had large negative impacts
on coerced populations. However, it differs from them because it required extensive local
processing, as did other examples of colonial extraction discussed in the next section. The
Javanese economy in 1830 was primarily agricultural, landless peasants were customarily
attached to land-owning households and hence not available for factory labor, and transport
infrastructure and external finance were nearly non-existent, all major barriers to industrial
processing that the Cultivation System altered to create an extractable surplus. Moreover,
village heads tended to be weak relative to landowners and village level public goods provision
was limited, and the System likewise modified these dynamics. This type of economic and
political organization was common across Southeast Asia and not unique to Java.4 Following
independence most Europeans left, but the Javanese utilized persistent colonial structures
to generate economic activity.
The remainder of the study is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the historical
context, and Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 examines the long-run impacts of the
3

In other work in the Americas about the persistent development impacts of different crop types - including
sugar - landholdings of settlers of European descent are also argued to play an important role in generating
persistence (Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Bruhn and Gallego, 2012).
4
See for example Lieberman, 1993, Coedès, 1966; Mabbett, 1977; Kulke, 1986; Tambiah, 1977; Wolters,
1999; Tambiah, 2013.

6

sugar processing infrastructure established by the Cultivation System, whereas Section 5
estimates the effects of being subjected to forced cultivation. Section 6 concludes.

2

Historical Background

2.1

An Overview of the Cultivation System

The Cultivation System (Cultuurstelsel ), in force from the early 1830s through the 1870s,
compelled Javanese villagers to produce export crops for the Dutch colonial government. At
its peak, the Cultivation System provided over one third of Dutch government revenues and
four percent of Dutch GDP (Luiten van Zanden, 2010; Ricklefs, 2008, p. 159), making Java
one of the world’s most financially lucrative colonies. While a variety of crops were grown,
from the 1850s onward sugar and coffee accounted for more than 96% of profits (Elson, 1994,
p. 135).5 We focus on sugar cultivation, which took place on the populated plains of Java’s
Northeast Coast. Coffee, while profitable, was primarily grown on forested mountain slopes
that were uninhabited initially (Elson, 1994, p. 65). Extant data on coffee are at a higher
level of aggregation that do not permit the detailed analyses that we perform for sugar.
The sugar system was a major enterprise, as Java was the world’s second largest sugar
producer at the time, surpassed narrowly only by Cuba. The use of coercion in sugar
production was typical at this time, see Dippel et al. (2015) for a theoretical and empirical examination of how returns from sugar were invested in coercive institutions in the
Caribbean. The system started in the early 1830s with over 70,000 sugar growers cultivating
cane for 59 factories, and over time grew to encompass 94 factories and a large share of the
Javanese population (Elson, 1994, p. 55). The factories were primarily established in the
1830s and after that changed little. (Elson, 1984, p. 71). A Dutch report cited by Fasseur
(1992) notes that as much as 25 percent of the native Javanese population was involved in
the Cultivation System (excluding coffee), of which sugar was the largest component. Dutch
reports from the 1860s show that over 2.5 million workers labored in the sugar factories or
related services (i.e. transporting cane and firewood to the factories), with the number of
free laborers expanding significantly across time (Elson, 1994, p. 215). Sugar factories were
run by private entrepreneurs with close links to the Crown, who were required to sell their
high quality sugar to the government. Villages surrounding each factory had to allocate up
to one-fifth of their land to grow cane, though in practice this ratio was often significantly
exceeded (Elson, 1994, p. 229; Van Niel, 1992, p. 137). Europeans were prohibited from
5

Indigo was grown initially but the Dutch started phasing it out in 1834 due to low profitability, and
indigo cultivation declined sharply throughout the 1840s (Elson, 1994, p. 83, 110, 131; Van Niel, 1992, p.
112). Cinnamon, tea, and tobacco were grown by a small number of peasants in localized areas.

7

renting or purchasing land and from establishing their own private factories, and hence sugar
production occurred almost exclusively through the Cultivation System.6
The Cultivation System was primarily administered by Javanese officials, who gained considerably greater command over land and labor than they had exercised previously (Van Niel,
2005, Elson, 1994, p. 183). Village heads were in charge of allocating sugar cultivation land
and assigning labor to cultivation services. The village received incentive payments (kultuurporcenten) for cultivating cane, and the village head was also tasked with distributing these
and with collecting the land tax owed to the Dutch government.
The Dutch phased out the Cultivation System in the 1880s, and sugar expanded rapidly
under free enterprise (Elson, 1984, p. 131). However, the industry collapsed during the Great
Depression, and subsequently Java’s primary competitors enjoyed large protected markets,
whereas Java did not.7 Moreover, much of Europe and North America subsidized and protected new domestic beet sugar producers. Today Indonesia is a major sugar importer, with
sugar contributing only 0.05% of their agricultural exports.

2.2

The Cultivation System’s Historical Impacts

Relative to the economics literature on extractive institutions - which tends to emphasize
persistent depressive effects on economic activity - the historical literature on the Cultivation
System underscores its role in promoting modern exchange. Extensive road and rail infrastructure were constructed to connect sugar producing regions to ports, plausibly promoting
market integration (Elson, 1994, p. 251-252, Ricklefs, 2008, p. 158). Moreover, the System
increased economic specialization by creating a variety of economic opportunities outside
forced cultivation (Elson, 1994, p. 207-208). Factory and transport workers were often paid
a wage, and there were also employment opportunities making baskets and matting to transport the cane, making clay pots for use in the factories, and transporting firewood to the
factories. Moreover, while the high grade refined sugar was exported, the low grade sugar
could not be exported due to a high water content. The factories were permitted to sell this
sugar locally, potentially spurring other food processing establishments to locate nearby.
Moreover, subjected communities received incentive payments based on the amount of
sugar produced, and historians argue that crop payments, by injecting currency into what
had previously been a non-monetized subsistence economy, promoted modern exchange (Elson, 1994, p. 261, Ricklefs, 2008, p. 158). The payments often exceeded the land tax owed to
the Dutch (Elson, 1994, p. 311, Van Niel, 1992), and residencies (provinces) more involved
6

The exceptions were the indirectly ruled Principalities, which had private estate agriculture and were
exempt from the Cultivation System.
7
For example, the Philippines and Hawaii had protected access to the U.S., and Taiwan had protected
access to Japan.

8

in the Cultivation System experienced a greater growth in markets while it was in force.8
Much of the historical literature on subjected villages has focused on the effects on land
distribution, with a general consensus that the System increased landholdings of the village
government. An older literature argues that the System led to an equalizing of the land
distribution, as villagers aimed to share the System’s burdens (Geertz, 1963). A subsequent
literature likewise hypothesizes that the Cultivation System had equalizing effects, through
increasing the amount of communal village land or through leading village land to be divided
more equally.9 A revisionist literature, initiated by Elson (1994, 1984), likewise emphasizes
an increase in village collective landholdings, but argues instead that this empowered village
elites (see also Ricklefs (2008, p. 159)). In particular, village heads were responsible for
assigning land for government cultivation, as the Dutch relied on Javanese authorities to
ensure that resources were devoted to government cultivation, and the Dutch distributed
incentive payments proportional to sugar cultivation to the village head.10 Village heads
plausibly responded by redistributing land to the village (where they controlled it) or to
their cronies (Van Niel, 1992, p. 139). By 1857, 20% of all the irrigated land in Probolinggo
Residency - a center of sugar cultivation - was controlled by officials, in Kedu village chiefs
had taken over more than half of the land, and similar patterns obtained in Pekalongan-Tegal
and other sugar-intensive areas (Elson, 1984, p. 94).

2.3

Other Historical Examples

The Dutch were not the only colonial power that attempted to institute major economic
changes in order to extract more surplus. The Japanese in Taiwan are a classic example of
a developmental colonial state that made massive investments in increasing output in order
to maximize extraction, including the construction of a large-scale, modern sugar-processing
infrastructure. The establishment of tea plantations and a network of tea processing plants
in India - including the formation of the Assam Tea Company under the auspices of the
colonial British government - likewise bears similarities to the Cultivation System, as does the
establishment of a colonial Indian jute production and processing infrastructure (Tomlinson,
2014). Van Waijenburg (2015) documents the widespread nature of labor conscription by
colonizers in Africa, highlighting many different types of economic arrangements including
some that involved labor in agricultural export and processing enterprises.
8

Government sugar land was assessed at the highest rate, so if anything increased the village’s tax burden.
See Elson (1994, p. 162) for a review.
10
The Dutch made village authorities accountable to the colonial state and ensured that they benefited
from furthering Dutch objectives. Traditionally, the head’s term was limited and required consent from
landholders. Dutch officials increasingly intervened to install village authorities friendly to their interests
and resisted the periodic rotation of village heads (Ricklefs, 2008, p. 158; Elson, 1994, p. 172-174). Following
an 1854 reform, succession of the village head was made hereditary.
9

9

2.4

Assignment to Sugar Cultivation

Understanding why sugar factories were located in particular places and why certain villages
were subjected is central to identifying the long-run impacts of the Cultivation System.
During the 18th century, sugar cultivation in Java was limited to a small number of estates
in the hinterland surrounding Batavia (now Jakarta), the capital of the Netherlands Indies
and the location of most European settlement. These estates crushed cane using wooden
rollers pulled by water buffalo and the output was consumed in local markets. During the
19th century, Batavian cane production nearly disappeared, as the technology was primitive
and the land marginally suitable (Van Niel, 2005, p. 133, 139).
The government factories were created in the 1830s and remained relatively fixed thereafter. Dutch official correspondence, analyzed by van Schaik (1986, p. 183), highlights
several factors used to locate sugar factories. Sugar grows well in plains and valleys and
does not grow well on mountain slopes, and factories had to be near locations suitable for
cultivation since raw cane was costly to transport. Moreover, in 1830 proximity to a river
was crucial because sugar processing technology at the time used iron crushing cylinders
powered by water wheels. It was not until the late 19th century that steam power became
dominant, and indeed after the abolition of the System, there was a large-scale expansion
of cultivation to areas where processing would not have been possible prior to steam power.
Proximity to timber was also important but is unobserved, since rapid deforestation occurred
throughout the 19th century and forest maps prior to the Cultivation System do not exist.
Finally, there needed to be nearby population to cultivate the cane, and the factories could
not be located in areas where transport costs were prohibitive. Hence, the remote valleys of
southern Java were not suitable, despite their agronomic conditions. However, at the time
there were no population censuses or systematic disaggregated data more generally that the
Dutch could use to fine tune the locations based on population or other pre-characteristics.
Each factory was allocated a certain area from which to draw the land and labor it
required, and villages were typically within four to seven kilometers of their factory. The
Dutch referred to this as the ‘circle system’. Catchment areas tended to be adjacent to
each other and avoided major pre-existing cities.11 Once one factory was sited, another one
could not be located too close even if there were many suitable places along a river, since
each factory required a sufficiently sized catchment area. We will exploit this fact to create
suitable counterfactual factory locations that can be used as a comparison group.
11

Colonial Java was divided into 24 residencies, which were the center of colonial administration and the
major cities of the time. Modern Indonesian provinces are larger, with only 6 provinces on Java, but the
colonial residency capitals by and large remain the largest cities today.

10

3
3.1

Data
The Cultivation System

Data on the Cultivation System are drawn from handwritten manuscript archival records
held by the Hague, with Appendix Figure Y-1 providing an example (Commissie Umbgrove,
1858). Constitutional reforms in the Netherlands in 1848 placed colonial affairs under partial parliamentary control, and in 1853 the Minister of Colonies appointed the Umbgrove
Commission to conduct an inquiry into government sugar cultivation. They spent the next
four years collecting detailed data. Handwritten documents list which villages contributed to
each sugar factory and how much land and labor each village provided, for the approximately
10,000 subjected villages. The manuscripts also contain qualitative information about the
social situation and sometimes show sketches of the catchment areas.
Historical villages are matched with coordinates from the U.S. National Geospatial Intelligence Agency’s Geonames database, which provides a detailed list of populated places,
including many sub-village units.12 Matches are made using the historical village’s name
and the location of its historical district. The manuscripts also list the distance between
the village’s fields and the factory, which allows us to distinguish between multiple matches.
We match 6,383 historical villages with coordinates, which are located in 2,519 modern village polygons. Modern villages are small - there are over 30,000 in Java. The factories are
matched using the same procedure. The combination of the historical sub-village, plus the
fact that the factory had to be adjacent to a river, means that they can be precisely located.
Not all historical sugar villages can be matched, as some disappeared or changed their
names, leaving gaps in the matched catchment areas. The actual catchment areas were
contiguous, and hence we infer a contiguous set of subjected villages by drawing straight lines
from each sugar factory to the coordinates of contributing villages, assigning any unmatched
village along the lines as treated. This method is illustrated in Figure 3, which shows the
factories, matched village points, straight lines, and catchment boundaries for an example
catchment area. Modern village polygons are shown in the background. 82% of modern
villages in the constructed catchment areas are matched to at least one village in the historical
dataset. We designate all villages inside these catchment areas as treated. The appendix
shows that results are highly robust to instead designating matched villages as treated and
instrumenting these with being inside the catchment areas.13
12

Data are available for download at http://geonames.nga.mil/gns/html/index.html.
The first stage is very strong, with an F-stat of around 1,450 when standard errors are clustered at the
sub-district level, making these estimates similar by construction.
13

11

3.2

Outcome Data

Outcome data are drawn primarily from population, industrial, agricultural, and village
censuses and household surveys. These data were collected between 1980 and the present by
the Indonesian government’s Central Bureau of Statistics (BPS) and are described in more
detail in the data appendix (Table Y-1). All contain village identifiers that we match to
modern village boundaries.14
The variation that we exploit is extremely fine, and anything above the village level
aggregates it away. Villages are very small - with over 30,000 in Java today - and while a
number of older data sources exist, they are too aggregated to be useful for our analysis.
We can though trace historical effects using cohort analysis and detailed infrastructure maps
published in 1900 by the Dutch Topographic Bureau (Topographisch Bureau) in Batavia.

4
4.1
4.1.1

Impacts of Sugar Factories
Empirical Strategy
Overview

In order to extract a surplus, the Dutch constructed a network of industrial sugar processing
plants to transform raw cane into exportable processed sugar. Prior to the Cultivation System, rural Java was specialized in subsistence production, and hence this extensive network
of factories represented a major reorganization of economic life.
Estimating the effects of proximity to a historical factory requires identifying a plausible
set of counterfactual factory locations. We exploit the fact that there were many possible
equilibrium factory configurations (Salop, 1979). Since catchment areas were typically adjacent and each needed to produce enough cane for the factory to operate, factories had to
be spaced sufficiently far apart. A variety of locations along rivers between actual factories
would have been suitable - and would not have resulted in major overall changes in the set
of villages that produced raw cane - but factories were not placed in these locations due to
the spacing constraints.
A feasible spatial equilibrium for the Cultivation System’s 94 factories consists of 94 suitable sites, spaced far enough apart to have adequately sized catchment areas. In the baseline
specification, we identify feasible counterfactual factory sites by imposing the following requirements, and an extensive set of appendices documents robustness:
14
We use the term village to refer to the lowest administrative level in Indonesia. In rural areas these are
known as desa; in more urban areas, these are known as kelurahan. We do not distinguish between desa and
kelurahan in the analysis, and they are treated identically in modern Indonesian data.

12

1. Since the state-of-the-art sugar processing technology was water-powered, sugar factories were located along rivers; we therefore only consider sites that can be reached by
moving 5 to 20 kilometers upstream or downstream via river from the actual factory.
2. The point must have at least as much sugar suitable land within a 5 kilometer radius
as the 10th percentile of the actual factory distribution. Sugar grows in the plains and
not on steep hillsides or in mountainous areas. We infer suitability by observing where
sugar was grown historically, first computing the 90th percentile of slope and elevation
in sugar villages and then assigning anywhere with slope or elevation less than these
cutoffs as suitable. We choose the 90th percentile because some sugar villages contain
both plains and part of a mountain, leading the right tail of the elevation and slope
distributions to be highly skewed.15
3. Placebo factories for each draw need to be at least as far apart as the 10th percentile
in the distribution of actual factories.
This approach is illustrated in Figure 1. Panel a) shows an actual factory, surrounded
by a 5 kilometer radius, with sugar suitability and rivers in the background. Panel b) shows
a suitable counterfactual factory location, which has a sufficient amount of nearby sugar
suitable land, as compared to the distribution of actual factories. Panel c) shows a larger
set of counterfactual factories.
We then estimate the following specification, both for the actual factory and for the 1000
sets of counterfactual factory locations:
outv = α +

20
X

γi df activ

+ βXv +

i=1

n
X

f actjv + v

(1)

j=1

where outv is an outcome of interest in village v, and the df activ are indicators equal to one if
village v is 0-1 km from the nearest (placebo) factory, 1-2 km,..., 18-19 km. The omitted bin
is 19-20 km, which is the maximum distance included in the sample. Xv includes elevation,
slope, distance to the coast, distance to the closest natural harbor, distance to the nearest
river, log flow accumulation, and a spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital,
with kink points every three kilometers. The f actjv are nearest factory fixed effects, which
ensure that villages are compared to other villages near the same (placebo) factory.
The baseline specification limits the sample to sugar suitable villages, in order to ensure
that the sample is geographically similar and because the analysis of the impacts of being a
15

An alternative would be to use FAO suitability data, but unfortunately these are too aggregated to be
useful when exploiting village level variation.

13

subjected sugar village will focus on this set of places.16 Our main set of results also restricts
the sample to historical factories that are not in close proximity to a modern factory, to
ensure that effects are not primarily driven by the persistence of sugar processing itself, and
we discuss explicitly the few cases where this restriction matters (primarily: manufacturing
of products used as inputs to sugar processing).
We use the position of the df activ coefficients for the actual factory in the absolute value
distribution of the 1000 counterfactual df activ coefficients to compute a p-value. Small pvalues imply that patterns near the actual factories would have been unlikely to arise in the
factories’ absence. If we instead simply used the regular standard errors from the distance to
actual factory estimates, the conclusions would be unchanged. The randomization inference
style approach has the advantage of imposing a more compelling counterfactual and also
addresses concerns about spatial correlation in the computation of standard errors.
The study also conducts an additional counterfactual exercise, shifting all the historical
factories up or down the river by the same distance. Then it estimates equation (1) for each
of these common shifts. We would expect the γi to be largest for shifts around 0 km - which
do not substantially change the location of the factories - and to dissipate the further the
placebo factories are moved away from the actual factories.
4.1.2

Specification Robustness

The results are highly robust to a variety of alternative specifications. In the main text,
we compute p-values using the placebo distributions constructed from independent random
shifts, whereas Appendix A shows that patterns are broadly similar when we instead compute
p-values using the placebo distributions constructed from the common shifts. In the baseline,
the sample includes villages up to 20 kilometers from the nearest historical factory, and
Appendix B documents that similar patterns obtain when only villages within 10 kilometers
of the historical factories are included.
Moreover, the baseline - except where explicitly noted - does not include historical factories that are near modern sugar factories, as the focus is on effects that do not go directly
through the persistence of sugar production. Appendix C shows that most conclusions do
not change when these factories are included. The effects that emerge are also very similar
when we include all villages in the sample, rather than limiting to sugar suitable villages, as
documented in Appendix D. Appendix E shows that it makes little difference if we omit the
factory fixed effects, comparing all places near historical factories to each other rather than
only exploiting variation within places near the same factory. Appendix F documents that
results are similar when we control for whether each village contributed land to forced sugar
16

To be consistent with the analysis of subjected villages, we also exclude places located in cities that were
pre-period residency capitals. As documented below, effects do not change when these places are included.

14

cultivation. Additional robustness is discussed throughout the remainder of the text.
4.1.3

Pre-Characteristic Balance

We begin by examining whether geographic characteristics are similar in places near versus
far from actual factories, and in places in similar proximity to actual versus counterfactual
factories. Geographic characteristics could vary with proximity to actual factories, but we
expect places in similar proximity to actual versus counterfactual factories to have similar
exogenous characteristics.
We illustrate the patterns in the data by plotting the df acti coefficients for proximity
to the actual factories. We denote the significance of each of the df acti coefficients relative
to the counterfactual df acti distributions constructed from randomly shifting the factories
to plausible counterfactual locations. Crosses indicate coefficients that are above the 95th
percentile of the counterfactual distributions, solid dots denote coefficients above the 90th
percentile, and hollow dots indicate coefficients below the 90th percentile. The figures also
highlight the general shape of the relationship by plotting a linear spline with kink points
every 3km, which is fitted on the raw data controlling for nearest factory fixed effects.
An alternative to plotting the actual df acti coefficients would be to plot the difference between the actual coefficients and the median placebo coefficients, which is done in Appendix
G. This typically makes little difference, as the means of the placebo df acti distributions
tend to be close to zero.
Figure 4 documents that geographic characteristics indeed appear balanced. The characteristics considered are elevation, slope, distance to the coast, flow accumulation, distance
to the nearest natural harbor, distance to the nearest river, and distance to the nearest 1830
residency capital. Flow accumulation is a measure constructed by the USGS Hydrosheds
project that calculates how many cells are uphill from the cell under question. The higher
the number, the more water we would expect to flow through the cell.
While a few coefficients are significant relative to the counterfactual distributions, most
likely by chance, there is no consistent pattern. Moreover, the magnitudes of the distance
to factory coefficients are very small – for example, moving from 1km away from a factory
location to 10km away is associated with a difference in elevation of about 2 meters.
Places near historical factories are closer to 1830 residency capitals (panel g). There are
a small number of these - only 24 in all of Java - and Appendix H shows that dropping
factories within 10 kilometers of a residency capital flattens out this relationship, whereas
the other results are broadly robust to this variation. Moreover, in other robustness checks
- such as dropping the fixed effects (Appendix E) or not requiring villages in the sample to
be sugar suitable (Appendix D), distance to the nearest residency capital is also balanced

15

relative to the placebos, whereas other results remain similar. Since distance to the nearest
1830 residency capital differs, we control for a flexible spline in it, with kink points every
three kilometers, throughout the analysis.

4.2
4.2.1

Results
Economic Structure

To the extent that agglomeration economies or other forces are important and highly persistent, government sugar factories could influence industrialization in the long-run, even
in places where sugar has not been processed for many decades. We examine this using a
variety of data on sectoral employment. We focus here on places without a modern sugar
factory nearby, in order to isolate effects that do not go directly through the persistence of
sugar processing. Subsequently, we will explicitly examine modern sugar production.
We begin by illustrating the methodology in more detail, using as a dependent variable an
indicator for whether the individual works in the agricultural sector, taken from the SUSENAS 2001-2011 household surveys.17 The sample includes prime age males aged 18 to 55 to
avoid confounding labor market participation.18 For each factory we take 1,000 independent
random draws that shift the factory to a suitable counterfactual location, constraining the
factories in each counterfactual spatial arrangement to be sufficiently far apart. We estimate
equation (1) using distance to the nearest actual factory, as well as distance to the nearest
counterfactual factory in each of the 1,000 counterfactual configurations.
The sub-plots in Figure 5, panel a) show the counterfactual distributions of absolute
coefficients for each of the df acti bins in distance to the nearest factory: 0-1 km, 1-2 km,
etc. The coefficients that measure the impacts of proximity to actual factories are denoted
by a red line. Each sub-plot also reports a p-value, given by the fraction of the absolute
value counterfactual coefficients to the right of the absolute value of the actual coefficient.
For bins near a factory, the actual coefficients fall far in the tails of the counterfactual
distributions, indicating that patterns of agricultural employment near government factories
would have been very unlikely to arise in the factories’ absence. For bins further away,
the actual estimates fall in the center of the counterfactual distributions, documenting that
agricultural employment is not different from what we would have expected in the factories’
absence. Effects dissipate within five kilometers.
Throughout the analysis, we will see that results take this hockey stick shape: large in
the immediate vicinity of the factory and then dissipating and remaining flat. This suggests
17

When we use the SUSENAS datasets, for which we pool a number of different years of the data together
in order to have sufficient number of observations in each village, we augment equation (1) to include a
survey-year dummy.
18
Estimates, available upon request, are similar using all individuals.

16

that the impacts around the factories do not result simply from a reallocation of economic
activity from nearby areas, a scenario that would tend to lead to negative effects for the
latter locations relative to even further places or the counterfactuals.
Panel b) plots the df acti coefficients for proximity to the actual factories. Crosses indicate
coefficients that are above the 95th percentile of the counterfactual distributions shown in
panel a), solid dots denote coefficients that are above the 90th percentile, and hollow dots
indicate coefficients that are below the 90th percentile. These figures also plot a linear spline
with kink points every 3 kilometers. The spline is fitted on the raw outcome data, controlling
for geographic characteristics, nearest factory fixed effects, and survey year fixed effects.
Individuals within a few kilometers of a historical factory are 20 to 25 percentage points
less likely to work in agriculture than those 10 to 20 kilometers away. Appendix Figure G-2
shows a version of this plot where the mean of each placebo df acti distribution has been subtracted from each coefficient. Relative to the placebos, individuals in the immediate vicinity
of a historical factory are around 17 percentage points less likely to work in agriculture.
We also conduct a placebo exercise that shifts all the historical factories up or down the
river by the same distance and then estimates equation (1) for each of these common shifts.
Each sub-plot in panel c) shows the γi coefficients for a df acti bin in distance to the nearest
factory: 0-1 km, 1-2 km, etc. The x-axis plots the magnitude of the common shift upstream
(left side of the plot) or downstream (right side of the plot), in kilometers. The y-axis plots
the γi , with the length of each bar indicating the magnitude of the counterfactual estimate.
Panel d) is analogous to panel b), plotting the coefficients for proximity to the actual factories
and computing p-values using the absolute counterfactual distributions constructed with the
specific shifts, omitting placebos in the immediate vicinity of the actual factories. The
patterns that emerge using this set of placebos are similar.
Figure 6 examines the industrial structure near government sugar factories in more detail,
examining both different sectors and different time periods. Due to space constraints, only
the coefficient plots are shown in the main text, with the statistical significance estimated
using the counterfactual distributions from the independent random shifts. The complete
set of counterfactual distributions for the independent and common shifts are shown in
Appendices I and J, respectively. Coefficient plots with p values constructed using the
common shifts are shown in Appendix A.
For comparison, panel a) repeats the plot for agriculture from the 2001-2011 household
survey data. Panel b) likewise examines whether the individual works in agriculture, using
data from the 1980 Population Census, again limiting the sample to prime age males. The
patterns are similar to those from 2001-2011, but the effects are even larger than in the
more recent period. Places in close proximity to a factory are 30 to 35 percentage points
less agricultural than those just ten to twenty kilometers away, and effects are similar when
17

the counterfactual mean is differenced out (Figure G-3). Indonesia was more agricultural in
1980, and these results suggest some convergence with more recent industrialization.
Next, panels c) and d) consider employment in manufacturing, again using data from
SUSENAS and the 1980 Population Census. The pattern for manufacturing during 20012011 is the inverse of that for agriculture, with around six percentage points more individuals
working in manufacturing in the immediate vicinity of historical factories relative to further
away. The 1980 Census likewise reveals that manufacturing employment is higher within
a few kilometers of a historical factory. Places near a historical factory had around seven
percentage points more individuals working in manufacturing, a very large effect given that
Indonesia was a primarily agrarian economy at the time – only 11 percent of the population
worked in manufacturing. Effects remain unchanged when the counterfactual means are
differenced out (Figure G-3), further indicating that it is not simply the case that places near
suitable factory locations are more industrial - i.e. because rivers promote industrialization.
We also examine employment in retail. For 2001-2011, places in the immediate vicinity of
a factory have around 10 percentage points more employment in retail relative to places ten
to twenty kilometers away, and the coefficient for the closest bin is above the 90th percentile
of the counterfactual distribution (panel e). In contrast to manufacturing, the retail effects
are somewhat higher today than in 1980.
These occupational patterns – more manufacturing, more retail, and less agriculture –
are also consistent with the areas near historical factories being more urban. Panels g and
h examine log population density in 2003 and 1980 (respectively), defined as the log of
population in each village per square kilometer. Areas within 1 kilometer of a factory are
much more densely populated than areas 10 kilometers away in both 1980 and today. The
effects relative to the 20 kilometer bin flatten out within a few kilometers, indicating that
the population response is not drawn disproportionately from places somewhat closer to the
historical factories relative to places further away or relative to the placebos.
4.2.2

Sugar and Linked Industries

The above results suggest that the historical location of production impacts current economic
activity through agglomeration, and we now examine this mechanism in more detail. Firms
that used sugar as an input may have located near historical sugar processing plants - creating
additional value through input-output, labor skill, and technological linkages (Ellison et al.,
2010; Marshall, 1890). Final goods consumers or workers may have also clustered near
historical production centers, with these patterns persisting even after the original sugar
factories disappeared.
Before examining linkages in detail, we consider whether sugar production itself has

18

persisted. Figure 7, panel a) shows - using the full sample of historical factories and data
from the 2006 Economic Census - that indeed places near a historical factory, particularly
those within 0 to 1 kilometers, produce substantially more processed sugar today than places
further away. In contrast, panel b) documents that once we drop the 19% of historical
factories within 2 kilometers of a modern sugar factory - as we do in all of our baseline
results - the relationship between distance and modern sugar production flattens out.
Panel c) shows that there is little relationship in the full sample between raw cane production, drawn from the Podes 2003 village census, and distance to a historical factory,
presumably because improvements in transport have obviated the need to grow cane in the
immediate vicinity of processing plants. The relationship between modern sugar cultivation
and distance to a historical factory remains flat in the restricted sample (panel d).
Input-output linkages were plausibly an important driver of agglomeration around sugar
factories historically, since the low grade sugar that factories sold on local markets was costly
to transport. To test whether such agglomeration has persisted, we construct weighted
average employment shares for industries upstream and downstream from sugar processing.
Sectoral employment is drawn from the 2006 Economic Census and total employment is
from the 2000 Census. The weights are from the Leontief inverse of the 2006 Indonesian
Input-Output Table. The input-output table specifies how many dollars of sector i’s output
are needed by sector j to produce one dollar of its own output. The higher this number,
the stronger the linkages between the sectors. The Leontief inverse of this matrix captures
not just direct linkages but also indirect ones. If sector k uses inputs from sector j, which
in turn uses inputs from sector i, sector k is indirectly linked to sector i via sector j. The
Leontief inverse measures how much of sector i’s output is used both directly and indirectly
by sector k. The Leontief weights are described in more detail in Appendix Z.
The main manufacturing sectors upstream from sugar processing are farm machinery,
used to harvest cane, and capital equipment, used to process cane. (Raw cane is, of course,
the largest upstream sector but is not included in our measure since the data only include
manufacturing establishments.) The main manufacturing industries downstream are in food
processing, as sugar is an additive to many other foods. Many types of services - restaurants,
hotels, schools, and hospitals, to name a few - are also downstream from sugar processing,
since sugar is consumed at these establishments, but these are not included in the downstream
measure since they are not in manufacturing. These downstream linkages could though
contribute to the retail impacts documented above.
Figure 7, panel e) shows that when all historical factories are included in the analysis,
upstream industries - i.e. farm and processing machinery - are about three times as prevalent
relative to the mean within one kilometer of historical factories. This relationship flattens
out when we exclude historical factories that are located near modern ones (panel f).
19

In contrast, even when we limit the sample to historical factories that are not near modern
ones, employment in manufacturing industries downstream from sugar is much higher near
the historical factories (panel h). This is particularly true for places within 0 to 1 kilometer of
a historical factory, and the effect is large. The difference in employment share in downstream
industries between the 0-1 km bin and places 10 to 20 km away is about 50 percent greater
than the sample mean. Sugar was used as an input in other foods historically, and other
processed foods also tend to be used as inputs into each other. This suggests a particular
channel for manufacturing persistence: even after the original sugar factories disappeared,
there were still agglomeration advantages for the remaining downstream firms to continue
to locate in the same place.
4.2.3

Public goods and the public sector

The analysis has focused on the private sector, but public investments may also be an important channel of persistence. The historical literature emphasizes that the Dutch government
constructed road and rail networks to transport sugar to ports, which may in turn have persisted. Infrastructure and input-output agglomeration mechanisms could plausibly reinforce
each other. The Dutch made large infrastructure investments precisely because it was profitable for them due to the extraction of a surplus, and they would have been very unlikely
to make these investments elsewhere in the absence of extraction.
Figure 8, panels a) and b) examine colonial road and rail density in 1900. The data
are from a detailed map that we geo-referenced of roads and railways published in 1900
by the Dutch Topographic Bureau (Topographisch Bureau) in Batavia. In the analysis of
infrastructure - and for the remainder of the study - we drop historical factories near modern
sugar factories to isolate impacts that do not go directly through sugar production, with
Appendix C documenting similar effects when these places are included.
Both colonial road and rail density are substantially higher near historical sugar factories,
and these effects are atypical of those near counterfactual factories. When comparing the
0-1 km bin to places 5-20 km away, the difference in colonial road density is more than twice
as large as the sample mean. The difference in rail density is also substantial.
Panels c) through f) document that these effects have persisted through the present,
plausibly playing an important role in generating long-run economic impacts. Data from the
1980 Podes, a census of village governments, show that villages in the immediate vicinity of
the historical factories were less likely to only be accessible via a dirt road historically (panel
c). Today, both intercity and local road density are higher near historical factories. When
comparing the 0-1 km bin to places 5-20 km away, the difference in intercity road density
is about twice as large as the sample mean (panel d). Differences in local road density

20

are similarly large (panel e). Moreover, magnitudes remain similar when the counterfactual
means are differenced out (Figure G-6). Finally, railroad density today remains substantially
higher in the immediate vicinity of the historical factories (panel f).
Over time the more industrialized and integrated areas near historical factories may have
gained better access to public goods more generally, because they could better afford or lobby
for them, or because the returns to public goods used in industrial production were higher.
Figure 9 examines two of the main public goods provided in Java: electricity and schooling.
1980 Podes data reveal that places in the immediate vicinity of the historical factories were
50 percentage points more likely to have electricity than places ten to twenty kilometers
away (panel a). The effects fall far in the right tails of the counterfactual distributions.
Moreover, we find that in 1980, areas in the immediate vicinity of a factory were four
percentage points more likely to have a high school than places ten to twenty kilometers
away, relative to a sample mean of only two percent of villages with high schools (panel
b). The effects on high schools are also positive using the pooled 1996-2011 Podes Village
Censuses but are not statistically significant relative to the placebo distributions, and high
schools had become more prevalent by this period (panel c).
High schools were mostly built in administrative centers, and indeed places near factories
are around two kilometers closer to the nearest subdistrict capital, relative to a sample
mean distance of 3.8 kilometers (panel d). Note that differences in proximity to subdistrict
capitals remain statistically significant and of similar magnitude when we include all villages
in the sample (Appendix D), when we omit factory fixed effects (Appendix E), and when we
drop factories within 10 km of a residency capital (Appendix H), all specifications in which
distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital is balanced.
Figure 10 examines long-run impacts on schooling in more detail, using cohort level data
from the 2000 Population Census. We focus in the main text on three representative cohorts:
the 1920-1929 cohort (educated during the Dutch period), the 1950-1954 cohort (educated
following independence), and the 1970-1974 cohort (educated during Indonesia’s large-scale
school building campaign). Appendix K shows results for the complete set of cohorts. Panel
a) documents that individuals within a few kilometers of a historical factory on average have
between 0.75 and 1.25 more years of schooling than those located ten to twenty kilometers
away, relative to a sample mean of 4.9 years of schooling. These effects are atypical relative to
the counterfactual distributions and hold across all three cohorts (panel b). We see a similar
pattern for primary completion (panels c and d). It is much higher in close proximity to the
historical factories, and this is particularly true for the two older cohorts, whose schooling
occurred at a time when primary access was far from universal. High school completion again
shows a similar pattern (panels e and f). Effects are largest for younger cohorts, who received
schooling at a time when high school was more common, but impacts are still positive and
21

statistically significant even for the oldest cohort, educated during the Dutch era.
4.2.4

Household Consumption

We conclude by examining effects on household consumption, using pooled data from the
SUSENAS household survey. Following Deaton (1997), we assume that children aged 0 to
4 are equal to 0.4 adults and children aged 5 to 14 are equal to 0.5 adults. All regressions
control for survey year fixed effects and the number of household members aged 0-4, 5-14,
and 15 and older. We find that consumption levels in areas immediately adjacent to the
historical factories are around 14 percent higher than areas even just 5 kilometers further
away. When the mean of the counterfactual distribution is differenced out, the difference
remains at around 9 percent (Figure G-8). Consistent with these being relatively integrated
areas, this effect is about what we would expect given the differences in education. People
living adjacent to a historical factory have about 1.25 more years of education, and an 8-10
percent return to schooling (Duflo, 2001) would yield the observed consumption differences.

4.3

Discussion

In summary, the Dutch colonial sugar industry substantially transformed economic activity
in contemporary Java. Sectoral composition suggests that industries that used sugar as an
input sprung up surrounding colonial sugar factories, creating food processing centers with
population clustered nearby. Even when the original source of sugar disappeared, these
industrial centers persisted, sourcing sugar from elsewhere. Moreover, infrastructure had to
be constructed to transport Cultivation System sugar to ports. There is broad consensus
that transport infrastructure is important for economic development, and the infrastructure
remained long after the Dutch left. Since maximizing colonial profits was central to the Dutch
objective, it is hard to imagine a scenario where they would have made these investments in
the absence of a large extractable surplus.
Of course, some industrial production centers would likely have ultimately arisen in rural
Java in the absence of the Cultivation System. However, given that rural Java in 1830 was
a heavily agricultural economy governed by traditional agricultural labor norms in which
landless peasants were customarily attached to landowning households, most production
was for subsistence, and financial markets were largely absent, there were many barriers to
overcome. This study highlights how colonial extraction can have a range of effects, some of
which may promote economic activity in the long run relative to the counterfactual.

22

5
5.1

Impacts on Subjected Villages
Empirical Strategy

The discussion thus far has focused on the establishment of sugar factories. The second part
of our analysis turns to the impact on the villages that were forced to grow sugar cane. To
estimate the effects of forced cultivation, we exploit the discontinuous change in exposure
at the borders of the subjected catchment areas (as illustrated by Figure 2). Inside, villages
cultivated sugar for the government, whereas outside they did not. The boundaries form a
multi-dimensional discontinuity in longitude-latitude space, and regressions take the form:
outv = α + γcultivationv + f (geographic locationv ) + g(df actv ) + βXv +

n
X

segvi + v (2)

i=1

where outv is an outcome in village v. cultivationv is an indicator equal to 1 if the village
grew cane for the Cultivation System and equal to zero otherwise. f (geographic locationv )
is the RD polynomial, which controls for smooth functions of geographic location. Following
Gelman and Imbens (2014), we use a local linear RD polynomial for the baseline.19 The RD
polynomial is estimated separately for each of the 17 contiguous catchment areas.
To ensure that the effects we estimate are due to a village being subjected to growing
cane, rather than merely being close to a factory, g(df actv ) controls for a linear spline
in distance to the nearest historical sugar factory, with kink points estimated every three
kilometers; Section 4 shows that this functional form captures the impacts of proximity to a
factory well. Xv contains the same exogenous geographic characteristics that we used in the
distance to factory analysis: elevation, slope, distance to the coast, distance to the closest
natural harbor, distance to the nearest river, log flow accumulation, and a spline in distance
to the nearest 1830 residency capital. The segvi split each catchment area boundary into 10
kilometer segments, equaling one if village v is closest to segment i and zero otherwise. They
ensure that the specification is comparing nearby villages. The baseline specification limits
the sample to villages within 10 kilometers of the threshold. Standard errors are clustered at
the sub-district level. Villages where sugar could not grow are not a suitable counterfactual.
Hence, we limit the sample to areas that are suitable for sugar, where suitability is defined
using the same elevation and slope requirements described in Section 4. For the same reason,
we exclude places in cities that were residency capitals.
RD plots are shown in Appendix L. Legibly showing multi-dimensional RD graphs where
latitude and longitude are the running variables, as in Dell (2010), would require zooming
19

Regressions use a triangular kernel such that the weight given to each observation decays with distance
from the threshold.

23

in separately for each of the 17 contiguous catchment areas. This results in a very large
number of plots when repeated for all the study’s outcomes. In the interest of concision,
we instead show single dimensional RD graphs where the running variable is distance to
the nearest catchment boundary. Negative values are used for places outside the catchment
areas. Border segment fixed effects, geographic controls, a spline in distance to the nearest
sugar factory, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude - estimated separately by
catchment area - have been partialed out.
5.1.1

Specification Robustness

Specification choices are inherent in an RD design, and we document that results are robust
to alternative choices along the following dimensions: 1) RD bandwidth, 2) RD polynomial,
3) inclusion of additional controls, 4) sample inclusion criteria, and 5) additional features of
the specification.
We are not aware of a well-accepted multi-dimensional RD optimal bandwidth, so Appendix M examines robustness to the full range of feasible alternative bandwidths. Each plot
shows point estimates and confidence intervals of γ using equation (2) and different bandwidths between 2 and 10 kilometers, with the bandwidth under consideration denoted on
the x-axis and the point estimate on the y-axis. Since the catchment areas are small, treated
villages are never more than 10 kilometers from the nearest catchment boundary. Results
are broadly robust to the choice of bandwidth, with narrower bandwidths by construction
tending to lead to somewhat noisier estimates.
Next, we consider robustness to the specification of the RD polynomial. Appendix N
shows that results change little when a single multi-dimensional RD polynomial is used
- rather than estimating the polynomial separately by catchment area - and Appendix O
documents that estimates are also very similar when the RD polynomial is specified as
quadratic. Appendix P shows that results are broadly similar when a linear polynomial in
distance to the boundary is included instead of the multi-dimensional RD polynomial.
We also examine robustness to varying additional control variables. Appendix Q shows
that results are robust to changing the length of the boundary segment fixed effects to 25
kilometers, and Appendix R documents robustness to excluding the geographic controls.
In the baseline we limit the sample to villages suitable for sugar cultivation - since nonsuitable places are not a plausible counterfactual - but estimates are robust to varying the
sample inclusion criteria. An alternative would be to limit to boundary segments that are
similarly suitable for sugar cultivation on either side of the boundary segment. Appendix
S shows that estimates are broadly robust to this alternative sample restriction. Moreover,
Appendix T documents that estimates are very similar when all villages are included in the

24

sample, regardless of their sugar suitability.
Finally, we document robustness to some additional aspects of the specification. The
baseline specification uses a triangular kernel such that the weight given to each observation
decays with distance from the threshold, and Appendix U shows that estimates change
little when no weighting is used. Finally, recall that not all villages within the constructed
catchment zones can be matched to historical villages, since some villages have disappeared
or changed their names. Appendix V designates matched villages as treated and instruments
these with being inside the catchment areas. The first stage F-stat is over 1300, and estimates
remain quite similar.
5.1.2

Pre-characteristic Balance

The key regression discontinuity identifying assumption is that all relevant factors besides
treatment vary smoothly at the Cultivation System boundaries. That is, letting c1 and c0
denote potential outcomes under treatment and control, x denote longitude, and y denote latitude, identification requires that E[c1 |x, y] and E[c0 |x, y] are continuous at the discontinuity
thresholds. This assumption is needed for observations located just outside the catchment
areas to be an appropriate counterfactual for observations located just inside.
To assess the plausibility of this assumption, Table 1 examines a variety of geographic
characteristics, using regressions of the form described in equation (2). The unit of observation is the village (Appendix Table W-1 shows that results change little when it is a grid
cell centroid). Column (1) examines elevation. The point estimate on cultivation is negative
and statistically significant but is only 2 meters, a very small difference. Indeed, the entire
sample is in the plains, close to sea level (the mean elevation in the sample is 31 meters). In
some of the alternative specifications examined in the appendices, this difference is smaller
and not statistically significant, yet other results remain similar. None of the remaining
characteristics – slope; flow accumulation; a dummy for being on the coast; or distance to
the coast, nearest river, nearest natural harbor, and nearest 1830 residency capital – show
statistically significant or economically meaningful differences.20
Another RD identifying assumption is that individuals did not selectively sort around the
threshold while the Cultivation System was in force, in order to exploit its design. Typically
in this context, one would worry that a substantial number of productive individuals moved
just outside the subjected areas to escape forced cultivation. However, as will be shown
below, we find positive economic impacts of the Cultivation System on subjected villages,
and it appears implausible that high productivity individuals would have moved to regions
subjected to forced cultivation. In historical Java, individuals who migrated to an already
20

We do not examine characteristics such as weather or soil quality since the lower resolution of these data
mean treated and non-treated villages typically fall in the same cell.

25

established village were not eligible to hold land, and disempowered movers would have
plausibly borne the brunt of forced labor.21 Alternatively, low productivity individuals may
have fled subjected villages.22 However, population density today is if anything greater in
treated villages, suggesting that mass out-migration is unlikely to drive results.

5.2
5.2.1

Results
Land

The historical literature has largely focused on how the Cultivation System impacted land
tenure in subjected villages. In particular, village heads under the Cultivation System were
empowered by the Dutch to distribute land in order to facilitate the growing of sugar cane.
As discussed in Section 2, the literature emphasizes that land was redistributed to the village,
whether the motive was to directly benefit officeholders, to facilitate sharing the burdens of
the System, or both (Elson, 1984, p. 94; Ricklefs, 2008, p. 159). Village land is used for
multiple purposes, but an important one is as tanah bengkok, which is land owned by the
village that the village head is allowed to use (or rent out) as compensation for his service.
We therefore begin by examining the allocation of land in more contemporary periods, and
in particular focusing on village-owned land, as well as overall land inequality among privately
held land. Indonesian PODES village censuses from 2003 and 1980 collected information on
village-owned land, and land inequality for private agricultural land can be measured using
the 100% microdata sample from the 2003 Agricultural Census.
The estimates show that the Cultivation System left a substantial mark on the amount
of village-owned land. Table 2, columns (1) through (4) show that in both 2003 and 1980,
Cultivation System villages had substantially more village-owned land, in absolute terms
(columns 1 and 3) and as a percentage of total land (columns 2 and 4). The differences are
highly statistically significant. In 2003, about 1.4 percentage points more land was owned
by the village in Cultivation System areas, relative to a sample mean of 9% of total land
being owned by villages. In 1980 these villages owned 1.2% more land, relative to a sample
mean of 11%. RD plots are shown in Appendix L.
Columns (5) through (8) examine inequality amongst agricultural households, considering the 99-90 ratio, the 90-10 ratio, the 90-50 ratio, and the 50-10 ratio of agricultural
land usage.23 Coefficients are positive but fall short of statistical significance. Across vari21

While in theory landowners were responsible for cultivation services, in practice landless peasants attached themselves to landholding families and often performed the labor.
22
Elson (1984, p. 60) argues that the growth of frontier regions may have been due to individuals fleeing
forced labor, though it is not obvious that the lowest productivity individuals would have been the movers.
23
Ownership data do not distinguish between agricultural and non-agricultural land, and hence we unfortunately cannot examine inequality in agricultural land ownership.

26

ous specifications examined in the appendix, the coefficients tend to be positive and either
marginally or not quite significant, suggesting land inequality is if anything higher in treated
villages, again consistent with the historical impacts emphasized in the qualitative literature.
5.2.2

Public goods

The village’s ability to raise revenue, as well as land tenure arrangements more generally,
could impact human capital accumulation and the provision of local schooling (Dell et al.,
2017; Acemoglu et al., 2009; Banerjee and Somanathan, 2007). This may have been particularly true in the Dutch period and in independent Indonesia prior to the massive INPRES
school expansion, studied by Duflo (2001), as prior to INPRES village-level school construction was financed locally by the villages themselves (Aritonang, 1994).
We begin in Table 3 by looking at the presence of schools in 1980, the earliest date
for which systematic village level data on different types of schools are available through
the Podes village census. 1980 was around the time of Indonesia’s massive primary school
building campaign - INPRES - which largely equalized access to basic primary schooling.
The data break down primary schools into those that were built by the INPRES campaign
and those that were not. Columns (1) and (2) focus on non-INPRES schools. There is
not an impact on the number of buildings, whereas the effect on the number of teachers is
if anything positive but falls just short of statistical significance. In the various appendix
specifications, these coefficients are sometimes marginally significant.
Columns (3) and (4) show that cultivation villages received significantly fewer INPRES
schools and teachers, almost surely an indicator of greater education beforehand since INPRES was targeted based on the availability of pre-existing primary education (Duflo, 2001).
Subjected villages were around four percentage points less likely to receive an INPRES school,
relative to a sample mean of 0.36. Moreover, subjected villages were 2 percentage points
more likely to have a junior high school, relative to a sample mean of 6 percent of villages
that had them (junior high schools were not covered by INPRES). There is not a statistically
significant impact on the presence of a high school, which only two percent of villages had.
These impacts are consistent with the fact that during the Dutch period, communities were responsible for raising a share of the resources if they wanted a school. Under
the volksschool (village school) program, the colonial government would provide resources
towards hiring a teacher only if the community constructed and maintained the school (Aritonang, 1994). We dig deeper into potential effects on educational attainment using the
100% sample of the 2000 Population Census. Table 4, column (1) documents that individuals in subjected villages have around 0.24 years more schooling, relative to a sample mean
of 5 years, and the effect is statistically significant at the 1% level. They are also more likely

27

to complete primary school and junior high (columns 2 and 3). There is not a statistically
significant impact on high school completion, though only 13% of the sample completed high
school (column 4). Columns (5) and (6) examine the 1980 Population Census. Individuals
in subjected villages are 1.7 percentage points less likely to have no schooling, relative to a
sample mean of 41%. There is not an effect on primary completion, with only 19% of the
sample in 1980 completing primary school.
To examine impacts on education historically, we estimate effects by cohort. For the 1980
Census, data are only available for a relatively small sample, and hence cohort estimates are
quite noisy. In contrast, the 2000 Census provides a 100% sample, so we can estimate villagelevel impacts on each cohort, beginning with the cohort born between 1920 and 1930 and
continuing through the cohort born between 1975 and 1980, the youngest cohort to have
reached adulthood by 2000.24 The left panel in Figure 12 plots estimates from equation
(2) by cohort. Each point represents a γ coefficient from a separate estimation of equation
(2) for a given cohort, with the 95% confidence interval indicated by a line. For ease of
interpretation, the right panel plots sample means for each cohort and outcome variable. In
general, schooling levels were initially very low and increased over time.
Impacts on years of schooling are large and positive across cohorts, even going as far back
as the cohort born in the 1920s who completed their education under the Dutch. Effects on
primary completion peak for cohorts born when primary was rapidly expanding - in particular
for cohorts born in the 1950s and 60s. The impact decreases somewhat as primary completion
becomes more universal, though is still present in the most recent cohorts. On the other
hand, impacts on junior high completion are zero for the older cohorts, whose junior high
completion rates were close to zero, and then become large and positive as cohorts born from
the 1950s onward begin to complete junior high at more appreciable rates. Impacts on high
school completion show a similar pattern.
Finally, columns (7) and (8) of Table 4 consider the education of village heads, pooling
data from Podes village censuses collected between 1996 and 2011. The regressions include
survey year fixed effects. While there is not a statistically significant impact on years of
schooling, village heads in subjected areas are three percentage points more likely to have
completed high school, relative to a sample mean of 74%. The effect on village heads is
about double the average effect for cohorts of similar age shown in Figure 12, panel g).
One possibility is that the more generous compensation for village heads, in the form of
more village land they are allowed to use ex-officio, attracted a relatively more educated
pool of village heads. Empirical evidence from Indonesia in turn shows that more educated
village heads increase public goods provision (Martinez-Bravo, 2017). Appendix Table X-1
considers various public goods beyond education. Effects of forced sugar cultivation tend to
24

We use ten year age groupings to increase power for the oldest cohorts, since these are much smaller.

28

be positive but not statistically significant.
5.2.3

Economic structure

We finally turn to the overall structure of the economy. Higher human capital levels - and
the disproportionately higher schooling levels of the village head - could plausibly lead to
less agriculture and more manufacturing. Moreover, the historical literature emphasizes that
the influx of crop incentive payments into Cultivation System villages incentivized modern
production and exchange (Elson, 1994, p. 261, Ricklefs, 2008, p. 158).
Table 5, columns (1) through (3) examine data from the SUSENAS household survey,
collected in annual waves from 2001 through 2011. All regressions include survey year fixed
effects. We find that in subjected villages, individuals are 4 percentage points (15 percent)
less likely to work in agriculture, 3 percentage points (14 percent) more likely to work in
manufacturing, and 1.3 percentage points (7 percent) more likely to work in retail.25
Columns (4) through (6) examine the structure of the economy in 1980, using data
from the Population Census.26 The coefficient on employment in agriculture is similar in
magnitude to that from the more modern SUSENAS data. The effect on manufacturing,
which was a much smaller share of the Indonesian economy in 1980, is close to zero and
statistically insignificant. However, we cannot rule out a similar proportionate increase in
manufacturing to that in the more recent data. Individuals in subjected villages were 2.6
percentage points (22 percent) more likely to be employed in commerce.
Data from Indonesia’s 2006 Economic Census, examined in Table 6, show a similar pattern. The Economic Census captures all large manufacturing firms and a random sample
of small and informal firms. We find that subjected villages have almost 30 percent more
manufacturing firms than non-subjected villages (column 1). Column (2) considers the village’s manufacturing employment, taken from the Economic Census, divided by the size of
the labor force, drawn from the 2000 Population Census. The estimate, which indicates a
2.3 percentage point (14 percent) increase, is similar to what we obtain from SUSENAS,
though more noisily estimated (not surprisingly since it is drawn from multiple datasets).
Population density is also around seven percent higher in subjected villages, both in 2003
and in 1980 (columns 3 and 4).
Finally, column (5) examines equivalent consumption from the SUSENAS household
survey. There is not a statistically significant difference in household consumption. However,
the confidence intervals include the possibility of consumption being around 2 percent higher,
25

The sample is limited to prime aged males - aged 18 to 55 - to avoid confounding impacts with labor
force participation, but estimates are similar when the entire labor force is included.
26
We again focus on prime aged males. We do not consider sectoral information from the 2000 Census, as
it was collected in the midst of a severe economic downturn – the Asian Financial Crisis – and hence is less
informative about long-run economic conditions.

29

about what we would expect given that individuals in subjected villages on average have
around 0.2 years additional schooling.

5.3

Discussion

The RD effects isolate the impacts of being subjected to forced cultivation and show that if
anything, the persistent local development effects of forced cultivation reinforce the positive
long-run economic impacts of creating a sugar processing infrastructure. This is surprising at
first glance in the context of other studies that find negative development effects of colonial
forced labor (Lowes and Montero, 2016; Dell, 2010), but there are various clues about what
drives the impacts on cultivation villages.
The historical literature emphasizes that while in force, the Cultivation System led to
increases in communal village landholdings and the share of village lands apportioned to village officeholders (Elson, 1984, p. 94; Ricklefs, 2008, p. 159), and impacts on public-use land
persist through the present. Households in cultivation villages are also more educated, all
the way back to cohorts educated during the Dutch period, and they are more likely to work
in manufacturing and retail and less likely to work in agriculture. While there are a variety
of channels that could link the Cultivation System to long-run human capital accumulation
and economic structure more generally, the presence of village land is a particularly plausible
mechanism, with revenue from village-owned lands facilitating public goods provision once
the System was abolished and these lands were returned to local community use.

6

Conclusion

This study documents that the establishment of a sugar processing infrastructure in colonial
Java persistently increased industrialization, education, and consumption in areas near government sugar factories, even after the factories had disappeared. Similarly, villages forced to
grow sugar cane for the Cultivation System have more schooling and manufacturing today.
Infrastructure, agglomeration via input-output linkages, and human capital accumulation
are important channels of persistence that plausibly reinforce each other.
These results highlight that the direction and magnitude of the long-run economic impacts
of extractive institutions are inextricably linked with the specifics of how these institutions
functioned, as these determine the channels of persistence. In the case of the Cultivation
System, the positive impacts on economic activity plausibly dominated in the long-run because of a constellation of features: processing had to be done on site, a modern transport
infrastructure was built to connect the extensive network of sugar factories to international
ports, and processed sugar - some of which was sold on local markets - had dense linkages
30

to industries that remained important after Indonesian independence. In subjected villages,
the higher share of village land plausibly raised the village’s capacity to fund public goods,
such as schools, once these lands were returned to community use.
The counterfactual is also important. In rural Java prior to 1830, landless peasants were
customarily attached to landowning households through feudal-like norms, most production
was for subsistence, the Javanese state was highly fractured, and financial markets were
largely absent, all major and persistent barriers to industrialization that in 1830 did not
show signs of disappearing. The Dutch made large-scale investments to overcome these
barriers precisely because they could extract a large surplus. While it plausibly would have
been better for the historical subjected populations - and potentially have led to better
long-run outcomes - if the Dutch had attempted to industrialize Java through inclusive
institutions that maximized the welfare of the Javanese populace rather than the profits of
the Dutch treasury, this is not a feasible scenario given the objectives of the colonial state
and indigenous power brokers.
The Dutch were not the only colonial power to reorganize colonial economies in order
to create the surplus that they wished to extract, nor are the Javanese unique in creatively
utilizing colonial structures to generate economic activity long after the colonizers had left.
These results plausibly inform a variety of contexts in which foreign powers attempted to
extract a surplus by reorganizing the economy along more modern lines.

31

References
Acemoglu, D., U. Akcigit, and W. Kerr (2016): “Networks and the Macroeconomy: An Empirical
Exploration,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 30, 273–335.
Acemoglu, D., M. A. Bautista, P. Querubin, and J. A. Robinson (2009): “Economic and Political Inequality in Development: The Case of Cundinamarca, Colombia,” in Institutions and Economic
Performance, ed. by E. Helpman, Harvard University Press.
Acemoglu, D., D. Cantoni, S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2011): “The Consequences of Radical
Reform: The French Revolution,” American Economic Review, 101, 3286–3307.
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012): “The Network Origins
of Aggregate Fluctuations,” Econometrica, 80, 1977–2016.
Acemoglu, D., C. Garcia-Jimeno, and J. A. Robinson (2015): “State Capacity and Economic Development: A Network Approach,” American Economic Review, 105, 2364–2409.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91, 1369–1401.
——— (2002): “Reversal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, 1231–1294.
Acemoglu, D. and J. A. Robinson (2013): Why Nations Fail: The Origins of Power, Prosperity, and
Poverty, Crown Business.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the
Plough,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128, 469–530.
Aritonang, J. S. (1994): Mission Schools in Batakland (Indonesia): 1861-1940, vol. 10, Brill.
Banerjee, A. and L. Iyer (2005): “History, Institutions, and Economic Performance: The Legacy of
Colonial Land Tenure Systems in India,” American Economic Review, 95, 1190–1213.
Banerjee, A. and R. Somanathan (2007): “The Political Economy of Public Goods: Some Evidence
from India,” Journal of Development Economics, 82, 287–314.
Baqaee, D. (2015): “Labor Intensity in an Interconnected Economy,” Working paper, Harvard.
Bartelme, D. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015): “Linkages and Economic Eevelopment,” Tech. rep.,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh, C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann (2016): “The Empire Is Dead, Long Live
the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy,” The Economic Journal,
126, 40–74.
Bruhn, M. and F. A. Gallego (2012): “Good, bad, and ugly colonial activities: do they matter for
economic development?” Review of Economics and Statistics, 94, 433–461.
Bukowski, P. (2016): “How History Matters for Student Performance. Lessons from the Partitions of
Poland,” Working paper, Central European University, http://www.personal.ceu.hu/staff/repec/
pdf/2015_3.pdf.
Carvalho, V. M. (2009): “Aggregate Fluctuations and the Network Structure of Intersectoral Trade,”
Working paper, Pompeu Fabra University.
Coedès, G. (1966): The Making of South East Asia, University of California Press.

32

Commissie Umbgrove (1858): “Archief van de Commissie voor de Opname van de Verschillende Suikerfabrieken op Java [1853–1858],” Nationaal Archief, The Hague, Access Number 2.10.11.
Deaton, A. (1997): The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to Development
Policy, World Bank.
Dell, M. (2010): “The Persistent Effects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78, 1863–1903.
Dell, M., N. Lane, and P. Querubin (2017): “The Historical State, Local Collective Action, and
Economic Development in Vietnam,” Working paper, Harvard.
Dippel, C., A. Greif, and D. Trefler (2015): “The Rents from Trade and Coercive Institutions:
Removing the Sugar Coating,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Donaldson, D. (2010): “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure,”
Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Duflo, E. (2001): “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review, 91, 795–813.
Ellison, G., E. L. Glaeser, and W. R. Kerr (2010): “What Causes Industry Agglomeration? Evidence
from Coagglomeration Patterns,” American Economic Review, 100, 1195–1213.
Elson, R. E. (1984): Javanese Peasants and the Colonial Sugar Industry: Impact and Change in an East
Java Residency, 1830–1940, Oxford University Press.
——— (1994): Village Java Under the Cultivation System, 1830–1870, Asian Studies Association of Australia.
Engerman, S. L. and K. L. Sokoloff (1997): “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths
of Growth Among New World Economies,” in How Latin America Fell Behind: Essays on the Economic
Histories of Brazil and Mexico, 1800–1914, ed. by S. Haber, Stanford University Press, 260–304.
Fasseur, C. (1992): The Politics of Colonial Exploitation: Java, the Dutch, and the Cultivation System,
Cornell University Southeast Asia Program.
Fernández, R. and A. Fogli (2009): “Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1, 146–177.
Geertz, C. (1963): Agricultural Involution: the Process of Ecological Change in Indonesia, vol. 11, University of California Press.
Gelman, A. and G. Imbens (2014): “Why High-Order Polynomials Should Not be Used in Regression
Discontinuity Designs,” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gennaioli, N. and I. Rainer (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in Africa,”
Journal of Economic Growth, 12, 185–234.
Giuliano, P. (2007): “Living Arrangements in Western Europe: Does Cultural Origin Matter?” Journal
of the European Economic Association, 5, 927–952.
Glaeser, E. L. and A. Shleifer (2002): “Legal Origins,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
1193–1229.
Grosjean, P. (2011): “The Weight of History on European Cultural Integration: A Gravity Approach,”
American Economic Review, 101, 504–508.
——— (2014): “A History of Violence: The Culture of Honor and Homicide in the US South,” Journal of
the European Economic Association, 12, 1285–1316.

33

Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales (2008): “Alfred Marshall Lecture: Social Capital as Good
Culture,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 295–320.
——— (2016): “Long-Term Persistence,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 14, 1401–1436.
Hirschman, A. O. (1960): The Strategy of Economic Development, Yale University Press.
Iyer, L. (2010): “Direct versus Indirect Colonial Rule in India: Long-term Consequences,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 92, 693–713.
Jedwab, R., E. Kerby, and A. Moradi (2015): “History, Path Dependence and Development: Evidence
from Colonial Railroads, Settlers and Cities in Kenya,” The Economic Journal.
Jedwab, R. and A. Moradi (2016): “The Permanent Effects of Transportation Revolutions in Poor
Countries: Evidence from Africa,” Review of economics and statistics, 98, 268–284.
Kulke, H. (1986): “Early and the Imperial Kingdoms in Southeast Asian History,” in Southeast Asia in
the 9th to 14th Century, ed. by D. G. Marr and A. C. Milner, Institute of Southeast Asian Studies and
Australian National University, Research School of Pacific Studies.
Lane, N. (2017): “Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial Policy and Networks in South Korea,” Tech. rep.,
IIES.
Lieberman, V. (1993): “Local Integration and Eurasian Analogies: Structuring Southeast Asian History,
c. 1350-c. 1830,” Modern Asian Studies, 27, 475–572.
Liu, E. (2017): “Industrial Policies and Economic Development,” Tech. rep., MIT.
Lowes, S. and E. Montero (2016): “Blood Rubber: The Effects of Labor Coercion on Institutions and
Culture in the DRC,” Working paper, Harvard, http://www.saralowes.com/research.html.
Lowes, S., N. Nunn, J. A. Robinson, and J. Weigel (2015): “The Evolution of Culture and Institutions:
Evidence from the Kuba Kingdom,” Working Paper 21798, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Luiten van Zanden, J. (2010): “Colonial State Formation and Patterns of Economic Development in
Java, 1800–1913,” Economic History of Developing Regions, 25, 155–176.
Luttmer, E. F. P. and M. Singhal (2011): “Culture, Context, and the Taste for Redistribution,”
American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3, 157–79.
Mabbett, I. W. (1977): “The ‘Indianization’ of Southeast Asia : Reflections on the Historical Sources,”
Journal of Southeast Asian Studies, 8, 143–161.
Marshall, A. (1890): Principles of Economics, Macmillan and Co.
Martinez-Bravo, M. (2017): “The Local Political Economy Effects of School Construction in Indonesia,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9, 256–289.
Michalopoulos, S. and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-Colonial Ethnic Institutions and Contemporary
African Development,” Econometrica, 81, 113–152.
——— (2014): “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 129, 151–213.
Myrdal, G. (1957): Economic Theory and Under-Developed Regions, G. Duckworth.
Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long-Term Effects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
123, 139–176.

34

Nunn, N. and N. Qian (2011): “The Potato’s Contribution to Population and Urbanization: Evidence
from a Historical Experiment,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126, 593–650.
Nunn, N., N. Qian, and S. Sequeira (2017): “Migrants and the Making of America: The Short and
Long Run Effects of Immigration During the Age of Mass Migration,” Tech. rep., Harvard.
Nunn, N. and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in Africa,” American
Economic Review, 101, 3221–3252.
Oto-Peralı́as, D. and D. Romero-Ávila (2014): “The Distribution of Legal Traditions Around the
World: A Contribution to the Legal-Origins Theory,” Journal of Law and Economics, 57, 561–628.
Rasmussen, P. N. (1956): Studies in Inter-Sectoral Relations, E. Harck.
Ricklefs, M. C. (2008): A History of Modern Indonesia Since c. 1200, Penerbit Serambi.
Salop, S. C. (1979): “Monopolistic Competition with Outside Goods,” The Bell Journal of Economics,
141–156.
Spolaore, E. and R. Wacziarg (2013): “How Deep Are the Roots of Economic Development?” Journal
of Economic Literature, 51, 325–369.
Tabellini, G. (2008): “Presidential Address: Institutions and Culture,” Journal of the European Economic
Association, 6, 255–294.
——— (2010): “Culture and Institutions: Economic Development in the Regions of Europe,” Journal of the
European Economic Association, 8, 677–716.
Tambiah, S. J. (1977): “The Galactic Polity: The Structure of Traditional Kingdoms in Southeast Asia,”
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 293, 69–97.
——— (2013): “The Galactic Polity in Southeast Asia,” HAU: Journal of Ethnographic Theory, 3, 503–534.
Tomlinson, J. (2014): Dundee and the Empire:’Juteopolis’ 1850-1939, Edinburgh University Press.
Valencia Caicedo, F. (2014): “The Mission: Economic Persistence, Human Capital Transmission and
Culture in South America,” Tech. rep., Mimeo.
Van Niel, R. (1992): Java Under the Cultivation System, KITLV Press.
——— (2005): Java’s Northeast Coast, 1740–1840: A Study in Colonial Encroachment and Dominance,
CNWS Publications.
van Schaik, A. (1986): Colonial Control and Peasant Resources in Java: Agricultural Involution Reconsidered, Amsterdam: Instituut Voor Sociale Geoerafie.
Van Waijenburg, M. (2015): “Financing the Colonial State: The Revenue Imperative and Forced Labor,”
Working paper, African Economic History Network.
Voigtländer, N. and H.-J. Voth (2012): “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of AntiSemitic Violence in Nazi Germany,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127, 1339–1392.
Wolters, O. (1999): History, Culture and Region in Southeast Asian Perspectives, Southeast Asia Program
Publications, Cornell University.

35

Figure 1: Placebo Factories Example
(a) Real Factory

(b) Placebo Factory Suitability

(c) Placebo Factories

This figure illustrates the construction of the placebo factories, as described in Section 4.1.

36

Figure 2: The Cultivation System
Legend
!

Government Sugar Factories
Not Sugar Suitable
Sugar Suitable

!

!

!

!
!!
! !

!
!
!!

!
!

!
!

!
!
!!
!

!

!!

!
!

!
! !!

!

!
!

!! !
!

!

!!

!

!

!
!

!

!

!

!!
!
!
!!
! ! !
!
!
! !
!
!
!
!
!!!
!
! !
! !! !
!!
!

!

!

!
!!
!!
!
! !

!
! !
!
!

!
!

0

Sources: Commissie Umbgrove (1858).

37

50

100

200 Kilometers

Figure 3: Construction of Catchment Areas
_
^

Factories

Matched Points

Catchment Boundaries
Straight lines

Desa Boundaries

_
^
_
^

_
^

_
^

This figure illustrates the construction of the catchment areas, as described in Section 3.1.

38

Figure 4: Geography
(a) Elevation

-2

0

0

Estimated Effect
2
4

Estimated Effect
.02
.04
.06

6

8

.08

(b) Slope

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 29.452

4

6

p < 0.05

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.270

-1

0

-.5

Estimated Effect
2
4

Estimated Effect
0
.5

1

(d) Log Flow Accumulation

6

(c) Distance to Coast

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 23.630

4

6

p < 0.05

14

16

18

20

18

20

(f) Distance to River

Estimated Effect
-.1
-.05

-1

-.15

0

Estimated Effect
1
2

3

0

4

(e) Distance to Natural Harbor

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 2.540

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 31.258

4

6

p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.287

-8

Estimated Effect
-6
-4
-2

0

(g) Distance to Nearest 1830 Residency Capital

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 22.362

Notes: Points plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of distance to
the nearest historical factory, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects. The data are fit with a linear
spline. p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories to the impact of proximity to 1,000
counterfactual factory locations.

39

Figure 5: Share in Agriculture (2001-11): Illustration of Methodology
(a) Independent Shifts: Counterfactuals

.2

(b) Independent Shifts: Plotted Coefficients

5−6 km

6−7 km

p=0.53

9−10 km

p=0.955

12−13 km

p=0.842

13−14 km

p=0.473

14−15 km

p=0.066

p=0.228

-.4

p=0.616

p=0.207

8−9 km

p=0.808

11−12 km

p=0.871

4−5 km

p=0.152

7−8 km

p=0.512

10−11 km

3−4 km

p=0.036

.1

2−3 km

p=0.013

Estimated Effect
-.2
-.1
0

1−2 km

p=0.003

-.3

0−1 km

0
0.0

15−16 km

16−17 km

p=0.649

0.0

0.1

0.2

17−18 km

p=0.118

0.0

0.1

0.2

p=0.489

0.0

0.1

0.2

0.1

2

4

6

0.2

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

18−19 km

p < 0.05

p=0.583

0.0

0.1

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.283

0.2

(d) Common Shifts: Plotted Coefficients
.2

(c) Common Shifts: Counterfactuals
1−2 km

2−3 km

3−4 km

4−5 km

5−6 km

6−7 km

7−8 km

8−9 km

9−10 km

10−11 km

11−12 km

12−13 km

13−14 km

14−15 km

15−16 km

16−17 km

17−18 km

18−19 km

-.4

-.3

Estimated Effect
-.2
-.1
0

.1

0−1 km

0
15 km
Up

2

4

15 km
Down

p < 0.05

15 km
Up

15 km
Down

15 km
Up

15 km
Down

15 km
Up

15 km
Down

15 km
Up

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.283

15 km
Down

Notes: Panel (a) plots histograms of absolute coefficients from a regression of the outcome variable on
bins in distance to counterfactual factories, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls,
a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital, and survey year fixed effects. The sample
is restricted to men aged 18 to 55. For each factory, a counterfactual was selected at random from the
region of the river network that was sugar-suitable and within 5-20 km via river from the real factory. This
procedure was repeated to construct 1000 sets of counterfactual factories. The coefficients for distance to
the real factories are shown as vertical lines. Panel (b) plots the real coefficients for each bin, with the
symbols indicating their position in the distribution of counterfactual coefficients shown in panel (a). Panel
(c) plots coefficients on distance to counterfactual locations, where here placebos were chosen to be a
specific distance upstream or downstream from the real factories. Real coefficients are shown as horizontal
lines. Panel (d) plots real coefficients for each bin, with the symbols indicating their position in the
distribution of counterfactual coefficients shown in panel (c).

40

Figure 6: Industry and Agglomeration
(a) Agriculture (Susenas 2001-11)
.2
Estimated Effect
-.2
-.1
0

-.4

-.4

-.3

-.3

Estimated Effect
-.2
-.1
0

.1

.1

.2

(b) Agriculture (Census 1980)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.283

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.482

(d) Manufacturing (Census 1980)

-.04

-.04

-.02

-.02

Estimated Effect
0
.02 .04

Estimated Effect
0
.02 .04

.06

.06

.08

.08

(c) Manufacturing (Susenas 2001-11)

6

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.196

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.110

Estimated Effect
.05
.1
0
-.05

-.05

0

Estimated Effect
.05
.1

.15

(f) Retail (Census 1980)

.15

(e) Retail (Susenas 2001-11)

6

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.176

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.124

(h) Log Pop. Density (PODES 1980)

Estimated Effect
.2
.4
.6
-.2

-.2

0

0

Estimated Effect
.2
.4
.6

.8

.8

1

1

(g) Log Pop. Density (PODES 2003)

6

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 2.847

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 2.533

Notes: These figures plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls,
and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital. Panels a), c), and e) include survey
year fixed effects. In panels a) through f), the sample is restricted to men aged 18 to 55. The data are fit
with a linear spline. p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories to the impact of
proximity to 1,000 counterfactual factory locations.

41

Figure 7: Sugar and Linked Industries
(b) Log Value Sugar Processed (No
Modern Factories, Econ Census 2006)

0

0

.5

.5

Estimated Effect
1
1.5

Estimated Effect
1
1.5

2

2

(a) Log Value Sugar Processed (Full
Sample, Economic Census 2006)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.218

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.168

400

(d) Tons of Cane Grown (No Modern
Factories, PODES 2003)

-400

-200

-200

Estimated Effect
0
200

Estimated Effect
0
200

400

(c) Tons of Cane Grown (Full Sample,
PODES 2003)

6

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 453.833

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 337.083

(f) Emp Share Upstream (No Modern
Factories, Economic Census 2006)

0

0

Estimated Effect
.001
.002

Estimated Effect
.0005 .001 .0015 .002 .0025 .003

.003

(e) Employment Share Upstream (Full
Sample, Economic Census 2006)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.001

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.001

.004

(h) Emp Share Downstream (No Modern Factories, Economic Census 2006)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.002

18

20

-.001

-.001

0

0

Estimated Effect
.001
.002

Estimated Effect
.001
.002

.003

.003

(g) Employment Share Downstream
(Full Sample, Economic Census 2006)

6

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.002

Notes: These figures plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls,
and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital. The data are fit with a linear spline.
p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories to the impact of proximity to 1,000
counterfactual factory locations.

Figure 8: Infrastructure
(b) Colonial Railroad Density (1900)

-1

0

0

Estimated Effect
2
4

Estimated Effect
1
2

6

3

8

(a) Colonial Road Density (1900)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

4

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 4.159

6

p < 0.05

14

16

18

20

(d) Intercity Road Density (2017)

-2

-.25

0

-.2

Estimated Effect
2
4

Estimated Effect
-.15
-.1
-.05

6

0

(c) Dirt Road (PODES 1980)

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 1.101

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.325

4

6

p < 0.05

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 2.677

(f) Railroad Density (2017)

-.5

0

0

Estimated Effect
.5
1

Estimated Effect
10
20
30

1.5

40

(e) Local Road Density (2017)

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 42.822

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.691

Notes: These figures plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls,
and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital. The data are fit with a linear spline.
p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories to the impact of proximity to 1,000
counterfactual factory locations.

43

Figure 9: Other Public Goods
(b) High Schools (PODES 1980)

-.2

-.04

0

-.02

Estimated Effect
0
.02

Estimated Effect
.2
.4

.04

.6

.06

(a) Village Has Electricity (PODES
1980)

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

2

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.324

4
p < 0.05

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.020

(d) Distance to Subdistrict Capital
(2011 PODES)

-3

-.04

-2

-.02

Estimated Effect
0
.02

Estimated Effect
-1
0

.04

1

.06

(c) High Schools (PODES 1996-2011)

6

0

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

0

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.065

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 3.806

Notes: These figures plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls,
and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital. Panel c) includes survey year fixed
effects. The data are fit with a linear spline. p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories
to the impact of proximity to 1,000 counterfactual factory locations.

44

Figure 10: Education
(b) Years Education by Cohort

1970-74
1950-54
1920-29
p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not
Statistically
Significant
Mean Dep. Variable:
1920: 1.823
1950: 4.412
1970: 7.469

-.5

-1

-.5

Estimated Effect
0
.5
1

Estimated Effect
0
.5
1

1.5

1.5

2

2

(a) Years Education (2000 Census)

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20
-1

0

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 4.900

0

2

4

16

18

20

1970-74
1950-54
1920-29
p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not
Statistically
Significant
Mean Dep. Variable:
1920: 0.278
1950: 0.611
1970: 0.900

-.1

-.05

-.05

Estimated Effect
0
.05
.1

Estimated Effect
0
.05
.1

.15

.15

.2

(d) Primary by Cohort

.2

(c) Primary (2000 Census)

6
8 10 12 14
Distance to Factory

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20
-.1

0

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.630

0

2

6
8 10 12 14
Distance to Factory

16

18

20

1970-74
1950-54
1920-29
p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not
Statistically
Significant
Mean Dep. Variable:
1920: 0.015
1950: 0.080
1970: 0.230

-.1

-.05

-.05

Estimated Effect
0
.05
.1

Estimated Effect
0
.05
.1

.15

.15

.2

(f) High School by Cohort

.2

(e) High School (2000 Census)

4

2

4
p < 0.05

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20
-.1

0

p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 0.112

0

2

4

6
8 10 12 14
Distance to Factory

16

18

20

Notes: These figures plot coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for gender, nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic
controls, and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830 residency capital. Left panels pool all birth
cohorts and right panels plot separate coefficients for three birth cohorts. The data are fit with a linear
spline. p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual factories to the impact of proximity to 1,000
counterfactual factory locations.

45

-.1

-.05

Estimated Effect
0
.05

.1

.15

Figure 11: Expenditure (2001-11)

0

2

4

6

8
10
12
Distance to Factory

14

16

18

20

p < 0.05
p < 0.10
Not Statistically Significant
Mean of Dependent Variable: 12.550

Notes: This figures plots coefficients estimated from regressing the outcome variable on 1-km bins of
distance to the nearest historical factory, controlling for demographic variables, survey year fixed effects,
nearest-factory fixed effects, geographic controls, and a linear spline in distance to the nearest 1830
residency capital. The data are fit with a linear spline. p-values compare the impact of proximity to actual
factories to the impact of proximity to 1,000 counterfactual factory locations.

46

Figure 12: Education by Cohort: Subjected Villages (2000 Census)
(a) Years of Schooling

(b) Years of Schooling Levels

0.6

●

7.5

●

●
0.4

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

5.0

●
●

●

●

0.2

●

●

●

●

2.5

0.0

●

●

1920

1930

0.0
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1940

1950

Year of Birth

1960

1970

Year of Birth

(c) Primary Completion

(d) Primary Completion Levels
1.00

●

0.06

●

●
●

0.04

●

0.75

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

0.50

●
●

●

●

●
0.02

●
●

0.25

0.00

●

●

1920

1930

0.00
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

1940

1950

Year of Birth

1960

1970

Year of Birth

(e) Junior High Completion

(f) Junior High Completion Levels
1.00

0.05

0.04
0.75

●

0.03

●
●

●

●

0.50

●

0.02

●

●
0.01

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.25

0.00
0.00
1920

1930

1940

1950

1960

1970

●

●

1920

1930

●

●

●

1940

●

●

1950

Year of Birth

●

1960

1970

Year of Birth

(g) High School Completion

(h) High School Completion Levels
1.00

0.03

0.75
0.02

●

●

●
0.50

●

0.01

0.00

●

●

●

●

●

●

0.00
1920

1930

1940

●

0.25

●

1950

1960

1970

Year of Birth

●

●

1920

1930

●

●
1940

●

●

1950

●

●

●

●

1960

1970

Year of Birth

Notes: In the left panels, each point plots a separate regression coefficient for different birth cohorts
(1920-1929, 1930-1934, 1935-1939, ..., 1975-1979). Lines show 90% confidence intervals. In the right panels,
points plot means. The unit of analysis is the individual, and the specification includes gender dummies,
geographic controls, boundary segment fixed effects, linear splines in distance to the nearest historical
factory and residency capital, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude estimated separately for
each catchment area. Robust standard errors are clustered by subdistrict.

47

Table 1: Geographic Characteristics: Subjected Villages

(2)

Log Flow
Accumulation
(3)

On
Coast
(4)

Distance
To
Coast
(5)

Distance
To
River
(6)

Distance
To Natural
Harbor
(7)

Distance To
1830 Residency
Capital
(8)

-0.017
(0.013)
4,553
383
0.26

-0.041
(0.160)
4,549
383
2.56

-0.013
(0.016)
4,553
383
0.06

0.117
(0.106)
4,553
383
24.90

0.001
(0.012)
4,553
383
0.29

0.126
(0.107)
4,553
383
33.26

0.062
(0.133)
4,553
383
24.80

Elevation

Slope

(1)
-1.908
(0.744)
4,553
383
31.17

Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Notes: The unit of observation is the village. Regressions include boundary segment fixed effects, a spline in distance to
the nearest historical factory with kinks each 3km, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude estimated separately
for each catchment area. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict, are in parentheses.

Table 2: Land Tenure: Subjected Villages

Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Village Land 2003
Total
Land
Land
Share
(1)
(2)

Village Land 1980
Total
Land
Land
Share
(3)
(4)

2.235
(0.852)
4,550
383
18.61

3.473
(1.538)
4,205
380
23.95

0.014
(0.004)
4,550
383
0.09

0.012
(0.005)
4,107
380
0.11

99th Pctile
÷
90th Pctile
(5)

90th Pctile
÷
10th Pctile
(6)

90th Pctile
÷
50th Pctile
(7)

50th Pctile
÷
10th Pctile
(8)

0.018
(0.262)
4,089
381
3.53

13.289
(8.469)
4,080
381
38.58

0.378
(0.272)
4,088
381
4.34

1.793
(2.007)
4,080
381
7.84

Notes: The unit of observation is the village. Regressions include geographic controls, boundary segment fixed
effects, linear splines in distance to the nearest historical factory and residency capital, and a linear polynomial in
latitude and longitude estimated separately for each catchment area. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict, are in parentheses.

Table 3: Schools (1980): Subjected Villages
Public Non-INPRES Primary
Buildings
Teachers
(1)
(2)
Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

0.009
(0.019)
4,205
380
0.43

0.169
(0.104)
4,205
380
2.81

INPRES Primary
Buildings
Teachers
(3)
(4)
-0.035
(0.020)
4,205
380
0.36

-0.207
(0.080)
4,205
380
1.37

Junior High
Schools
(5)

High
Schools
(6)

0.019
(0.009)
4,205
380
0.06

0.007
(0.006)
4,205
380
0.02

Notes: The unit of observation is the village. Regressions include geographic controls, boundary
segment fixed effects, linear splines in distance to the nearest historical factory and residency capital, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude estimated separately for each catchment
area. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict, are in parentheses.

48

Table 4: Education: Subjected Villages

Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Years
Education
(1)

2000 Population Census
Primary
Junior
School
High
(2)
(3)

0.238
(0.075)
16,125,747
383
5.10

0.026
(0.006)
16,125,747
383
0.64

0.017
(0.007)
16,125,747
383
0.27

1980 Census
No
Primary
School
School
(5)
(6)

High
School
(4)
0.008
(0.005)
16,125,747
383
0.13

-0.017
(0.009)
653,313
358
0.41

-0.003
(0.010)
653,188
358
0.19

Village Head
Years
High
Education
School
(7)
(8)
0.106
(0.087)
26,630
383
11.87

0.029
(0.013)
26,630
383
0.74

Notes: The unit of observation is the individual. Regressions include boundary segment fixed effects, linear splines
in distance to the nearest historical factory and residency capital, geographic controls, and a linear polynomial in
latitude and longitude estimated separately for each catchment area. Columns (1) through (6) include gender dummies, and columns (7) and (8) include survey year fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict,
are in parentheses.

Table 5: Industrial Structure: Subjected Villages
SUSENAS (2001-11)
Ag.
Manuf.
Retail
(1)
(2)
(3)
Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

-0.042
(0.012)
130,335
381
0.27

0.030
(0.009)
130,335
381
0.21

0.013
(0.007)
130,335
381
0.18

1980 Population Census
Ag.
Manuf.
Commerce
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.039
(0.021)
127,873
358
0.48

0.008
(0.012)
127,873
358
0.11

0.026
(0.010)
127,873
358
0.12

Notes: The unit of observation is the individual. The sample is restricted to men
age 18-55. Regressions include geographic controls, boundary segment fixed effects,
linear splines in distance to the nearest historical factory and residency capital,
geographic controls, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude estimated
separately for each catchment area. Columns (1) through (3) include survey year
fixed effects. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict, are in parentheses.

Table 6: Firms, Population, and Consumption: Subjected Villages

Cultivation
Obs
Clusters
Mean

Num. Manuf.
Firms
(1)

Manuf. Emp.
Share
(2)

Log Population
Density (2003)
(3)

Log Population
Density (1980)
(4)

Log Equiv.
Consumption
(5)

21.433
(8.513)
4,549
383
71.72

0.023
(0.018)
4,549
383
0.16

0.067
(0.034)
4,550
383
2.87

0.064
(0.032)
4,107
380
2.54

0.007
(0.011)
144,046
381
12.55

Notes: The unit of observation is the village in columns (1) through (4) and the household in column
(5). Regressions include geographic controls, boundary segment fixed effects, linear splines in distance
to the nearest historical factory and residency capital, and a linear polynomial in latitude and longitude
estimated separately for each catchment area. Column (5) includes year fixed effects and household
demographic controls. Robust standard errors, clustered by subdistrict, are in parentheses.

49

