                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE RISE, THE FALL, AND THE RESURRECTION OF ICELAND

                                     Sigríður Benediktsdóttir
                                       Gauti B. Eggertsson
                                       Eggert Þórarinsson

                                       Working Paper 24005
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24005


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We thank Karl Aspelund, Josef Platzer, Luca Riva and Ian Tarr for excellent research assistance
and Jon Steinsson and Kathryn Dominguez for comments. This paper was prepared for the
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity fall meeting 2017. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24005.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Sigríður Benediktsdóttir, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Eggert Þórarinsson. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise, the Fall, and the Resurrection of Iceland
Sigríður Benediktsdóttir, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Eggert Þórarinsson
NBER Working Paper No. 24005
November 2017
JEL No. E0,E32,E44,E6,E63,F31,F32,F34,F38,F51,F65,G01,G20,G21,G3,G33,H12,H6,H62

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents how the Icelandic banking system grew from 100 percent of GDP in 1998
to 9 times GDP in 2008 when it failed. We base the analysis on data from the banks that was
made public when the Icelandic parliament lifted among others bank secrecy laws to investigate
the run up to the financial crisis. We document how the banks were funded, and where the money
went with a comprehensive analysis of their lending. We also analyze policies implemented after
the crash, including emergency legislation, capital control, alleviation of balance of payment risks
and preservation of the financial stability. We estimate the output costs of the crisis, which was
about average relative to the 147 banking crisis documented Laeven and Valencia (2012) and the
100 banking crisis documented by Reinhart and Rogoff (2014). Our computation of the
governments direct costs, reveals that the recently concluded negotiation with foreign creditors
may leave the Icelandic government in net surplus as a consequence of the crisis, although there
is still some uncertainty about the ultimate cost and our benchmark estimate is a cost
corresponding to 5 percent of GDP. We summarize several lessons from the episode.

Sigríður Benediktsdóttir                         Eggert Þórarinsson
Yale University                                  Central Bank of Iceland
sigridur.benediktsdottir@yale.edu                eggertthrostur@gmail.com

Gauti B. Eggertsson
Department of Economics
Brown University
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu
Introduction
In some respect Iceland was ground zero of the financial crisis of 2008. Its entire banking system
failed within the span of a week, sparking mass protests and eventually forcing the government
to resign. The Icelandic saga captured the imagination of the world. It was a topic of books,
movies and television shows.2 Some suggested it as a key parable of the folly of bankers gone
wild, while other hailed Iceland’s response to the crisis as a role model for recovery from a
banking crisis.

At some level, the amount of attention heaped on a tiny country of 330,000 people in the middle
of the Atlantic Ocean is a mystery. Why would a country with a population equivalent to a few
blocks in New York City command such attention? One indicator may shed light on this. Table 1
shows the largest bankruptcies in US history in terms of dollars. Put in that comparison, coming
in at number 3, a few places below the Lehman Brothers, is the Icelandic bank failure. The
banks, largely state-owned at the turn of the century, managed in only about 5 years, following
privatization, to grow into international banking franchises. In 2008, at the eve of the banking
crisis, the combined assets of the three major Icelandic banks corresponded to about 9 times
Iceland’s GDP, or 155 b.dollars (115 b.euros). This was the largest banking sector relative to
GDP of any country in the world. Contrast this to the second largest banking sector at that time,
Switzerland’s, which had a balance sheet of about 8 times GDP, accumulated over a period of 3
centuries of banking experience and institution-building rather than in a span of a few years.

Table 1. Iceland and America's Largest Bankruptcies
                 Name     Date of failure   Total Assets
                                            b.dollars
        Lehman Brothers Sept. 2008                   $639
      Washington Mutual Sept. 2008                   $328
          Icelandic Banks Oct. 2008                  $155
               World.com July 2002                   $104
         General Motors June 2009                     $91
    Source: BankruptcyData.

In the annals of economic history, this stupendous growth perhaps belongs with the Dutch tulip
mania of the 1600s. Yet the effects were more dramatic. Once the Icelandic banks went bust, not
only did people in Iceland suffer losses, but so did hundreds of thousands of claimholders across
the world. That included thousands of depositors in Britain and the Netherlands who thought
their money was protected by insurance in line with EU rules. This lead to a complicated
international dispute, which for a while looked like it would evolve into a serious trade conflict.

This article tells the Icelandic saga. In itself, it is a saga worth telling, due to the unprecedented
growth and failure of a banking system which has been well documented in part due to

2
  Few examples of books, Asgeir Jonsson ʺWhy Iceland?: How One of the World's Smallest Countries Became the
Meltdown's Biggest Casualtyʺ (2009), Gudrun Johnsen ʺBringing Down the Banking System: Lessons from Icelandʺ
(2014) and Asgeir Jonsson and Hersir Sigurgeirsson ʺThe Icelandic Financial Crisis: A Study into the World´s
Smallest Currency Area and its Recovery from Total Banking Collapseʺ (2016), Iceland was also mentioned in
among others the Oscar winning movie Inside Job written and directed by Charles Ferguson.
exceptional access to data. After the financial crisis of 2008, the Icelandic Parliament (called the
Althingi) established the Special Investigation Commission (SIC) composed of a supreme court
judge, parliamentary ombudsman and an economist, Sigridur Benediktsdottir who is one of the
author of this paper, to address the basic questions of “What just happened?” and “Where any
public officials responsible for mistakes or negligence?”3 The investigation is unique in that
Althingi lifted all laws on bank secrecy in the public interest. The investigation commission had
unparalleled access to information about the operations of the banks, loan books, tax
information, reports, and loan committees’ documents and minutes from all banks. Moreover,at
they had subpoena power over all bankers and any other relevant parties, such as politicians,
civil servants, business partners and regulators. The result of this effort was made public, in a
3000-page report (in Icelandic) in 2010. We will use much of the data presented in that report in
the first part of the article, explaining the run-up to the crisis. Relative to that report, we have
chosen to aggregate some data, which were made public, to give a more consistent macro picture
that does not depend on the particulars of each bank. Furthermore, as the report was written in
2010, we now have seven years of financial statements by the banks which allows us to assess
recovery rates and put the crash in a broader ex post context. In particular, it gives us better
ability to assess the key question of whether or not the banks were solvent at the time of the
crash – and thus a victim of self-fulfilling bank-run in the spirit of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) –
or not. One of our key conclusions is that they were insolvent in 2008, although we acknowledge
that such an assessment is highly speculative for reasons we outline.

Apart from telling the Icelandic saga which is interesting in its own right, there are at least three
other reasons why it is worth revisiting for a broader audience.

First, the Icelandic example is often heralded as a role model on how to deal with a bank crisis—
let the banks go bust (!)—but on relatively dubious premises. This popular account is not
accurate. The domestic portion of the banking system was bailed out; deposits were given
priority ex-post ahead of other unsecure claims. The foreign portion of the failed banks were
granted a debt moratorium and resolution committees were appointed to them to preserve the
value of their assets.4 The real story, which we will seek to shed light on, is more interesting than
the stylized fiction. We suspect that some aspects of the government’s actions were inevitable at
the time, including prioritizing deposits ex-post, and may therefore have predictive power for
actions by other democratic governments faced with similar set of problems in the future.

Second, Iceland provides an interesting case study for the cost of a financial crisis. It was clearly
immense: GDP declined over 10% in real terms from peak to through in 2010 and disposable
income declined about 20% over the same period. However, the recovery has been relatively
strong. We present evidence that output lost was relatively modest in international context, given
the enormous scale of the Icelandic financial sector failure relative to GDP. We also present new
evidence on the fiscal cost of the crisis. Our benchmark net cost is about 5 percent of GDP seems
modest relative prior evaluations and the enormity of the crisis. We even illustrate scenarios, that
do not look implausible, where there is a net fiscal gain from the crisis, corresponding to about 1
percent of GDP. There are also several noteworthy features of the recovery, such as the

3
  Some translated chapter from the report: https://www.rna.is/eldri-nefndir/addragandi-og-orsakir-falls-islensku-
bankanna-2008/skyrsla-nefndarinnar/english/
4
  The Financial Supervisory Authority Annual Report 2009.A
aggressive restructuring of household and firms debt in the aftermath of the crisis, which may
help explain the relatively rapid recovery which supported the modest cost of the crisis. This ties
closely to the literature on debt deleveraging5 and the importance of cleaning up firm’s balance
sheet to avoid the problem of “Zombie firms”.6 The implementation and lifting of capital
controls that were only recently lifted as well as the “stability contributions” from the old banks
estates and the prevention of a looming balance of payment crises both supported the recovery
and made all the difference for the final fiscal cost of the crisis.

Third, we think there are a several broad lessons to be learned extending beyond Iceland. Largely
these are stories that have been told before, but perhaps the starkness makes Iceland a good
illustration, along with the access to more detailed data that documents the rise and fall of the
banks, its causes and consequences. To take but a few examples: The saga connects well with
Rajan’s (1994) theory of credit erosion and dangers of too rapid expansion in loan books (see
e.g. Jimenez and Saurina (2006)). It is also vivid example of the moral hazard and more risk
seeking triggered by explicit and implicit safety nets (see e.g. Kareken and Wallace 1978), as
well as highlighting the dangers of bank runs in the absence of a viable lender of last resort
(Diamond and Dybvig (1983)). The saga also highlights the importance of a robust supervisory
authority and strong rules against large exposures and insider lending, connecting quite closely to
the analysis in Akerlof and Romer’s (1994) and Johnson, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and
Schleifer (2000). Similarly, the banks financing on foreign bond markets is an interesting
example of what Brunnermeier (2012) calls “rating arbitrage”. Finally, the story of the large
capital inflows leading to increased external leverage and increasing systematic risk is an
example of the mechanisms highlighted in Calvo (1998), Krugman (1998), Reinhart and Rogoff
(2008) and Caballero (2016). There are many other connections to mechanism identified in the
literature that could be highlighted further, and we will attempt to provide some in the main text.

The rise of the Icelandic banks into international franchises should also be interpreted in the
context of a set of political ideas that became dominant in western democracies towards the end
of the last century. It should be understood in the context of that the central focus of the Icelandic
government was not only to privatize and deregulate all banks and thrifts but also to make
Iceland an international financial center (Benediktsdottir, Danielsson and Zoega 2011). The
government wanted the banks to expand. The general attitude towards regulation was that the
best people to regulate the banks, were the bankers themselves.

This was not a fringe view that was special to Iceland. It was a part of a broader intellectual
consensus towards deregulation of the financial industry throughout western democracies.
Bernanke (2016), a keen student of the Great Depression and intimate expert of banking
problems, describes some differences in views he had with Alan Greeenspan, then Chairman of
the Fed, when Bernanke joined the Fed as a governor in 2004, at which point the Icelandic
frenzy was just about to start. Greenspan was arguably the most powerful policy maker in world
towards the end of last century and in the run up of the crash. Bernanke describes as one of the
key difference in his views to Greenspan’s as follows: “Also, he (Greenspan) did not put much
stock in the ability of bank regulation and supervision to keep banks out of trouble. He believed


5
    See e.g. Eggertsson and Krugman (2012).
6
    See e.g. Caballero, Hoshi and Kashyap (2008).
that, so long as the banks had enough of their own money at stake, in the form of capital, market
forces would deter them from unnecessarily risky lending.”

At the most basic level, this paper should be read as a careful documentation of what happens
when banks are left virtually unregulated and unchallenged, in a country that at the very least
was perceived as having very strong democratic institutions and very low level of corruption.7
The bank’s capital, even if overstated, as we will document, was above international regulatory
requirements at the time of failure. As it turns out, bank’s reported capital and market forces did
not provide enough discipline. Meanwhile, in the US, Greenspan himself recognized as much in
a Congressional hearing in 2008 in response to the crisis: “Those of us who have looked to the
self-interest of lending institutions to protect shareholders’ equity, myself included, are in a state
of shocked disbelief.” The Icelandic saga is, perhaps, the starkest example from the crisis of
2008, for why Greenspan’s turnabout seems reasonable in the light of new evidence. This seems
all the more relevant now as a cautionary tale, as it appears that the policy pendulum in
Washington is swinging back to the pre-crisis consensus, towards tearing down the regulatory
framework enacted following the crisis of 2008.

We will document in detail aggressive risk-seeking, insider lending, moral hazard and virtually
non-existent supervision in Iceland leading up to the crisis. Our documentation includes an
estimate that about 25 percent of the banks 125 billion euros loan book at time of the crash went
to only 6 groups of related parties through a complex cobweb of holding companies, largely
unknown to supervisors at the time. Similarly, to take but one example, the lending of one of the
banks to two of its principal owners was about 1.5 billion euros at the time of the crash. These
same owners had only invested just about 35 million euros in equity to buy the banks 5 years
earlier when it was privatized.

The key point to make before diving into the details, and this relates to the extent to which the
lessons here generalize, is that most of this was only known ex post. It was only known after the
Icelandic Parliament, Althingi, appointed a special investigative committee of economists,
lawyers and forensic accountants and let them study the matter for over one year. What is known
came after Althingi lifted bank secrecy laws and gave the investigative committee broad
subpoena powers of all the main players. Furthermore, Althingi appointed a special prosecutor of
the failed banks resulting in several charges, including charges against COE’s of all the three
major banks, all of which were sentenced to serve jail time. Following the crisis of 2008, or any
other crisis for that matter, very few countries have put this amount of resources into
investigating what went wrong in a banking system after a crash. It is therefore very difficult to
know the degree to which the Icelandic case is representative of international banking in general.

7
  We put the caveat “perceived” as opposed to claiming that Iceland “was” uncorrupt. While Iceland ranked in
international surveys as the least corrupt country in the world a possible problem may be that those indicators of
corruption are not picking up the right things. That it is impossible to bribe an Icelandic policemen, for example,
may not be a good indicator of how hard/easy it is to avoid regulations or buy state properties at subpar price.
Nepotism and cronyism are examples of corruption which is difficult to measure but may be present. It is worth
noting, however, that despite intense investigative effort into financially incentivized corruption – which included
publicly releasing all bank loans to politicians and journalists – no evidence of bribes emerged and no corruption
charges were issued by the special prosecutor, with the possible exception of a high ranking employee of the
Ministry of Finance who sold stocks in one of the banks after a meeting that revealed their fragile state. He was
charged for trading on insider information and sentenced to jail by the Supreme Court.
Throughout this paper we will try to draw parallels to the extent possible to other known cases,
in countries such as Ireland, Italy, Mexico, SE-Asia, the S&L crisis in the US, but perhaps more
importantly to the economic literature developed partially prior to the crisis, or after the crisis.
Despite Iceland´s particulars we believe there are important generic lessons to be learned from
our tale, which at various point may appear to be a tall one.8 The main lesson, in summary,
appears to support Greenspan’s verdict cited above in his Congressional hearing, which implied
a complete reversal of the emerging pre-crisis consensus that the best people to monitor banks
are the bankers themselves.

The outline of the paper is as follows: In section 1 we make some general observation about the
growth of the Icelandic financial sector. In sector 2 we document where and how the Icelandic
banks funded their growth. This includes a discussion of the collection of internet deposits in
Britain and Netherland amounting to 10 billion euros at its peak, corresponding at that time to
about 10 percent of the banks´ balance sheet. We also discuss how the banks managed to borrow
over 6 billion euro in collateralized funding from the ECB and the Central Bank of Iceland. That
involved in part one Icelandic bank printing a bank bond, in exchange for a bank bond issued by
another Icelandic bank, and each posting that as a collateral. Via this arrangement the banks were
essentially allowed to borrow money without limit and without a meaningful collateral. In
section 3 we discuss who received the funds. In particular, we take advantage of the
unprecedented access of Parliaments’s Special Investigation Commission (SIC) to among other
loan books, derivative contracts, other lending contracts and all domestic tax returns. All the
evidence suggests that the quality of the loan book eroded in the run up to the crisis, that large
exposures grew, and that owners of the banks, i.e. insider, borrowed disproportionally. Large
exposures and insider borrowing posed a serious systemic risk largely unbeknownst to
supervisors or other policy makers at the time. The data pinpoints the exact group of individuals
and firms that received the loans and the development of the exposure over time. We also
document the form of these loans which were more often than not in the form of a loan with a
single payment at the end of the loan period (bullet loan), with no collateral or lax restrictions on
collateral. Section 4 documents that a large share of the equity of the banks was “weak” in the
sense that bank shares were funded by the banks themselves directly, with the shares themselves
as the only collateral for the loans. This equity evaporated during the crises, lowering recovery
from the estates. In section 5 we document the nature of the government emergency laws when
the banks faced a severe run on foreign currency funding, including deposits abroad. We suspect
these laws have predictive power for policy actions in time of stress in countries with large
international banking exposure, with important implication for cross country regulations. In
section 6 we assess the recovery rate of the banks. On the basis of our estimates, we argue that it
is difficult to maintain that the Icelandic banking system was solvent in 2008 and a victim of a
classic self-fulfilling run. In section 7 we estimate the output cost of the banking crisis in Iceland
and assess the sources of the recovery. In section 8 we estimate the fiscal costs. In section 9 we
discuss Iceland’s post-crisis balance of payment problem post crisis and it´s experiment with
capital controls. In section 10 we draw general implication and lessons. Section 11 concludes.
1. Growth of the three large banks
The three largest banks in Iceland, which accounted for over 95 percent of the banking system,
expanded from corresponding to approximately 100 percent of GDP in 1998 to about 900
percent of GDP at the time of their failure (see Figure 1.2).9 This growth was often cited as
evidence of the unsustainability of the Icelandic banking model.10

    Figure 1.1. Banking system size % of GDP                   Figure 1.2. 3 Large Banks Liabilities % of GDP
                                                                 1000%
                                                                  900%
                                                                  800%
                                                                  700%
                                                                  600%
                                                                  500%
                                                                  400%
                                                                  300%
                                                                   200%
                                                                  100%
                                                                     0%
                                                                       2004          2005   2006       2007       2008

                                                                           Glitnir    Kaupthing    Landsbankinn
     Source: Central Bank of Iceland, EoI 2016.                  Source: SIC.




9
  The measure used is the combined balance sheet of the three largest Icelandic banks: Kaupthing, Glitnir and
Landsbanki.
10
   The question of when a banking system is “too big” is an interesting and challenging one. Fitch Ratings (2006),
for instance, focused on Iceland’s net external debt and the lack of experience with floating exchange rate as a
“stress test”—as opposed to Australia or New Zealand. Other concerned observers include Merrill Lynch (2006) and
Danske Bank (2006).
 Figure 1.3. Combined Liabilities 1998-2003                   Figure 1.4. Combined Liabilities 1998-2008

                 18                                                         140




                                                                 b. Euros
      b. Euros

                 16                                                         120
                 14
                                                                            100
                 12
                                                                             80
                 10
                 8                                                           60

                 6                                                           40
                 4
                                                                             20
                 2
                                                                             0
                 0




                                                                                  1998
                                                                                         1999
                                                                                                2000
                                                                                                       2001
                                                                                                              2002
                                                                                                                     2003
                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                                                          2006
                                                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                                                        2008
                      1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003

                Deposits      Other Debts   Equity                                       Deposits              Other Liability                   Equity
     Source: SIC.                                               Source: SIC.
     Búnaðarbankinn is
To put things in perspective, Figure 1.1 shows banking system size as percentage of GDP in
Iceland in the run up to the crisis and in comparison to select industrialized economies with large
banking sectors in 2007. The median size banking system in this comparison is around 3 times
GDP, which is around the 2004 levels in Iceland. The three large banks grew rapidly from 1998
to 2003 (Figure 1.3), but the main growth spurt happens in the five years after that (Figure 1.4),
after the privatization of two of the three banks. But how did it all start, and who bought the
banks?

Two groups of Icelandic investors bid for the banks in a controversial sale, whose details we will
not go into here. How the purchases were financed, however, is quite relevant for the present
purposes, as it seems to have set the tone for what was later to come. At the risk of
oversimplifying, each group borrowed from other large banks in Iceland money to fund their
bank purchase and some of the supposed foreign co-investors turned out to be fronts for
unknown Icelandic investors at the time.11

The origin of the sales of the banks points to an important pattern: First, the new owners of the
banks were very closely connected and lent each other large amounts of money right from the
start. Second, this kind of equity funding seriously weakened, in a non-transparent way, the
ability of the banks to suffer losses, hence increasing notably systemic risk as we further clarify
in section 4. Third, the banks ownership from the beginning was murky and supervisors and
policy makers seemed complacent. This was the backdrop against which the banks started to
expand.




11
  More precisely, Kaupthing funded 70% of the purchasing price of Landsbanki, while Landsbanki funded 35% of
the purchasing price for Bunadarbanki, which was acquired by Kaupthing less than six months later. Moreover, as it
turned out, a foreign co-investor of Bunadarbanki, later turned out to be a risk-free front for Icelandic co-investors.
The standard double entry accounting will lead the way in how we answer the question: How
could the Icelandic banks grow so much? First, we will analyze the liability side: who was ready
to lend the banks so much money? Second, moving to the asset side, where did it all go?

Table 1.1. Combined balance sheet 30.6.2008
 Assets                                      Liabilities
     Billion euros          30.6.2008                              30.6.2008

     Cash and equivalents                2  Deposits                            45
          Loans to banks                 9  Borrowings                          50
      Loans to customers                74  Other liability                      8
              Other asset               30  Subordinated debt                    5
                                            Equity                               7
                 Total               115 Total                                 115
 Sources: Q2 results of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki 2008.

Reviewing Table 1.1 the largest part of the Icelandic bank’s assets are loans to “customers”. It is
interesting to dig into who those customers are and the nature of the loans. We will present some
evidence that suggests that the lending was disproportionally to large related parties and large
owners of the banks.

It turned out that the equity in the Icelandic banks was to a large extent self-funded and hence
fictional. This will be major theme of Section 4. Other important funding sources for the banks
were deposits and borrowing, roughly in equal proportion. Where the funding originated is of
considerable interest, and we will go into detail of the available evidence in the next section.

2. Where did the money come from?
This section addresses a basic question: How, exactly, did the Icelandic banking system increase
its funding seven-fold in only 5 years?

 Prior to the turn of the century, the Icelandic banks largely financed themselves via domestic
deposits and long-term loans from foreign financial institutions. This changed, however, once
European financial market became more integrated. While Iceland is not a member of the
European Union, it is a member of the European Economic Area, giving it essentially the same
access to financial markets as EU member countries. This included opening bank branches and
subsidiaries in EU member countries giving the banks access to collecting deposits in Europe
and collateralized borrowing from the ECB. Both would turn out to be quite important funding
sources after the international liquidity crises started in the middle of 2007.

The privatization of a large portion of the Icelandic banking system and the subsequent explosive
growth did not occur in a vacuum. At the time, there was abundant global liquidity, or what
Bernanke (2005) termed at the time “the global savings glut”, and the premium on investments in
peripheral economies declined to record lows as investors “searched for yield”.12 The Icelandic
banks benefited greatly from this, going from being a fringe investment to a highly rated main

12
  Bracke, Thierry, and Michael Fidora. "Global liquidity glut or global savings glut? A structural VAR approach."
(2008).
stream investment opportunity. Capital inflow into Iceland through the banks grew greatly,
elevating the capital inflows to a prime example of what Reinhart and Reinhart (2008) term
“capital flow bonanza” which they document to be highly correlated with currency and banking
crisis.13 Meanwhile, the Icelandic economy was also set up for a boom independently of the
banking expansion. In 2003, a four-year investment project began on a hydroelectric dam and
aluminum smelter that amounted to about 50 percent of GDP.14

We will focus below on the period of the most rapid growth, which was after the banks were all
in private hands, i.e. after 2003. The liabilities of the banks combined increased from a little
under 16 billion euros to 108 billion euros. Roughly, we can divide this period into four stages,
with the Icelandic banks entering new funding markets, as the conditions in their previous
markets tightened.

In the first stage in 2004 and 2005 the main source of funding growth came from the European
bond market (EMTN market). The bond issuance is represented by the yellow in Figure 2.1. In
the second stage in 2006, an important source of funding was the US bond market. In the third
stage in 2006 and 2007, the banks started collecting internet deposits in Europe, represented by
the grey in Figure 2.1. Finally, in 2007 and with increased vigor in 2008, the banks increased
their collateralized borrowing, in particular from the European Central Bank and the Icelandic
Central Bank. Each stage highlights in its own way some possible problems that the economic
literature has identified with the operation of modern financial markets.

2.1 Stage 1 and 2: European and US bond markets
Many banks moved to an ”originate and distribute” model in the lead-up to the financial crisis,
abandoning the model of retaining loans on their balance sheet. Banks repackaged the loans and
sold them to various other financial investors thereby offloading the risk via “structured”
products often referred to as collateralized debt obligations (CDOs). Brunnermeier (2009) gives
a careful account of this process in the lead-up of the crisis in the US, which led to weakening of
credit standards and ultimately the crisis. A key problem with these products, according to this
account, was that a substantial part of the risk was borne not by the originator but other financial
institutions that were eager to purchase these products in the “search for yields” environment
prior to the crisis. This generates a classic principal-agent problem. The banks that bundled the
assets into CDOs essentially only faced the “pipeline risks” of holding the assets for some period
until the risk were passed on. Their incentive to evaluate the creditworthiness of borrowers were
thus not sufficiently as strong. Brunnermeier (2009) argues that this process was key driver for
cheap credit, declining lending standards and the housing boom in the run up to the great
financial crisis in the US.




13
     Using data from 181 emerging and advanced countries from 1960-2007.
14
     SIC chapter 4.
 Figure 2.1. Changes in Banks Liability                                   Table 2.1. Moody's Credit Rating for
                                                                                     Long-Term Debt

          35                                                                Date           Glitnir   Landbanki       Kaupthing
                                                                                                                     (Bunadarbanki)
          30                                                                       1998    A3        A3
          25                                                                       1999    A3        A3              A3
b.euros




          20                                                                       2000    A2        A3              A3
          15                                                                       2001    A2        A3              A3
          10                                                                       2002    A2        A3              A3
          5                                                                        2003    A1        A3              A2*
          0                                                                        2004    A1        A2              A1
                         2004      2005      2006      2007      2008
          -5                                                                       2005    A1        A2              A1
     -10                                                                          4/4/06   A1        A2              A1
     -15                                                                         2/23/07   Aaa       Aaa             Aaa

     -20                                                                         4/11/07   Aa3       Aaa             Aaa
                         Other deposits             Foreign deposits             2/28/08   A2        A2              A1
                         Medium term notes          KR bonds
                         Other REPO                 REPO CBI                     9/30/08   Baa2
                         REPO ECB                   Subordinated loans           10/8/08   Caa1      Caa1
                         Other borrowing
                                                                                 10/9/08                             Baa3
   Sources: SIC and authors calculations.
                                                                            * At the end of the year, after the merger with Bunadarbanki
                                                                            Source: SIC.


This development in financial markets helps explain the strong appetite for the Icelandic bank
bonds in this period. From 2004 to 2008 the banks issued bonds, starting in the European and
then moving on to the US bond market, corresponding to about 45 billion euros (see Figure 2.2),
or about 40 percent of the banks’ balance sheet at the time of the financial crisis and three times
Iceland’s 2007 GDP.

 Figure 2.2. International Bond Issuance                                 Figure 2.3. Bank CDS 2006-2008
                    14
                                                                          1200
          b.euros




                    12                                                    1000
                    10                                                     800

                    8                                                      600

                    6                                                      400

                    4                                                      200

                    2                                                        0
                                                                                 Mar-07




                                                                                 Mar-08
                                                                                 May-06




                                                                                 May-07




                                                                                 May-08
                                                                                  Jul-06




                                                                                  Jul-07




                                                                                  Jul-08
                                                                                  Jan-07




                                                                                  Jan-08
                                                                                 Sep-06




                                                                                 Sep-07
                                                                                 Nov-06




                                                                                 Nov-07




                    0
                            2004    2005     2006    2007     2008
                                                                                   Kaupthing         Glitnir      Landsbanki
                                EMTN      USMTN      Other
    Source: SIC.                                                          Source: SIC.
Table 2.1 shows that Moody’s credit ratings for the Icelandic banks in the 10 years leading up to
the financial crisis was very good. Investors had a strong appetite for Icelandic bank bonds
because they were “cheap” in their rating class, i.e. they had high return relative to assets with
comparable ratings.15 This gave rise to what Brunnermeier terms “regulatory and rating
arbitrage”. The Icelandic bank bonds were a good way of increasing the credit rating of the
CDOs with which they were bundled without compromising the returns.16 In early 2006 the
spreads on the banks bonds temporarily increased, in what was later termed a “the Geysir crisis,”
and access to the European bond market became limited. Later that same year, the US bond
market opened up and the spreads lowered again and remained low until the liquidity crisis hit
international financial markets mid-summer 2007.17 At that stage the spreads the banks had to
pay in the bond market became prohibitively high and the cost of insuring the banks bonds
peaked (see Figure 2.3). Accordingly, the banks started looking for alternative sources of
funding.

2.2 Stage 3: Deposit collection
EU law mandate a minimum deposit insurance of 20.000 euros, and many member countries
increased this minimum during the crisis. The classic problem created by deposit insurance is
moral hazard as illustrated for example in Kareken and Wallace (1978). It reduces the incentive
for depositors to monitor banks and incentivizes hence banks to take on larger risk than is
socially optimal. The Icelandic banking saga provides a vivid example of bad incentives created
by deposit insurance. The Icelandic banks offered repeatedly the highest deposit rates according
to weekly comparison of deposit rates and their advertisements and websites mentioned that the
deposits fell under the EU-mandated deposit insurance.18 For the Icelandic banks, obtaining
deposits at relatively high interest expenses became preferred to the alternative, which was the
increasingly tight bond market.




15
   SIC chapter 7.
16
   SIC chapter 7.
17
   Given how closely connected European and US markets are, it may seem a bit surprising that the US market
“opened” when the market in Europe “closed” on the Icelandic banks. On possible explanation is that in the
European case to a large extent large investors, who became increasingly concerned about the health of the Icelandic
banks, while the Icelandic banks could access the US bond market via the “regulatory and rating arbitrage” in
CDO’s in the US, as we document above, where they were pooled with several other assets.
18
   SIC chapter 17, pg. 262.
 Figure 2.4. Icesave Deposits                                                                                                   Figure 2.5. Total Foreign Deposits
               10                                                                                                                         18
     b.euros




                                                                                                                                b.euros
                9                                                                                                                         16
                8                                                                                                                         14
                7                                                                                                                         12
                6                                                                                                                         10
                5                                                                                                                         8
                4                                                                                                                         6
                3                                                                                                                         4
                2                                                                                                                         2
                1                                                                                                                         0
                0                                                                                                                              Oct-07 Dec-07 Feb-08 Apr-08 Jun-08 Aug-08
                    Nov-05




                                                        Nov-06




                                                                                            Nov-07
                                               Aug-06




                                                                                   Aug-07




                                                                                                                       Aug-08
                             Feb-06




                                                                 Feb-07




                                                                                                     Feb-08
                                      May-06




                                                                          May-07




                                                                                                              May-08                               Icesave   Kaupthing Edge   Glitnir
       Source: SIC.                                                                                                              Source: SIC.



From early 2006, following the so-called Geysir crisis, the Icelandic banks started to collecting
deposits abroad. Landsbanki and Kaupthing were particularly aggressive in Britain and the
Netherlands. Foreign deposits increased to over 16 billion euros by the middle of 2008 (Figure
2.5) corresponding to 15 percent of the banks’ balance sheet at the time of failure. The great
popularity of these accounts may appear somewhat puzzling, since at least as early as February
2006 rating firms and other market observers warned of the growth of the Icelandic banking
system and its reliance in foreign funding, pointing out that the banks would most likely not be
able to withstand losing access to international financial markets.19 This was reflected in
increases in credit default swaps, shown in Figure 2.3.

High interest rates attracted investors to the deposit accounts. If a bank offered one of the three
best deposit rates in according to a list that was published weekly in the UK, there was a steady
inflow into the accounts, while if they fell of the lists or were in fifth place there was an outflow.
20
   Accordingly, these deposit accounts seem to have been very price-sensitive. There is also
some evidence that the deposit guarantee of 20.000 euros played a role. This can be gauged by
the large number of accounts that were just below the 20.000-euro limit.21

Foreign deposit collection by the three Icelandic banks peaked at about 14 billion euros in the
fall of 2007. Deposit then started to flow out, in particular Icesave whole-sale deposits which are
uninsured, until the spring of 2008. In the spring of 2008 Kaupthing started collecting so-called
Kaupthing Edge deposits, reinvigorating foreign deposit collection by the Icelandic banks, which
then peaked at 16 billion euros shortly before the failure of the banks (Figure 2.4 and 2.5).

19
   Fitch revises Iceland’s outlook to negative on widening macro imbalances. Fitch Ratings 22. February 2006 and
Thomas, Richard: Icelandic Banks: not what you are thinking. Merrill Lynch 7. mars 2006. Iceland: Geyser crisis.
Research 21. mars 2006, Danske Bank.
20
   A simple regression in the report of SIC shows that the inflows into the accounts were heavily dependent on where
the banks were in the lists of highest deposit rates, which was published weekly, SIC chapter 7.
21
   SIC chapter 17 pg. 37.
The behavior of the Icelandic banks in the European deposit market is reminiscent of the
behavior of thrifts 1980, leading to the S&L crisis, as documented by Akerlof and Romer (1993).
A change in regulation meant that the S&L’s, that had government insured deposits, could now
set deposit rates at will. Akerlof and Romer (1993) interpret this as having given the thrifts “an
unlimited ability to borrow from the government” simply by making their government insured
deposits more attractive via higher rates.

2.3 Stage 4: Central Bank lending
As the collection of deposits slowed in the fall of 2007 the banks turned to yet another funding
source: The Central Bank of Iceland (CBI) and increasingly the European Central Bank (ECB).
Both banks’ main policy tool is repurchasing agreements (repo) or collateralized lending to
banks. The banks post a collateral at the central bank—with a haircut—in exchange for liquidity,
and then repay the loan after one week. The central banks use collateral lending to control
interbank lending rates, much in the same way the Federal Reserve uses open market operations
to set the Federal Funds rate in the Fed Funds market.

As liquidity started to tighten in mid-2007, the Icelandic banks increased their collateralized
borrowing from central banks from about 2 billion euros to 9 billion. The banks borrowed
directly or indirectly about 3 billion euros from CBI. Collateralized borrowing from the ECB,
through their subsidiaries in Luxembourg, was about 1 billion euros at the beginning of 2008 and
peaked at 4.5 billion in July 2008. The borrowing had come down to 3.5 billion euros when the
banks failed. How the Icelandic banks funded themselves via collateralized borrowing from
central banks carries an important lesson for central banking that we suspect may be
underappreciated.

 Figure 2.6. Collateralized Borrowing                                                                         Figure 2.7. Collateralized Borrowing at the
                                                                                                              ECB
              10                                                                                                           5
    b.euros




                                                                                                                 b.euros




               9
               8                                                                                                           4
               7
               6
                                                                                                                           3
               5
               4
                                                                                                                           2
               3
               2
               1                                                                                                           1
               0
                   Jun-06




                                                        Jun-07




                                                                                            Jun-08
                            Sep-06

                                     Dec-06




                                                                 Sep-07

                                                                          Dec-07




                                                                                                     Sep-08
                                               Mar-07




                                                                                   Mar-08




                                                                                                                           0
                                                                                                                           Jan-08   Mar-08 May-08   Jul-08     Sep-08

                        Glitnir               Landsbankinn                    Kaupthing                                         Glitnir   Landsbankinn       Kaupthing
  Source: SIC.                                                                                                 Source: SIC.
 Figure 2.8. Collateral at the ECB

                5
     b.euros


               4.5
                4
               3.5
                3
               2.5
                2
               1.5
                1
               0.5
                0




                      Icelandic bank bonds   Other
       Source: SIC.


Conducting monetary policy via collateralized lending and deposit is a simple way for the central
bank to determine interbank rates. A key requirement in the operations is that underlying asset in
the transaction is a high-quality bond to which a haircut may apply in order to minimize credit
risk for the central bank.

What qualifies as a high-quality bond? As it turns out, the ECB and the CBI only required them
to be above a particular rating threshold, and the pool of eligible assets included bank bonds
which met certain ratings criteria. Some central banks, including those of Switzerland and
Sweden explicitly forbid this. As Table 2.1 showed, the Icelandic banks had an excellent credit
rating. This opened the door to a straightforward strategy for the closely interconnected Icelandic
banks which became known as the “love letter” trade.

The love-letter exchange worked as follows: two Icelandic banks issued their own bonds, which
they then exchanged, often without going through the financial market. Then the banks posted
the respective bonds as collateral for a loan at the CBI or the ECB. As there is no limit to how
much bonds they could issue and exchange to one another, the banks essentially had an unlimited
access to funding from the two central banks. To some extent this was like printing money.22, 23

Icelandic borrowing from the ECB increased by 2.5 billion euros from the beginning of February
2008 to the end of April 2008, when it amounted to over 3.5 billion euros or more than 20
percent of the combined balance sheets of the Luxembourg subsidiaries of the Icelandic banks


22
  SIC. Chapter 4 pg. 165 and chapter 7 pg. 41.
23
  It should be noted that such a scheme is not possible in the United States because the Federal Reserve’s open
market operations utilize only government securities, rather than collateral posted by banks, to control the interbank
lending rate. Direct lending to banks, however, take place via the Discount Window, which has strict rules about the
type of collateral accepted.
(Figure 2.7).24 About 1.5 billion euros were secured with Icelandic bank bonds, or the so-called
love letters (Figure 2.8). The ECB got wind of what was going on and at the end of April 2008,
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, called the Governor of the CBI and said the ECB viewed the
bonds posted as collateral “artificial and abnormal”.25 The “love letter” collaterals were out of
the ECB system by the end of August, replaced in part with CDOs of Icelandic krona loans and a
currency swap agreement written by the Icelandic banks. The CBI, however, continued to take
the bank bonds as collateral, essentially giving the banks free access to Icelandic króna until the
bitter end. The losses by the Central Bank were sizable, close to 15 percent of GDP, as we will
further discuss in Section 6.

There is anecdotal evidence that other banks engaged in similar behavior to gain access to ECB
funding after the liquidity crunch began in 2007. The Icelandic banking crisis, however, provides
the only direct evidence and admission of a collusion between banks and a direct swap of bonds
to bring to use for collateralized borrowing to our knowledge.26

3. Where did the money go?
Getting an overview of the loan portfolio of any bank is challenging, not only because of bank
secrecy laws, but also due to incomplete record keeping, the complex nature of some loan
contracts, and non-transparent ownership structure of the firms that receive the money. Any
assessment will thus necessarily be incomplete and only suggestive. In the case the Icelandic
banks, this is particularly challenging as much of the lending was to holding companies with
opaque ownership structures, sometimes registered in Iceland but sometimes held abroad by
Icelandic parties. One aspect of the Icelandic banking crisis that makes it of interest, however, is
that Althingi lifted bank secrecy laws and other secrecy laws to the investigatory committee,
which then made some of the underlying data and conclusion public. We rely on that evidence
here, while mostly aggregate the data across all three banks to streamline the narrative.

Before going into the details of the available evidence, and some of the data gaps, it is worth
sketching out at a broad level the direction of lending in the run up to the crisis. The loans that
can be explicitly documented appear to have been funneled, to a disproportional extent to firms
and companies tightly connected to the banks’ owners. At the time of the crash, approximately
20 percent of the parent banks’ loan books, for which reliable information exist, can be traced to
only six groups of related parties, each of which had a significant ownership connection to one of
the three banks. To remind the reader, what is at stake here is a balance sheet of 115 billion euros
or close to ten times Iceland’s GDP.

Large exposure rules stipulate that a bank can only lend up to a maximum of 25 percent of equity
to a group of connected parties. As you will see below and the SIC documented these rules seem
to have been bent if not broken in the run up to the crisis.27 The Icelandic Financial Supervisory
Authority (FSA), however, never seriously raised the subject of large exposure lending before
the financial crisis. The opaqueness of firm ownership limited the FSA’s knowledge of the

24
   Total ECB lending through the Central Bank of Luxembourg amounted to less than 2 percent of total assets of the
banking system in Luxembourg at the time. See. SIC, chapter 7 pg. 48.
25
   SIC. Chapter 4 pg. 47.
26
   SIC. Chapter 7 pg. 47.
27
   SIC. Chapter 8.
problem, and their narrow legal interpretation of what constituted “connected parties” also
played a role. For example, FSA allowed Landsbanki to categories the two largest owners of
Landsbanki as not “connected”, despite them having purchased the bank together and being
father and son.28

We will mostly focus on the expansion of the banks’ balance sheet from 2003 to the financial
crisis. During that period, their lending increased by 70 billion euros, or seven times Iceland’s
2003 GDP. We find it useful to separate the expansion on the asset side of the banks into two
stages: The first stage is the lending growth from 2003 to 2006, which funded both domestic and
foreign investment by Icelandic investors and holding companies. The second stage was what we
call the debt repatriation phase. From 2006 to 2008 Icelandic companies were facing margin
calls from their foreign creditors and these loans were refinanced by the Icelandic bank in
response. The lending expansion phase coincides roughly with the banks’ successful bond
issuance in European and US bonds markets (Phase 1 and 2 in Section 2), while the loan
buyback period corresponded quite closely to the period when the banks started financing
themselves with online deposits in Europe and with collateralized borrowing from central banks.

3.1 Nature of the expansion
Figure 3.1 shows the evolution of the asset side of the three large banks. Their combined assets
increased from 18 billion euros in the first quarter of 2004 to 115 billion euros in end June 2008.
The largest part of the increase is due to loans to customers, which rise from 12 billion euros at
the beginning of 2004 to 74 billion at the time of their failure.29

 Figure 3.1 Banks Total Assets
                140
      B.euros




                120

                100

                80

                60

                40

                20

                 0
                      03/04
                          07/04
                              11/04
                                  03/05
                                      07/05
                                          11/05
                                              03/06
                                                  07/06
                                                      11/06
                                                          03/07
                                                              07/07
                                                                  11/07
                                                                       03/08




                  Cash and equivalents            Loans to banks
                  Other asset                     Loans to customers
     Source. SIC


28
   SIC. Chapter 8 and Appendix 2. Another stark example was that Glitnir did not connect Baugur and Gaumur to
Stoðir, despite the former two being very connected and owning over 45% in Stoðir. SIC. Chapter 8 pg. 125 and
309. Documents indicate that this was done with the sole purpose of getting around rules on large exposures.
29
   The yellow portion on the asset side, denoted “other”, represents mostly financial assets, securities and
derivatives, but we will mostly focus on the banks’ loan books, as the growth is more concentrated there.
 Table 3.1: Growth of the three large banks
 b.ISK.                            2003    2004        2005        2006        2007        2008
 Total assets year end. b.ISK.     1.451   2.946       5.419       8.475       11.354      14.437
 Assets acquired                           834         726         34          26          0
 Outer growth %                            57,5%       24,7%       0,6%        0,3%        0
 Evaluation changes and currency           -51         -203        1.068       -231        3.302
 Inner growth b.ISK.                       713         1.949       1.954       3.084       -219
 Inner growth %                            49,2%       66,1%       36,1%       36,4%       -1,9%
 Inner real growth %                       43,5%       59,5%       27,2%       28,8%       -10,0%
 Source: SIC.

During this time period, the Icelandic banks acquired some foreign financial institutions, gaining
foreign loan portfolios, a fact they used to soothe fears about their rapid growth. This does
explain some of their growth, but only a small fraction of it. Table 3.1 decomposes the growth
over this period. An acquisition of a foreign financial institution is an example of “outer growth”.
Other growth in the banks’ lending and other assets is defined as “inner growth”. As the table
reveals the largest part of the growth is due to inner growth. Most of the growth on the asset side
of the Icelandic banks, in other words, was “fresh” lending, i.e., lending done by the banks
themselves applying their own loan standards to current or new customers. The literature
documents that this kind of rapid growth of the loan portfolio is associated with increased default
risks. There is both a moral hazard effect due to the behavior of over leveraged borrowers and
adverse selection in connection to the expansion of customer’s base (e.g. Sharpe 1990, Jiménez
and Saurina 2006). We will see evidence of both in coming sections.

3.2 Erosion of the loan books
As we start to dig into the loans books the data set contracts. The investigation commission had
unprecedented access to data, but it was still mostly limited to the portions of the banks that were
supervised in Iceland, i.e. the parent companies. Detailed information on subsidiaries was limited
to single snap shots, shared by foreign supervisors, which did not lend itself to the in-depth
analysis shown in this section. Figure 3.2 shows loans from the Icelandic parent company of the
three banks. This reflects about 2/3 of the loan book of the banking groups as of 2008. Some
evidence will be presented from subsidiaries in Luxembourg, which were the ones that seemed
most connected to the operations in Iceland.
 3.2. Loans of the three large banks                    3.3. Collateral for new large exposure
                                                             loans 2007-2008
            60


            50
                                                                            No
            40                                                          Collatera…
  b.euros




            30                                                                       Shares
                                                                    Other             54%
            20                                                       24%


            10


            0                                                           Cash
             2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007     Source. SIC.   3%
               Households            Firms
               Holding companies     Foreign entities
               Other
     Source. SIC


The loans in Figure 3.2 are categorized into households, firms, holding companies, foreign
entities and other. The “foreign entities” are not necessarily informative about actual ownership
of the borrower, as these in some cases included Icelandic investor that registered their
companies abroad for variety of reason. What is particularly noteworthy is that the CBI started
tracking loans specifically to limited liability holding companies in 2004. There was a sharp
increase in these loans in 2006 and 2007. What did they correspond to? It became increasingly
common to use holding companies to fund share purchases in listed domestic firms and in
particular the banks themselves. More often than not the collateral was shares in the banks
themselves, as we will later discuss. For all large exposure loans from the beginning of 2007
until the collapse, 54 percent of all loans were collateralized with shares. These loans were also
increasingly bullet loans, i.e. all paid in one installment at the end of the loan period. The loan
book of Landsbanki provides a vivid example of this. Figure 3.4 shows repayment methods of
loans from Landsbanki, the increase of bullet loans (green) in comparison the loans with fixed
payment schedules. Bullet loans double from 2006 until the crash, while other types of
repayment forms increase only slightly. At the same time, virtually all loans to holding
companies were bullet loans starting in mid 2004. This is in sharp contrast to loans to
households, where amortizing loans were most common over the whole period and bullet loans
made up less than 10 percent of the total. Bullet loans were also the most common form of
repayment methods for loans categorized as to “foreign entities”.
 Figure 3.4 Landsbanki, Loan Repayment                       Figure 3.5. Landsbanki, Loans to Holding
 Forms, billion euros                                        Companies
     18                                                       100
     16                                                        90

     14                                                        80

     12                                                        70
                                                               60
     10
                                                               50
     8
                                                               40
     6
                                                               30
     4
                                                               20
     2
                                                               10
     0                                                           0
      2005              2006         2007                         2004          2005   2006      2007
             Other                 Bullet loan
                                                                    Annuitet              Fixed principal payment
             Annuitet              Fixed principal payment          Bullet loan           Other
          Source SIC.
                                                              Source SIC.
          Landsbanki
                                                              Landsbanki
Lending that requires only a single payment at the very end of the contract is arguably a riskier
loan than the more usual form of loan contracts. The inability to make individual payments sends
the banks a signal of the financial health of the borrower, and in the case of bullet loans this
signal is lost. Supervisors should also view growth in bullet loans as a potential risk, as it is
usually the form of loans that is used to evergreen loans by delinquent borrowers, so as not to
have to register losses on banks loan book.30 The information that can be gleaned from the
unwinding of the banks after they failed does suggest that these loans were in fact very risky.
The estimated recovery rate on loans to holding companies was reported in 2010 to be about 4%
in Glitnir, while Kaupthing reported 6 percent recovery and Landsbanki 5 percent.31

3.3 Lending to related parties and owners (insiders)
Large exposure rules are almost universal. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BASEL) issued standards in 1991 for measuring and controlling large exposures. The
motivation for regulations on large exposures is to prevent a sudden failure of a group of
borrowers from causing the downfall of the bank. The large exposure rules in Iceland stipulated,
as they did in most other countries, that each bank could not lend an amount corresponding to
more than 25 percent of capital to one group of related counterparties. Large exposure rules were
bent to the point of breakage in Iceland and commonly large owners of the groups that were able
to borrow a lot were also large stake holders in the banks.
There are two important reason why the large exposure rules were bent without much objection
from the supervisory authority. First is the absence of a clear definition of what constituted a
“related party” in theory and in practice. Second, the banks themselves, rather than the Icelandic

30
     The term evergreen refers to automatically rolling over short term loan.
31
     Financial information of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki in 2010.
Financial Supervisory Authority (FSA), had the last word in determining which loans were
deemed to be between related parties.32

 Figure 3.6 Kaupthings Large Exposure                           Figure 3.7. Glitnir Large Exposure
      m.euro                                           %          m.euro                                                 %
                                                                 2500                                                    90
     2000                                                  35
                                                                                                                         80
                                                           30    2000                                                    70
     1500
                                                           25                                                            60
                                                                 1500
                                                           20                                                            50
     1000
                                                                                                                         40
                                                           15    1000
                                                                                                                         30
                                                           10
      500                                                                                                                20
                                                                  500
                                                           5
                                                                                                                         10
         0                                                 0        0                                                    0
             2005     2006    2007         2008                         2005        2006             2007        2008
           Other                     Síminn                                Baugur Group                     FL Group
           Lýsing                    Exista
                                     % of equity base (r.h.)               Other firms                      April 2007
           Bakkavör Group
                                                                           % of equity base (r.h.)
     Source. SIC
                                                                 Source: SIC.


Figures 3.6 and 3.7 shows lending by two of the major banks to a group of firms that we like the
SIC define as “related,”.33 In the case of Kaupthing, the group of related parties exceeded the
regulatory limit of 25 percent of the equity base from late 2005 until the failure of the bank. In
the case of Glitnir, the group of related parties illustrated exceeds the regulatory maximum in
2005 and borrowing peaked at close to 90 percent of equity base in early 2008.

The banks themselves always reported large exposures within regulatory limits. An employee of
the FSA notified the director general of the FSA as early as 2004 that he thought that the banks
were not correctly connecting together large exposure. The employee used Baugur Group and
related parties as the main example (See Figure 3.7.) The FSA did not follow up on that work
and lending to the group grew exponentially in the following years.34

Another noteworthy fact about Figure 3.6 and 3.7 is that both of these related parties in question
were also large owners, insiders, of the banks.35 Figure 3.7. gives circumstantial evidence on the

32
   In principle FSA could suggest certain parties where related, but the burden of proof was on the side of FSA to
make the case. The FSA never attempted to make such a case. This has been amended post crash, as the FSA has
authority to require banks to connect specific borrowers into the same exposure.
33
   There is a lot of data and investigative work underlying these two figures. Underlying the two figures is data from
the banks’ loan books, as well as information about cross ownership of Icelandic firms, which the SIC put together
by using tax data, firm registry data and minutes from the loan committee meetings of the banks. The SIC then
connected firms into groups of related parties, the methodology is outlined in Benediktsdottir, Bjarnadottir and
Hansen (2015). Here, two parties are related if they own 20 percent or more directly or indirectly in each other.
34
   SIC Chapter 8 pg 124.
35
   "Insiders" includes executive officers, directors, principal shareholders and the related interests of such parties.
role ownership had in the Icelandic banks. Baugur Group bought a large stake in Glitnir in
February 2007, market by the red line. Consequently, the loans to the Baugur group of related
parties, who were now insiders, almost doubled from 1 billion euros to about 2 billion euros in
less than a year.36

In general, the large owners of the banks seemed to have had disproportionate access to funds at
the banks. Figure 3.8. illustrates the lending of all the three banks to six groups of related parties
of borrowers who were also large owners of the banks, shown both in billions of euros (left axis)
and as portion of the total loan book (right axis). When the banks failed, lending to these six
groups corresponded to over 20 percent of the loan book of the parent banks.

Considerable literature exists documenting how lending to insiders weakens banks due to
tunneling and looting (e.g. Akerlof and Romer 1993 and Johnson et al 2000). As shown it seems
that lending to insiders in Iceland was on an exceptional scale. Yet it is worth keeping in mind
that there are several other well documented examples of large insider lending. In the run-up to
the Mexican banking crisis in the 1990s, for example, insider lending was estimated to be 20
percent of all loans (La Porta et al 2003). Insider lending was also a large factor in the Savings
and Loans crisis in the US (Calavita, Tillman and Pontell 1997; Akerlof and Romer 1993).

 Figure 3.8. Loans to Large Related Parties that had large ownership in the banks
                 14                                                                                   35%
       b.euros




                 12                                                                                   30%

                 10                                                                                   25%

                  8                                                                                   20%

                  6                                                                                   15%

                  4                                                                                   10%

                  2                                                                                   5%

                  0                                                                                   0%
                      2005                2006                2007               2008



                         Baugur Group and connected parties          Exista and connected parties
                         Samson and connected parties                BG and connected parties
                         Milestone and connected parties             Ólafur Ólafs and connected parites

     Source. Authors calculations and SIC

3.4 Lending traced to individuals
Another way of characterizing lending to “related parties” is to identify it with particular
underlying individuals. If a firm A secures a loan of 100 million from a bank, and a particular
individual holds a 10 percent share in that company, then 10 million of the loan is assigned to


36
     SIC. Chapter 8.
his/her name. The Special Investigation Commission traced every loan from the parent banks
through firms down to individuals and made the results public (Table 3.2).

The commission did not have access to the loan book of the subsidiaries of the banks abroad.
One might suspect - and indeed the Icelandic banks claimed this prior to their failure - that the
loans of subsidiaries abroad would diversify the risk. The commission did get a snapshot of the
largest borrowers in the subsidiaries in Luxembourg for Landsbanki and Kaupthing. Once again,
it is the main owners of the banks – insiders - that are borrowing heavily, even in foreign
subsidiaries. We add this to the parent company loan books. Done in this way we see that the top
five borrowers are also among the largest shareholders in the Icelandic banks.37 Several of the
others on the list are also closely related.38

 Table 3.2. Ten largest debtors of the Icelandic banks parent company at the end of September
 2008 and their debt in two subsidiaries, m.euros
 Rank     Name                                Parent company        KB and LB Luxemburg            Total
                                                                    (rank in loan book)
      1   Robert Tchenguiz                               2104.9           213 (3 in KB)                2317.9
      2   Ólafur Ólafsson                                1128.2          49.1 (10 in KB)               1177.3
      3   Jón Ásgeir Jóhannesson                          864.3           11.5 (9 in LB)               875.8
      4   Björgólfur Guðmundsson                          516.8           16.5 (5 in LB)               533.3
      5   Björgólfur T. Björgólfsson                      481.7           305 (1 in LB)                786.7
      6   Ása K. Ásgeirsdóttir                            430.6                                        430.6
      7   Jóhannes Jónsson                                429.7                                        429.7
      8   Hannes Þór Smárason                             410.6                                        410.6
      9   Ingibjörg Stefanía Pálmadóttir                  390.7                                        390.7
     10   Jákup á Dul Jacobsen                            349.8                                        349.8
 Note. Debts are tabulated from the personal holdings of the individual in the banks. Ownership is assessed from
 holdings at the end of 2008. Data from the Luxemburg subsidiaries is from October 2nd for LB and August 31st for
 KB. Assumptions for calculations for subsidiaries not fully compatible.
 Source. SIC.

3.5 Debt repatriation
The discussion above points to a deterioration in the loan book from over exposure to certain
group of related parties and to the owners of the banks. An additional mechanism of increased
credit risk is worth noting. Access to international financial market was not just opening up for
the banks in the period 2003 to 2006. Icelandic holding companies also got increased access to
funds at large international banks such as Barclays, Citibank, Morgan Stanley and Deutsche
Bank. Often those loans were collateralized with Icelandic publicly traded shares, in particular




37
  #1 owned shares in KB and was on the board of Exista that was large large owner of KB. #2 large owner of KB.
#3 large owner of Glitnir. #4 and #5 large owners of Landsbanki. #6 mother of #3. #7 father of #3 large owner of
Glitnir. #9 spouse of #3. #10 no known ownership connection. And so on.
shares in the Icelandic banks. The loans usually included stipulations that the debtor needed to
post further collateral if the shares fell enough in value (margin calls).39

This had major implications as the global liquidity crisis hit in the middle of 2007 and share
prices of banks around the world started to decline. Foreign banks started to send out margin
calls to Icelandic holding companies and investors, who turned to the Icelandic banks to
refinance their loans.40 Despite the liquidity tightness they were experiencing, the Icelandic
banks took on the challenge, and doubled down on lending to their customers, repatriating the
credit risk that had formerly been diversified out of the country. This concentrated the risk to
which the banks were exposed to and increased overall systemic risk in the economy. There are a
number of plausible reasons why the banks may have done this. For one, the borrowers were
more often than not also large stake holders in the banks, bringing into question the principle of
arms-length lending. In addition, the Icelandic banks had extended so much credit to the same
holding companies, that their default would have substantial effect on the operating results.
Hence these borrowers had become “too big to fail” for the Icelandic banks or there was a kind
of “bank capture”. Finally, the collateral that foreign banks would have seized and sold was in
many cases shares in the banks themselves, so a default to the foreign creditor, would have
triggered selloff of the banks stocks, further reducing their stock value, complicating future
funding. Thus, the Icelandic banks were left with two bad choices: doubling down on an over-
leveraged customer or risk the effect of their failure. They chose the latter, increasing the risk for
the bank and the economy as a whole. This behavior is reminiscent of Rajan (1994) model of
credit policy under incomplete information that explains why banks may extend loans with
negative net present value. Instead of maximizing long term performance the bank manager is
more concerned with information that is directly observable by the market such as share prices.

3.6 Transparency and ownership structure
It is worth stressing, that the information about lending to related parties, relies upon an
extensive work of untangling several holding companies with various cross ownership that was
possible only after bank secrecy laws were lifted. Little of these connections were known before
the crisis. Figure 3.9 shows the complex cross-ownership of the 1,307 Icelandic firms with
balance sheets in excess of 500 million ISK at the end of 2007. Most of these were holding
companies that had little to no equity, and many were established explicitly to circumvent
regulations about related parties. But even what became known, and we have documented above,
is still only a partial picture. Bank secrecy laws were only lifted in Iceland and therefore it was
often impossible to trace some of the financial relationship and firm ownership across borders. It
is important to be able to trace firms’ ownership to prevent too much interdependencies, too
much insider lending and violations of large exposure rules. All of which is crucial for financial
stability and bank supervision.




39
   SIC gives example of 3 deals with lending over 600 m. euros. It was also common that the loans from the foreign
banks had a priority claim over the Icelandic loans in case of default, example loans to the pharmaceutical company
Actavis.
40
   SIC Chapter 8.
Figure 3.9 Interconnectedness of Icelandic firms




Source: SIC appendix by Bjarnadóttir, Margrét V. and Guðmundur Axel Hansen



4. A Fable of Fictional Equity
When a bank fails, those who hold equity in the bank will not get anything paid out until all other
claims have been settled. Consider the stylized example of bank in Figure 4.1. This bank has 10
percent equity to asset ratio, or what is termed capital adequacy ratio, assuming 100 percent risk
weights for all assets, or alternatively 10 percent leverage ratio. Now consider a scenario in
which loan defaults increase to the extent that there is a 20 percent decline in the value of the
loan book. It goes from $100 to $80, rendering the bank insolvent. Depositors and other creditors
would recover 89 percent of their deposits, in this case, even though the value of the loan book
declines 20 percent. The main loss absorbing buffer, equity, is wiped out, so in this example the
bank shareholders lose all their money. Sufficiently high equity is thus key for a bank to remain
resilient. Consider for example if equity had been $20 rather than $10. Then even a 20-percent
drop in the value of assets would leave the depositors and other creditors fully protected and the
bank would have been technically solvent.

For this reason, most countries have minimum equity requirements, i.e. the bank’s equity cannot
go below a certain threshold relative to total (or more generally risk weighted) assets. In Iceland,
the legal requirement in the run up to the crisis was 8 percent risk weighted capital, in line with
BASEL I. The Icelandic banks always met that requirement; even three months before their
failure they were well above it. Figure 4.2 shows the banks’ capital adequacy ratio.
 Figure 4.1. Example of a Balance Sheet                     Figure 4.2 Banks Reported CAD Ratio,
                                                            percent
                                                              18
     Assets              Liabilities                          16
     Loans           100 Deposits                  75         14
                         Other Liability           15         12
                         Equity                    10         10
                                                               8
                                                               6
                                                               4
                                                               2
                                                               0




                                                                   Nov-06




                                                                   Nov-07
                                                                   Aug-07

                                                                   Oct-07
                                                                   Jun-07




                                                                   Jun-08
                                                                   Dec-06
                                                                    Jan-07
                                                                   Feb-07




                                                                   Sep-07


                                                                   Dec-07
                                                                    Jan-08
                                                                   Feb-08
                                                                     Jul-07
                                                                   Apr-07




                                                                   Apr-08
                                                                   May-07




                                                                   May-08
                                                                   Mar-07




                                                                   Mar-08
                                                                        Glitnir     Kaupthing        Landsbanki
                                                               Source. SIC

Imagine now two banks, K and L with identical balance sheets as shown in Figure 4.1. As
before, there is 10 percent un-risk weighted capital ratio. This provides depositors and other
creditors with a cushion in case of bank failure. Now imagine that the two banks are sold at book
value to two investment groups, A and B. Suppose, furthermore, that in order to finance the
purchase the new bank owners borrow from each other’s banks the entire purchasing amount, or
$10. Suppose the only collateral for those loans are the shares in the bank being purchased. Now,
on the asset side, $10 out of the $100 in the “loan book” is a loan to the owners of the other bank.

What is the problem with this arrangement? Consider if the loan book declines $20 in value for
both banks rendering them insolvent. The value of their equity becomes zero and both banks will
then immediately loose another $10 from the loans they have collateralized in bank equity. This
means that additional $20 of the combined banks´ balance sheet gets wiped out immediately. The
aggregate banking system is left with no equity and higher losses for creditors. The recovery for
depositors and other creditors will be 78 percent instead of 89 percent with this kind of cross
lending. Indeed, this is equivalent to the losses if both banks had no equity at all.41 Accordingly,
cross-borrowed bank equity provides no cushion to the depositors and other creditors in a case of
asset value decline and system wide bank failure.

The same principle applies, but with even more force, if a bank lends money to a person to buy
its own shares if the only collateral is the share itself. In that case the equity is not only weak in
case of a system wide failure. It also provides no protection in the case of a failure of that
individual bank. As the bank fails, the asset on the loan book corresponding to loan for share
purchases immediately gets wiped out.

These simple examples are relevant in the Icelandic case. After the banks failure, and the loan
books were opened up, it turned out, that from their privatization onward, their shares were
heavily funded via loans from themselves and each other, as we have previously discussed. This

41
  Assets would be $90 and deposits and other liabilities $90 and equity 0, with $20 in initial losses recovery for
depositors and other liability would be $70/$90=78 percent
meant, that in the aggregate, the banking system had very little equity from the very beginning.
In addition, the three large banks did extensive lending to purchase their own shares in the run up
to the crisis. By middle of 2008 they were funding on average 25 percent of their own shares and
if we include cross funding they were funding 33 percent of the shares in the three large banks.42
This amounted to about 4 billion euros. These loans became worthless when the banks failed,
giving the equivalent outcome for depositors and other creditors, as if that equity had never been
there as a buffer against losses. The capital adequacy ratio for the banks was hence overestimated
in the middle of 2008. Loss absorbing capital buffer was only about 8 percent rather than the 11
percent reported.43

 Figure 4.3. Funding of Own Shares and                                          Figure 4.4. Kaupthing trades with own shares
             Cross Funding of Shares                                                        on the exchanges % of trades
      b.kr.
                                                                                      %
     450                                                                   40    90                                                          1300
     400                                                                   35
                                                                      %          70                                                          1100
     350
                                                                           30
                                                                                 50                                                          900
     300
                                                                           25
     250                                                                         30                                                          700
                                                                           20
     200                                                                         10                                                          500
                                                                           15
     150
                                                                           10
                                                                                -10                                                          300
     100

      50                                                                   5    -30                                                          100

      0                                                                    0    -50                                                          -100
           Dec-06   Mar-07   Jun-07   Sep-07   Dec-07   Mar-08    Jun-08              2004     2005       2006       2007       2008
                        Glitnir                   Kauthing                                            KB sells - initiated by KB
                        Landsbanki                Cross funding                                       KB sells - initiated by counterparty
                        % of equity                                                                   KB buys - initiated by KB
                                                                                                      KB buys - initiated by counterparty
      Source. SIC                                                                                     KB Share price (r.h.axis)
                                                                                 Source. SIC


One of the motivation for funding own shares was market manipulation. Once the liquidity crisis
started in the summer of 2007 share prices of the banks became under severe pressure (Figure
4.4). The banks all reacted in the same manner, they purchased about 50 percent of all trades
with their share that came through the exchanges. As can be seen in Figure 4.4 this reached up to
70 percent of all trades with the shares of Kaupthing in the last months before the failure of the
bank (see Figure 4.4). The same story holds for the other two banks. In total, the banks
purchased their own shares on the stock market for over 3.5 billion euros in the last 20 months
before their failure, while they only sold less than half a billion on the market. The banks could
not maintain those shares on their own balance sheet so they sold them directly outside the
market to holding companies, often owned by related parties44 or large customers. These sales
were frequently coupled with a loan amounting to the full purchase price of the shares. The only


42
   Note. Subordinate debt accounted for about half of the banks capital so this is about a sixth of the total capital of
the banks.
43
   SIC, chapter 9 pg. 22.
44
   Owners of the banks.
collateral for the loan were the shares themselves.45 In a subsample of the largest loans, 32 firms
borrowed 3.5 billion euro over the same 20-month period to fund share purchases.46 It was clear
as the crisis intensified that these loans were not handled like loans for unrelated shares. The
banks waived margin calls repeatedly.47 The investigative committee’s report goes step by step
over a number of these deals, which were obviously made in an attempt to manipulate the market
price of the banks. Additionally, this increased systemic risk as the equity of the banks became
false in the process, losing its loss absorbing capacity. Bank managers of two of the three banks
have been found guilty by the Icelandic Supreme Court for market manipulation and the third
case is being prosecuted now.48

This practice of lending for own shares was not just limited to Icelandic banks. In Ireland, for
instance, a high-profile case about lending to the so-called golden circle or Maple 10. Anglo Irish
lent 450 million euro to ten investors for them to reinvest in the bank’s shares to bolster the share
price.49 This amplified the Irish governments loss from the banking crisis. Similarly, the Britain’s
Serious Fraud office charged four senior executives at Barclays for extending loans to investors
to buy its own shares so as to prop up stock prices.50 The investor, which was not accused of
wrong doing in this case, was also involved in a similar market manipulation trade with
Kaupthing Bank.

Doubling down on over-leveraged customers and manipulating share prices—as well as
international credit default swap prices51—are signs that Iceland’s banks were “betting on life”
or “gambling for resurrection” a common theme in the finance literature. When a bank could
become insolvent, bankers may shift their risk-taking to projects with low or negative expected
returns if there is small probability that the returns will be high. If the gamble fails, shareholders
lose; if it works, the bank may survive (see e.g. Boyd and Hakenes 2014). The banks in Iceland
increased their risk-taking in many ways as we have explained, at great cost. In retrospect, this
behavior became increasingly earnest—and obvious—after the liquidity crisis hit in the middle
of 2007.

5. The Failure of the Icelandic banks
So far, we have not discussed much the fact that the Iceland has its own currency, the krona
(ISK). The reason for this omission is not because we think it is unimportant. Rather, we think
that the euro denominated view gives a more precise understanding of the balance sheets of the
banks in the lead up to the crisis, as it involves the expansion of their asset and liabilities, a large
portion of which was denominated in euros.

The krona, however, is critical in understanding the actual failure of the banks. The banks were
increasingly operating in foreign currencies, with no credible lender of last resort in those

45
   SIC chapter 12.
46
   These loans were not only for shares sold by the banks, some of this is also loans to refund foreign loans
discussed in last section.
47
   SIC chapter 12 pg. 17.
48
   Supreme court case nr. 842/2014 (4. February 2016) and nr. 498/2015 (6. October 2016).
49
   Reuters (February 2009) ‘Anglo Irish lent "golden circle" 451 million euros” http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-
ireland-banks-idUKTRE51J3SB20090220
50
   https://www.sfo.gov.uk/2017/06/20/sfo-charges-in-barclays-qatar-capital-raising-case/
51
   The banks did this through Deutsche bank.
currencies. The Central Bank of Iceland foreign currency reserves were a tiny portion of the
short term foreign liabilities of the Icelandic banking system. Foreign currency deposits alone
were as high as eight times the central banks’ reserves.52 The banks were thus susceptible to a
classic bank run as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). Interestingly, the banks in fact failed with
their coffers full of kronas, which as we have documented, they could essentially print at will via
the “love letter” trade documented in Section 3. But the banks lacked foreign currency to service
foreign depositors and claimholders once they came asking for their money back. Therefore, in
documenting the collapse of the Icelandic banks, we begin by giving a snapshot of the aggregate
financial flows in the years prior to October 2008, explaining how the external debt position
played a role in the financial crisis. We will return to this issue in Section 9.

Between 2002 and 2008, investment in Iceland increased by more than 6 percent of GDP, private
consumption increased and savings contracted by 13.5 percent of GDP, resulting in a current
account deficit peaking at almost 25 percent of GDP in 2006 as shown in Figure 5.1. This deficit
was financed by international financial markets, mostly through the domestic banking system as
we have documented in Section 2. Direct borrowing in bond markets, collateralized borrowing
and deposits, as mentioned earlier, funded loans in foreign currency to Icelandic households and
firms which sometimes had neither assets nor income in foreign currencies. The portion of loans
to household that were denominated in foreign currency rose from virtually zero in 2004 to close
to 18 percent around the crash (see Figure 5.2). On the firm side, it rose from an already high 55
percent in 2004 to 60 percent at the time of the crash.

Another source of capital inflow was carry trade, which was attracted by a wide interest rate
differential and possible currency appreciation. By mid-year 2007 the stock of outstanding “glacier
bonds”, bonds issued abroad in Icelandic krona and hedged with domestic bonds or derivatives,
amounted to about a third of Iceland’s GDP. Iceland looked like a classic example of a “capital
flow bonanza” as in Reinhart and Reinhart (2008). The likelihood of capital flight was far from
trivial.




52
     SIC, chapter 7.
 Figure 5.1. Current account balance                      Figure 5.2. Loans in foreign currency

                15                                        70                                                                                                                 18
                10                                        60                                                                                                                 16
     % of GDP




                5                                                                                                                                                            14
                0                                         50
                                                                                                                                                                             12
                -5                                        40                                                                                                                 10
          -10
                                                          30                                                                                                                 8
          -15
                                                                                                                                                                             6
          -20                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                             4
          -25
                                                          10                                                                                                                 2
          -30
                     1997
                     1998
                     1999
                     2000
                     2001
                     2002
                     2003
                     2004
                     2005
                     2006
                     2007
                     2008
                     2009
                     2010
                     2011
                     2012
                     2013
                     2014
                     2015
                     2016
                                                           0                                                                                                                 0




                                                               03/2004
                                                                         08/2004
                                                                                   01/2005
                                                                                             06/2005
                                                                                                       11/2005
                                                                                                                 04/2006
                                                                                                                           09/2006
                                                                                                                                     02/2007
                                                                                                                                               07/2007
                                                                                                                                                         12/2007
                                                                                                                                                                   05/2008
                     Balance on income
                     Balance on services
                     Balance on goods
                     Current account balance                                   Firms (left)                                     Households (right)
         Source: Central Bank of Iceland, FS 2017/1.       Source: Central Bank of Iceland.




The Icelandic financial crisis look a lot like the Asian financial crises of the 1990s in this respect.
There was an economic upswing, inducing an increase in interest rates to combat inflation. Interest
rate differentials became quite high, capital inflow rose fast, and Icelandic banks borrowed heavily
abroad to funnel funds to firms and households. The capital inflow bonanza increased the
likelihood of a financial crisis which would then threatened the solvency of over leveraged local
governments, firms and households.

As the liquidity crisis started in 2007, it became harder for the banks and other Icelandic firms to
secure foreign funding and the Icelandic krona started to give way. Around the middle of
September 2008, after many months of trying to find foreign funding, it became clear that Glitnir
would not be able to pay off a large loan maturing in October. The head of the board of Glitnir
requested assistance from the Central Bank of Iceland on September 25. On September 29, it was
publicly announced that the Government was taking over 75% of the equity in Glitnir.53 This
rattled international financial markets, already plenty rattled after the failure of Lehman Brothers.
Markets did not see this move by the Icelandic government as credible, given the size of the
banking system and the currency in which it operated. A full-fledged capital flight from Iceland
ensued. Share and bond markets were in free fall as both domestic and foreign investors ran for
the door. The banks’ share prices declined, margin calls were coming in for collateralized
borrowing, liquidity lines were not liquid at all and a run on foreign deposit account was growing
increasingly intense. The banks were fast becoming illiquid in foreign currencies.54




53
   BBC news 29. September 2008. „Iceland nationalises Glitnir bank“
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/7641753.stm
54
   SIC chapter 4 and 20.
On October 6, 2008, the Icelandic Parliament, Althingi, passed the so-called Emergency Act.55
The Emergency Act had two major features. First, it changed the order of the priority of claim
holders by giving depositors first priority. Before the law, depositors had the same priority as
other unsecure claims i.e. bond holders. Second, the Act granted the Financial Supervisory
Authority (FSA) broad-based and unprecedented authorization to intervene in various ways in
the operations of financial undertakings. The FSA took over all three banks in that same week.56

The FSA split each bank in two as illustrated in Figure 5.3. It created a domestic bank that took
over all deposits in branches in Iceland, which were guaranteed in full. Most of the Icelandic
assets were transferred to the new banks, at a hefty discount, as we will discuss in Section 6. The
government refinanced the new banks with equity injections and subordinated loans, amounting
to about 12 percent of GDP. The government then took partial ownership in the new banks
according to the amount of refinancing that it had provided. The rest of the assets and liabilities
were left in three holding companies, usually called “the old banks,” directed by resolution
committees tasked with protecting creditors interest and winding up boards were appointed to
file claims. As a consequence, the operation of the banks in Iceland was never interrupted.

Figure 5.3. The spilt of the balance sheets into new and old banks




Source: FSA annual report 2009.

An immediate issue of contention in these very first days was the demand by the British and Dutch
governments that the Icelandic government guarantee the EU-mandated deposit insurance for all
depositors both in domestic and foreign branches, not just domestic.57 That would be
discrimination. They also argued that the government was responsible for guaranteeing at least the
minimum deposit insurance amount, anything else would be a breach of obligation. The position

55
   There had been little preparation for the failure of the banks. Policymakers had prepared a few draft paragraphs
for emergency legislation but little else. The first written document outlining the idea of the split is from September
30, and in it the motivation is said to be “to insure bank service for the general public and firms in Iceland and
additionally limit the governments risk form the extensive foreign operations of the banks.” See SIC chapter 20.
56
   Landsbanki and Glitnir on October 7th and Kaupthing on October 9th.
57
   A foreigner with a deposit in a domestic branch was bailed out and an Icelander with a deposit in a foreign branch
was not.
of the Icelandic government was that this was the role of the Icelandic Depositors and Investors
Guarantee Fund, which was clearly insolvent with the systematic failure of the Icelandic banking
system. The Icelandic government also cited the Emergency Law stipulation that depositors were
prioritized in front of other creditors, which increased the likelihood of a full recovery of the
deposits. The dispute was settled in European courts58 a few years later, where the court dismissed
the case of discrimination between domestic and foreign depositors on technical grounds while the
case concerning breach of obligation was dismissed on the grounds that deposit guarantees are not
set up to cope with systemic banking failure of the scope that occurred in Iceland.59

Bank failures are typically considered a very costly affair, and the government has strong incentive
to ex-post bail out depositors and sometimes also other creditors (see e.g. Chari and Kehoe 2016).
The Icelandic government had a strong ex-post incentive to bail out deposits in the domestic
portion of the banks, and it did. But the Icelandic government had little incentive to risk taxpayers’
money to bail out depositors in foreign branches.60 There were high political costs domestically
from doing so: much of the political turmoil in Iceland following the crisis came from the strong
opposition of Icelandic voters to any law that was seen as bailing out foreign depositors or creditors
at tax-payers expense. Aside from the government’s incentive, it is furthermore unlikely that any
attempt to bail out the foreign branches would have been credible.

Following the failure of the banks the krona continued to depreciate. This posed two major
problems. First devaluation fed straight through to foreign currency loans, threatening Icelandic
households and firms with no income or assets in foreign currency. Secondly, the currency
depreciation fed into inflation, which then fed into CPI indexed loans which made up almost all
mortgages in Iceland at the time. Increased default of households and firms threatened to
substantially amplify the ongoing financial crises. The Central Bank had few options to support
the currency, as its efforts to strengthen foreign currency reserves had already failed earlier that
spring and higher interest rates seem to do little to stop the outflow.

Capital control were adopted on November 28, 2008.61 At that point the krona had declined about
35 percent in value against the euro in three months and over 50 percent in twelve months. The
capital controls were put in place to stem the ongoing capital flight and continuous drop in the
value of the currency. This provided shelter to different sectors of the economy. The newly
established banking sector could retain their important deposit funding without foreign
competition. The government got time to regain control over public sector finances and maintained
access to domestic funds that on good terms as investors were restricted from exiting the economy.
Lastly the controls created a breathing room for household and firms that had debt in foreign

58
   The EFTA Court
59
   Judgment of the EFTA Court 28 January 2013 on the case E-16/11 “Directive 94/19/EC on deposit-guarantee
schemes – Obligation of result – Emanation of the State – Discrimination”
http://www.eftacourt.int/fileadmin/user_upload/Files/News/2013/16_11_Judgment.pdf
60
   A foreigner with a deposit in a domestic branch was bailed out and an Icelander with a deposit in a foreign branch
was not.
61
   The capital controls did allow for purchase of foreign exchange for the imports of goods and service to Iceland.
Additionally, as indicated above, any scheduled repayments of foreign loans were permitted. Foreign currency income
from exports was subjected to repatriations requirements. The controls put in place broad-based restrictions on
investments in any type of foreign asset, such as financial instruments and real estate and prevented foreign investors
who held ISK assets from recovering their investments (Central Bank of Iceland, FS 2012/1).
currency, but all their revenues in krona’s. The continuing drop in the currency threatened to make
them insolvent.

 Figure 5.4. EUR/ISK exchange rate

     0.015
                                                  Capital controls
                                                  November 28
     0.013


     0.011


     0.009


     0.007


     0.005
             2004
                    2005
                           2006
                                  2007
                                         2008
                                                2009
                                                       2010
                                                              2011
                                                                     2012
                                                                            2013
                                                                                   2014
                                                                                          2015
                                                                                                 2016
                                                                                                        2017

      Source: Central Bank of Iceland.

The capital controls were implemented in conjunction with an IMF economic program which
was initiated in November as well. The program included vital financing of USD 4.4 billion,
with 2.1 billion coming from the IMF and the rest from bilateral loans from the Nordic countries
and Poland.62 This allowed the Central Bank of Iceland to bolster its foreign currency reserves
which was an important first step in the recovery that was sure to take a long time. We discuss
the implementation and eventual lift-off of the capital controls in Section 9.

6. Were the Icelandic banks solvent?
It is sometimes said that the model of Diamond and Dybvig (1983) is the bankers’ favorite
model, because it gives them a reasonable claim arguing that the governments should provide
emergency liquidity during crisis. The Diamond-Dybvig model formalizes the notion that even if
a bank is “solvent” - that is, the value of the bank’s assets exceeds the value of its liabilities - it
can still fail should all depositors demand their money at the same time. This is because banks
have long term assets but short-term liabilities. Their long-term assets, usually in the form of
loan contracts, however, often cannot be sold for their booked value in a timely fashion, resulting
in fire-sale prices. A bank run can thus be self-fulfilling, as a fully solvent bank becomes
insolvent just because its depositors and other creditors ask for their money at the same time,
forcing the bank to sell its assets prematurely at a discount. The fact that assets of a failing bank
are typically sold at a discount makes it exceedingly hard to assess ex post whether a bank was
truly insolvent or a victim of a self-fulfilling run. With this caveat in mind, it is still interesting to
look at asset recovery rates of the Icelandic banks and gauge their solvency at the time of their
failure.



62
     Central Bank of Iceland, EOI 2010.
6.1. Losses in the eye of the storm
Figure 6.1 gives an outline of how the assets of the bank were split up following the crisis.63
Collateralized asset were seized immediately by financial institutions and other investors who
owned secured claims on the banks (“pledged assets” in Figure 6.1). These assets include loans
and securities that had been bundled into asset backed securities and used as collateral at the
ECB and CBI. There is little available information on how large a fraction of the bank’s assets
was pledged and seized in this way.64

In the initial days of the crisis foreign subsidiaries of the Icelandic banks, which were under
foreign supervision, were appropriated by the respective supervisory authorities in various
European countries (the second branch in Figure 6.1). Some of these subsidiaries were later
merged with other financial institutions, while others were liquidated. Towards the end of 2007
these subsidiaries accounted for about 40% of the banks’ total assets, or more than 45 billion
euros.65 In the subsidiaries losses were fully absorbed by equity and subordinated debt, which
was fully held by the parent bank in Iceland. General senior unsecured debt and deposits were
however, in most cases, fully honored. Some subsidiaries issued their own debt instruments, and
in those rare cases we can get some estimation of recovery of respective general claim holders,
which supports this.66 Once pledged assets and subsidiaries had been purged from the three
banks’ balance sheets, each had its domestic operations, assets and liabilities spun off into three
separate financial institution while the rest was left in a holding company, creating the “new
banks” (forth branch in Figure 6.1) and “old banks” (third branch in Figure 6.1), respectively. As
explained in section 5, the “new banks” took over domestic deposit, which were fully guaranteed
by the government, as well as nearly all domestic loans to firms and individuals. The old banks
took over what was left of the bank’s assets and liabilities with the objective of maximizing the
values of the assets.




63
   The figure is put together using three different points in time. Since the value of the assets and currencies changed
rapidly during this period there are some discrepencies.
64
   One hint towards the magnitudes involved was that SIC estimated collateralized lending on September 30th
amounting to about 5.2 b.euros, when we exclude loans between the Icelandic banks. In some cases the pledged
assets were worth somewhat more than the underlying loan principal due to haircuts, in which case the reminder was
paid back to the old banks.
 SIC chapter 7 pg. 43. Pledged assets worth was falling fast in September.
65
   Central Bank of Iceland, FS 2008.
66
   Notable exception were the entities in Luxemburg. Those subsidiaries were tied more closely to the parent
companies, and most of their losses in the general liquidation process wound up in the parent companies.
Figure 6.1. Assets of the Icelandic banks.




Sources: Annual reports of Glitnir, Kaupthing, Landsbanki, Islandsbanki, Arion banki and Landsbankinn, financial information
of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki and Central Bank of Iceland FS 2008.


The assets of the new banks were estimated at 11.8 billion euros at the end of 2008 as seen in
Figure 6.1. These assets had a face value of 25.8 billion euros, meaning they had been transferred
to the new banks at a 60% discount.67 Similarly, the first complete financial statement of the old
banks, after their failure, available in 2010, evaluates their assets at 19.1 billion euros. The face
value of those assets was 40 billion euros before the failure of the banks, indicating an estimated
loan loss of 20.9 billion euros, or over 50% of the pre-crisis values of the assets. To put these
initial asset, write downs in context, they amounted to 34.9 billion euros or around 5 times the
reported equity of the banks prior to the failure. To the extent these estimated losses were
accurate – something we will revisit shortly – the banks were clearly insolvent.

Table 6.1 reports the estimated loan losses of the old banks at the end of 2010, separated into
loans to holding companies, other companies and financial institutions. We have already
discussed the nature of loans to holding companies in Section 3. As the table reveals, loans to
holding companies were estimated at only 6% of face value. As we have already noted, part of
the loans to holding companies were extended to purchase shares in the banks themselves with
the only collateral being the shares themselves, in which case the loan was fully lost.




67
   It is worth pointing out that it would likely be more difficult to transfer assets, loans, with such a large discount in
a partial financial system failure due to the implied information about asset values in other, still solvent, financial
institutions. Such discount would likely cause a domino effect of losses on similar or perceived similar institutions.
 Table 6.1. Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki loans performance 31.12.2010
 B. EUR                          Carrying value        Fair value     %        % of total
 Holding companies                    8,6                 0,5         6           9
 Other companies                      8,2                 4,1         50          78
 Financial institutions               3,3                 0,6         20          12
 Total                               20,1                 5,2         26         100
 Sources: Financial information of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki.


6.2. Losses through the cycle at parent companies
The write-offs realized in 2008 and 2010 and reported in Figure 6.1 appear to have been a
reasonable approximation for the actual losses as estimated at the end of 2015 in the old and new
bank’s financial statements. Table 6.2 summarizes the new and old banks’ financial statements
for 2015, in which the assets turned out to have appreciated slightly in value. Table 6.2 is the
basis of our recovery estimate, which is 58.2 percent of accepted claims in the old banks
assuming that both deposits and bonds had the same priority.68,69

 Table 6.2. Estimated recovery in the parent companies as of 31.12.2015
 before payments of the stability contribution and taxes
 B. EUR
                                                                                   Assets
 Assets transferred to new banks against domestic deposits                          9.8
 Priority claims paid in the winding-up proceedings                                 9.4
 Assets in the estates                                                              14.6
 Total                                                                              32.1

                                                                                 Liabilities
 Domestic deposits                                                                  9.8
 Paid priority claims                                                               8.7
 Accepted general claims                                                            39.5
 Total                                                                              58.1

 Estimated recovery                                                                58.2%
 Sources: Financial information of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki, annual reports of
 Íslandsbanki, Arion banki and Landsbankinn and authors calculations.



68
   This excludes special bank taxes imposed on the old banks in liquidation and the stability contribution (discussed
further in Section 9). It is worth noting that this rate only accounts for accepted claims, which were only about half
of the total claims submitted to the winding up boards. Some claims were netted out against assets during the
winding up proceedings, some were withdrawn while others were rejected. The amount paid to accepted priority
claim holders is higher than the claim value in table 6.2., due to exchange rate movements, because claim values
are based on the exchange rate 22.04.2009, per Icelandic law, while payments are based on spot exchange rate at
the time they are made.
69 This result is in line with Jonsson and Sigurgeirsson (2017) taken into account the special bank taxes, the
stability contribution and exchange rate difference between 22.04.2009 and the end of year 2015 spot rate.
Table 6.3 gives an overview of the latest estimate of ex-post recovery rates for types of claims
according to their priority. Depositors recovered 100 percent of their claims, both at home and
abroad. The recovery rate of general liabilities in foreign subsidiaries were also very close to 100
percent. Recovery of equity and subordinated loans was zero. General creditors of the parent
companies – most of whom had bought Icelandic bank bonds between 2005 and 2007 – also lost
considerable portion of their claims. The eventual write-off for general creditors totaled 28.1
billion euros, or approximately twice Iceland’s 2007 GDP.70 The total equity in the banks prior
to the crisis was 7 billion euros, i.e. a fourth of the accrued losses. While there may have been
considerable losses due to fire sale prices on assets, as well as a feedback loop between the
failure of the banks and adverse consequences for Icelandic firms, this nonetheless is suggestive
of that the Icelandic banks were not solvent at the time of their failure. As such, the Icelandic
banking crisis was not an example of self-fulfilling run, which could have been prevented with a
better lender of last resort or alternative funding in foreign currency. Rather, the evidence
indicates they were insolvent.

 Table 6.3. Recovery Rate for Liabilities, after Stability Contribution and Taxes
 B.EUR                                                                  Before failure     Recovery rate
 Deposits from customers                                                     18.8              100%
 Deposits from customers in foreign subsidaries                              14.5              100%
 Asset backed securities                                                      >0             29-100%
 Borrowings and wholesale deposits                                          >52.8              29%
 Borrowings and wholesale deposits in foreign subsidaries                 20<x<10          Close to 100%
 Other liabilities                                                           8.0               29%
 Subordinated loans                                                          5.0                0%
 Equity                                                                      6.7                0%
 Total                                                                      115.2
 Sources: Financial information of Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki and authors calculations.

Where the recovery rates poor in international context? As the table reveals the recovery rate of
senior unsecured claims was about 29 percent for general creditors of the Icelandic banks (e.g.
typical bank bond holder) which appears low. While we are not able to do an extensive analysis
of recovery across countries and time, a paper by Acharya, Bharath and Srinivasan, (2007) offers
some hints. They compute recovery rates for senior unsecured claims between 1982 and 1999,
based on bonds, loans and other debt instrument. The recovery rates are estimated as 56% for all
industries and 59% for financial institutions. Put in this context, the recovery rate of senior
unsecured creditors was therefore poor in the case of the Icelandic banks. One element that
makes this comparison tricky, however, is that all deposits were granted super-priority in
Iceland. In the case of the US, however, only insured deposits have full priority while those
deposits above the insurance limit become general senior unsecured claims. The number are thus
not fully comparable, as there were large uninsured deposits in the Icelandic banking system
which gained super-priority at the expense of other creditors.71
70
   This figure includes approved claims to the Iclandic banks, after-tax payments and the stability contribution and
excludes accrued interest for over six years, from the failure until the payments were/will be made.
71
   One can thus think of 29 percent as a lower bound on the recovery rate in the case of the Icleandic bank when
compared to the US but 57 as an upper bound.
7. The output cost of the Icelandic banking crisis
A major cost associated with a banking crisis is aggregate production forgone. Given the
enormous size of the Icelandic financial crisis, the output effects appear relatively modest in
international context and the recovery relatively brisk, at least when taking into account the size
of the failed bank relative to Iceland’s GDP. Here we update and extend two well-known metrics
of output losses from banking crisis, that of Laeven and Valencia (2012) who study 147 crises
post 1970, and Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) that study 100 crises that span over one and a half
century. The passage of time allows us to update the estimation with longer date series and
longer time horizons than either study. The updated assessments suggest that Iceland’s output
losses, while significant, were not as large as previous thought. We discuss some theoretical
possibilities that may help explain the relatively rapid recovery.

7.1. Output losses according to the output metric proposed by Laeven and Valencia (2012) with
simple extensions
Figure 7.1 shows real GDP, normalized at 100 at the year of a banking crisis in 22 advanced
industrial economies that are listed up in Table 7.1, using a definition of a banking crisis
proposed by Laeven and Valencia (2012). Icelandic GDP is depicted with a dark solid line. Other
countries that are categorizes as having experienced a banking crisis in 2008 are shown in solid
lines, while the dashes line depict four other banking crises (Finland in 1991, Norway in 1991,
Japan in 1997 and Korea in 1997). Output fell in Iceland by about 10 percent in the first 2 years
of the crisis, only Greece contracted more during the same period in this sample. If we look
towards the end of the period (IMF estimate of 2017 GDP), however, Iceland has recovered to
beyond pre-crisis levels, and it has the third highest level of output of the countries hit by the
crisis, relative to 2007.

 Figure 7.1. GDP index, index=100 at crisis date.




 Source: IMF and authors calculations

Laeven and Valencia (2012) estimated the output loss, in the three years after the start of a crisis,
as fraction of annual production at the start of the crisis. According to their metric, Iceland faced
a sizable output loss of 40 percent of GDP, comparable to the cost of Japanese crisis in 1997 and
ranks as the 34 costliest crises of the 147 crises that they consider. It is considerable smaller,
however, than many well-known banking crises such as Argentina in 2001 and Thailand in 1997,
where output loss is estimated about 70 and 100 percent of GDP respectively.

Figure 7.2. Output loss over a period of 3, 6 and 9 years




Source: Authors calculations

Figure 7.2 shows the evolution of Icelandic GDP from 2003 to IMF latest estimate of 2017 GDP.
The estimated difference between “potential output” and actual output is represented by the first
gray area in the figure. This is scaled to be a fraction of GDP pre-crisis, i.e. 2008. We now have
access to more data so we also compute the same statistic for six and nine years after the crisis
start, adding in each case the shaded region to the right in the figure. The results are shown in
Table 7.1 for a select number of industrial economies, assuming their potential output is growing
at the same rate. Considering a longer horizon reduces the cost of the crisis in Iceland relive to
other countries on account of the strength of the recovery. While the output cost is the fourth
highest according to the 3-year horizon, it goes down to 8th place for the 6 and 9 years horizon.72




72
   Laeven and Valencia (2012) assume that potential output grows at a different pace in different countries. We
instead assume that output potential grows by the same amount across all countries (by a constant 1.62 percent per
year). While this makes little difference in the relative ranking of countries at the 3 year horizon, it matters more for
6 and 9 year horizon. While our benchmark has its own problem, we think it gives a more accurate picture of the
relative output losses across countries for a 6 and 9 year horizon in advanced industrialized economies. The reason is
that Laeven and Valencia (2012) estimate potential by computing a trend using a HP filter for each and every county
over 20 years and extrapolate it. The problem is that economic growth is often unsustainable in the run-up to a
banking crisis. This is particularly obvious in the case of Iceland, where growth was amplified by large capital
inflows, lending growth and an asset price bubble, giving an estimated potential growth of 5.13 percent per year
using Laeven and Valencia´s suggested methodology, shown by the steep line in figure 7.2. This assumption would
clearly exaggerate the estimated output loss for Iceland-- especially at a six- and nine-year horizon, even if it matters
less at a 3 year horizon those authors focused on.
 TABLE 7.1. OUTPUT LOSS OVER A PERIOD OF YEARS IN % OF GDP
          USING THE COMMON POTENTIAL OUTPUT GROWTH FOR ALL COUNTRIES
 COUNTRY                 Year        3        6        9     COUNTRY                   Year        3        6        9
                                  years    years    years                                       years    years    years
 AUSTRIA                 2008      0.13     0.31     0.57    ICELAND                   2008      0.29     0.67     0.86
 BELGIUM                 2008      0.11     0.28     0.51    ITALY                     2008     0.26      0.75     1.40
 SWITZERLAND             2008      0.06     0.12     0.21    JAPAN                     1997     0.14      0.41     0.75
 GERMANY                 2008      0.16     0.32     0.51    KOREA                     1997     -0.09    -0.66    -1.57
 DENMARK                 2008      0.22     0.54     0.89    LUXEMBOURG                2008     0.19      0.34     0.27
 SPAIN                   2008      0.18     0.64     1.14    NETHERLANDS               2008     0.14      0.41     0.72
 FINLAND                 1991      0.48     1.02     1.44    NORWAY                    1991     -0.01    -0.15    -0.37
 FRANCE                  2008      0.15     0.37     0.67    PORTUGAL                  2008     0.17      0.63     1.20
 UK                      2007      0.12     0.35     0.54    SLOVENIA                  2008     0.20      0.64     1.09
 GREECE                  2008      0.35     1.34     2.55    SWEDEN                    2008     0.17      0.34     0.41
 IRELAND                 2008      0.33     0.79     0.42    US                        2007     0.11      0.27     0.39
 AVERAGE                           0.18     0.44     0.66
 SOURCE: IMF AND AUTHORS CALCULATIONS.


As an alternative check on the output cost and the strength of the recovery we can look at the
relative ranking of Icelandic GDP in this period. Iceland was the fourth richest country in the
world in dollar GDP per capital terms in 2007 and drops to 21 place in 2010 according to IMF.73
It climbs back to the fourth seat in 2017, the same year as Iceland is assumed to be back at
potential in figure 7.2.74 We will not comment in detail on the other countries in the table, yet it
is worth cautioning the reader that there is a recent debate on the reliability of the GDP data for
Ireland, due to its role as a hub for global tax management.75

7.2 Output loss metric proposed by Reinhart and Rogoff (2014)
Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) compare the output cost of 100 major banking crises that span 150
years. One advantage of their methodology is that it does not make any assumptions about
underlying trend of potential GDP, which we have seen can be important. They construct a
severity index for each financial crisis, the sum of the absolute value of the fall in per-capita
GDP and how long (in years) it takes to get back to the pre-crisis peak.76

We report in Table 7.4 our re-estimation of the 11 banking crisis in Reinhart’s and Rogoff’s
(2014) dataset, for which new data exists relative to their paper, and report the difference. Of the

73
   http://www.imf.org/external/datamapper/NGDPDPC@WEO/OEMDC/ADVEC/WEOWORLD
74
   If we instead used the country specific HP trend, the counterfactual growth shown by the line in figure 7.3 would
have made Icelandic GDP the riches country in the world today by a wide margin.
75
   This debate gathered momentum in 2016 when it was reported that that the Irish economy grew by 26 percent in
2015. Following this the Central Statistics Office of Ireland has started presenting “modified gross national income”
or GNI*, suggesting that GNI* was only 70 percent of GDP, and estimate mostly reached by excluding profits from
US companies with big operations in Ireland such as Google and Microsoft. It is beyond our scope to go in the
details of this debate, but it is worth noting that we are not aware of any similar possible sources of mismeasurement
for Icelandic GDP. For details and references see FT (2017).
76
   Observe that Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) use real GDP per capital, while Laeven and Velencia use real GDP, for
further discussion see Reinhart and Rogoff (2014).
cases we re-evaluate, the new estimate changes most significantly for Iceland and Ireland.
Iceland severity index drops from 23.2 to 18, resulting in a 14-place drop in the overall ranking.
This is below the mean of the Reinhart and Rogoff´s crisis index, but slightly above the
median.77 The main reason for the change in the assessment for Iceland’s GDP in 2017 relative
to the earlier assessment is that the current estimate of GDP in 2017 is 15 percent higher than in
2013, while the IMF estimates used by Reinhart and Rogoff predicted it would be only 6 percent
higher.78 To give perspective on the magnitude of this index, the costliest crisis is Chile in 1926
at 62.6, while the value of the index for the Great Depression in the US is 38.6.

 Table 7.4 Estimation of Banking Crises Cost, Reinhart and Rogoff method.
                                      Peak to      Peak to       Peak to      Severity     New estimated Difference
 Year        Country                  Trough       trough      recovery         index    rank (out of 100) vs. 2014
                                                                                                           est

 2008        Greece                      -26.3           6            15          41.3            9                  8
 2008        Ukraine                     -18.2           7            14          32.2           21                 13
 2008        Italy                       -12.4           7            15          27.4           25                  4
 2008        Spain                       -10.6           6            11          21.6           34                  5
 2007        Ireland                     -11.1           5             8          19.1           41                -14
 2008        Iceland                     -10.0           2             8          18.0           45                -14
 2008        Portugal                     -7.0           5            10          17.0           47                 -4
 2007        United Kingdom               -6.4           2             8          14.4           52                 -5
 2008        Netherlands                  -4.3           1             9          13.3           56                 -6
 2008        France                       -3.8           2             7          10.8           70                -13
 2007        United States                -4.8           2             6          10.8           71                  0
 2008        Germany                      -5.2           1             3           8.2           81                  0

 All 100   Mean                          -11.5         3.2           8.3          19.8
 episodes  Median                         -8.8           2           6.5          15.3
           Standard deviation              9.2         2.5           6.2          14.3
 Source: Authors calculations.

7.3 Snapshot of the Icelandic recovery
Series of influential papers by Reinhart and Rogoff have made it a stylized fact of
macroeconomics that recoveries from banking crisis are slow. Given the size of the Icelandic
banking system' once it failed, a reasonable conjecture is that the recovery should have been long
and painful. While the output loss was substantial, we have now presented several measures
which indicate that the Icelandic banking crisis is quite far from being the costliest banking crisis
in economic history in terms of output loss, despite being the largest when measured by the size
of the banking system relative to GDP.


77
   The aggregate statics, which we report in the table, are not very different from those reported in Reinhart and
Rogoff (2014).
78
   As Reinhart and Rogoff we rely on IMF World Economic outlook estimate of future output. The new estimation
shortens the duration of the crisis by two years. In addition, data revisions make 2008 the pre-crisis peak rather than
2007 which accounts for 1 year. In addition, revised data from the IMF put the peak output decline in Iceland at 10
percent, while the data Reinhart and Rogoff (2014) relied on had it at 12.2.
The output costs we have documented, when compared across countries and time, may even
somewhat overstate the output cost in the case of Iceland since most advanced economies were
also in a recession during Iceland’s recovery. The S-Korea recovery after the 1997 crisis, for
instance, occurred during a time of robust economic growth in the world. Figure 7.3 shows GDP
in Iceland compared to 38 industrialized economies, normalized at 100 in 2007, where we have
extracted a few special cases. We show with a gray area the 1st to 3rd quantile of the
distribution. Laeven and Valencia (2012) dataset identifies 20 out of these 38 countries as having
gone through a banking crisis in this period. As of 2017 the index for Icelandic GDP is above the
US index and above the sample median. The evolution of employed workers, see Figure 7.4,
shows an even stronger Icelandic recovery. Below we offer some possible explanation for the
strength of the recovery, relating it to existing literature on the possible output cost of financial
crisis. We leave a detailed model based analysis to future work.


 Figure 7.3. GDP index at constant prices in                 Figure 7.4. Number of employed, index
 domestic currency, index 2007=100                           2007=100
 Compared to 38 industrialized countries                     Compared to 38 industrialized countries


 140                                                          115
                                                              110
 130
                                                              105
 120                                                          100

 110                                                           95
                                                               90
 100
                                                               85
     90                                                        80

     80                                                        75
                                                                    2004
                                                                    2005
                                                                    2006
                                                                    2007
                                                                    2008
                                                                    2009
                                                                    2010
                                                                    2011
                                                                    2012
                                                                    2013
                                                                    2014
                                                                    2015
                                                                    2016
                                                                    2017
     70

                                                                                                  1st to 3rd quartile
                                      1st to 3rd quartile              Iceland                    Estonia
                    Iceland           Estonia                          Greece                     Ireland
                    Greece            Ireland                          United Kingdom             United States
                    United Kingdom    United States
     Source: IMF.                                              Source: IMF.


One common explanation for the slowness of the recovery of countries from banking crisis, is
the presence of “zombie firms” on banks’ balance sheets, which keep lending to insolvent firms
to avoid necessary write off in their loan books, in which case banks may not satisfy capital
adequacy regulations (Caballero et al 2008).79 This leads to capital misallocation, as the zombie
firms starve new and more promising firms from securing funding. We saw some evidence of
this type of behavior in the lead-up to the financial crisis in Iceland where some borrowers

80
  To the extend other countries did not reevaluate their loan books in a similar manner, the dashed line is more
comparable to what we report in other coutries. It is beyond our scope to, however, make a similar correction for the
comparison countries which is likely to have differed from country to country.
became “too big to fail” (see Section 4). However, the incentives for the banks changed after the
establishment of the new banks. Icelandic firms and household loans were transferred to the new
banks at a 60-percent discount of the claim value on average, and new equity was injected into
the new banks. In contrast to the Japanese banks analyzed in Caballero et al (2008), the new
Icelandic banks had the scope and incentives to restructure corporate and household debt, and
little incentive to keep afloat zombie firms.

 Figure 7.5. Default ratios, corporations and                   Figure 7.6. Firms equity ratio
 households

     45
                                                                  45
     40
                                                                  40
     35
                                                                  35
     30
                                                                  30
     25
                                                                  25
     20

     15                                                           20

     10                                                           15

     5                                                            10
     0                                                             5
          2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
               Iceland--Book value        Iceland-Claim value      0
               Ireland                    Lithuania
                                                                       2002
                                                                       2003
                                                                       2004
                                                                       2005
                                                                       2006
                                                                       2007
                                                                       2008
                                                                       2009
                                                                       2010
                                                                       2011
                                                                       2012
                                                                       2013
                                                                       2014
                                                                       2015
               Spain                      Denmark
               Greece
     Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS17/1.                     Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS17/1.


Figure 7.5 shows that the actual default ratio of corporations and household were significantly
higher in 2009 and 2010 relative to many industrialized economies at that time, it however falls
off fast after that which is suggestive of that the new banks were more aggressive in going
through debt restructuring. Because the reported default represents default of the newly re-
evaluated book value of the loan book in Iceland, the solid black line is an underestimate of loans
in default, while the dashed line which shows the actual default on the pre-crisis book value of
the loans is an over estimate.80 Non-performing loans rose from being less than 1 percent to over
40 percent of the initial claim value of the loans. The new banks supported the firms they
assumed viable, while other firms were wound up at a relatively high frequency in the initial
years. Figure 7.6 shows that reorganization was successful in more than tripling firms equity
ratios from about 12 percent in 2008 to over 40 percent in 2015. As an example, most of the




80
  To the extend other countries did not reevaluate their loan books in a similar manner, the dashed line is more
comparable to what we report in other coutries. It is beyond our scope to, however, make a similar correction for the
comparison countries which is likely to have differed from country to country.
firms currently listed on the domestic stock exchange changed owners after the crisis (76
percent). 81

 Figure 7.7. Households debt                                Figure 7.8. Corporate debt

                                                                        250




                                                             % of GDP
                140
     % of GDP




                                                                        200
                120

                                                                        150
                100

                                                                        100
                 80


                 60                                                      50


                 40                                                      0
                      2003
                      2004
                      2005
                      2006
                      2007
                      2008
                      2009
                      2010
                      2011
                      2012
                      2013
                      2014
                      2015
                      2016




                      Iceland     UK            Denmark
                                                                              Iceland       Denmark       Ireland
                      Ireland     Sweden
                                                                              Greece        Spain         Italy
      Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS17/1.                   Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS17/1.


A second popular explanation, closely connected to the first, is that the crisis itself is triggered by
agents accumulating “too much debt” and the recovery is slow because of forced deleveraging –
following what is often referred to as a “Minsky moment” (see e.g. Eggertsson and Krugman
(2012), Mian, Rao and Sufi (2013) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017)). As those overextended
agents are forced to pay down their debt, there is a slowdown in spending and someone else must
pick up the slack. The shorter the deleveraging process, the stronger will be the recovery.82
Figures 7.7 and 7.8 show household and firm debt as a fraction of GDP, illustrating the sharp
decline in debt following the crisis in comparison with select number of countries. A significant
part of this sharp decline was the aggressive debt restructuring made possible by the initial asset
write off when the new banks were founded. Another important factor were some specific
government policies, including household debt write down and giving individuals access to
pension savings to pay down principals of loans. Moreover, the Supreme Court determined that
the loan contracts linked to foreign currency offered by the banks before the crisis were illegal,
which reduced markedly value of outstanding debt.83

81
   Broadly speaking, it was mostly firms in the export sector that survived restructuring. All banks, insurance
companies and flagship firms such as Icelandair and Eimskip, which is the largest shipping company, changed
owners. Similarly the largest retail chain, Hagar, changed owners, as well as the largest newspaper, Morgunbladid,
to take a few examples.
82
   Benignio, Eggertsson and Romei (2014).
83
   Central Bank of Iceland, FS 2012/1. For households about 60% of the debt deleveraging was due to illiegal
foreing currency linked loans, about 20 percent was due to policy put in place soon after the cirsis and another 30
precent due to the so-called indexed loans principle reduction policy. See report on „Loan principle reduction“ prime
ministry 2013 https://www.stjornarradid.is/media/forsaetisraduneyti-media/media/Skyrslur/hofudstolslaekkun-
A key element Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Guerrieri and Lorenzoni (2017) emphasize
as being important to speed up debt deleveraging, and thus speed up of a recovery from a
financial crisis, is the ability of the central banks to cut interest rate. A key constraint identified
in this literature is the problem of the zero lower bound on interest rate, which became a major
constraint for the ECB, Bank of Japan and the Federal Reserve during the crisis. The Icelandic
Central Bank, however, never faced the ZLB constraint, partially due to historically higher
inflation, but perhaps more importantly because there was a large currency devaluation right
around the crisis, discussed in greater detail in section 9. The Icelandic krona depreciated against
the value of the euro by about 50 percent over the 12-month period before capital controls were
implemented in the fall of 2008. The combination of capital controls, and large devaluation, may
thus have contributed to easier monetary condition than many other countries were able to
provide that were either constrained by the ZLB or part of a larger currency area and thus did not
have the flexibility of devaluing their currency. It also insulated the Icelandic government from
the sovereign debt crisis that shook Europe in 2012. The freedom of Iceland to devalue in the
crisis, to the extent it helped the recovery, lend some credence to the provocative claim by
Krugman (1991), that Iceland was an optimal currency area, an idea we do not try to formally
evaluate.

 Figure 7.9. Current account balance                                                                       Figure 7.10. Export of good and service

    15                                                                                                                60
    10
                                                                                                           % of GDP



                                                                                                                      50
     5
                                                                                                                      40
     0
                                                                                                                      30
    -5
                                                                                                                      20
   -10

   -15                                                                                                                10

   -20                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                            2003
                                                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                                            2005
                                                                                                                            2006
                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                                            2008
                                                                                                                            2009
                                                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                                            2011
                                                                                                                            2012
                                                                                                                            2013
                                                                                                                            2014
                                                                                                                            2015
                                                                                                                            2016
   -25
                                                                                                                           Service - other
         2004
                2005
                       2006
                              2007
                                     2008
                                            2009
                                                   2010
                                                          2011
                                                                 2012
                                                                        2013
                                                                               2014
                                                                                      2015
                                                                                             2016
                                                                                                    2017




                                                                                                                           Service - transport and travel
                                                                    1st to 3rd quartile                                    Service
                       Iceland                                      Estonia                                                Goods - other
                       Greece                                       Ireland                                                Goods - aluminium
                                                                                                                           Goods - fish
                       United Kingdom                               United States
                                                                                                                           Goods
    Sources: IMF, Central Bank of Iceland FS 2017/1.                                                         Source: Statistics Iceland.



One hint towards the importance of devaluation in the recovery is the large reversal of the
current account shown in Figure 7.9.84 The current account surplus has been on average 6

husnaedislana.pdf
Firms debt reduction is more due to write offs, restructuring and loan payback.
84
   The current account balance for Iceland shown on Figure 7.10 is so-called underlying current account, excluding
effect of the failed banks in winding-up proceedings from Q4/2008.
 %
percent of GDP since 2008. The reversal of the trade balance was driven by a sharp turnaround
in terms of trade and a decline in domestic demand for, in particular, foreign investment goods
and foreign consumption goods. The financial account also improved markedly as interest
expenses declined by 14 percent of GDP from 2008 to 2009 due to delinquent failed bank debt.
Adding to the reversal in the trade balance has been a massive explosion in tourism. The tourism
boom was partially triggered by the large initial devaluation, but a well-coordinated effort by the
government and firms starting in 2010 to attract tourists could also have played a role.85
Applying a wider definition of tourism (including airline transport), tourism now make up
around 40 percent of Iceland’s total exports (see Figure 7.10).

There is also evidence for external debt deleveraging. While the presence of the large Icelandic
banks greatly complicated to computation of the net international investment position of Iceland,
especially right before and around their failure, there is reason to believe that the CBI
computation of this statistic gives a reasonable estimate of the underlying net international
investment position, see the gray line in Figure 7.11. Since the failure of the banks, the net
international investment position of the Icelandic economy has changed dramatically and now
stands at positive 1 percent of GDP (see Figure 7.11). The rapid improvement of the external
positions since 2008 is mainly due to three factors. First, external debt of failed firms has been
written down by foreign creditors. Second, the current account surplus made it possible for other
firms and entities to pay down foreign debt quite rapidly. Third, the stability contribution of the
old bank estates alone improved the external position by about 20 percent of GDP. We will
document this key element of the recovery in the next two sections.

 Figure 7.11. Net international investment
 position, % of GDP

            20

                0
     % of GDP




         -20

         -40

         -60

         -80

     -100

     -120

     -140
                       1995
                       1996
                       1997
                       1998
                       1999
                       2000
                       2001
                       2002
                       2003
                       2004
                       2005
                       2006
                       2007
                       2008
                       2009
                       2010
                       2011
                       2012
                       2013
                       2014
                       2015
                    2016 Q3




                           NIIP          Underlying NIIP
       Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS17/1.



85
  For example, in 2010, a collection of firms together with the government and local authorites launched and ad
campaign called “Inspired by Iceland”, see IMF (2017). Google searches for Iceland also peaked in April 2010
following the Eyjafjallajökull eruption.
8. Fiscal Cost
The Icelandic banking crisis is sometimes cited as one of the costliest on record from the
perspective of government finances. This is based on two measures relative to GDP, gross fiscal
outlays and net increase in public debt. Measured in gross fiscal cost, the Iceland’s banking crisis
was the third costliest out of the 147 crises in Laeven and Valencia’s (2012) sample, while it was
the seventh costliest measured in increase in government debt (see Figures 8.1 and 8.2, excluding
red column which will be discussed later).

 Figure 8.1. Fiscal cost, estimated 2012                   Figure 8.2. Increase in debt, estimated 2012


     70                                                          120

     60
                                                                 100
     50
                                                                  80
     40
                                                                  60
     30

                                                                  40
     20

     10                                                           20

       0                                                           0




  * Updated authors calculations
  Sources: Laeven and Valencia and authors calculations.     * Updated authors calculations
                                                             Sources: Laeven and Valencia and authors calculations.


We present some new evidence on the fiscal cost of the Icelandic crisis. According to our
calculations, the fiscal cost is notably lower than estimated in 2012. There are also scenarios,
which do not look too unreasonable, under which the Icelandic government’s net cost is
negligible or even turns into revenues. It should be emphasized, however, that this estimate is
still subject to uncertainty, as it depends significantly on the market value of the government
stake in the new domestic banks.

There are two main reasons why the outlook for the fiscal cost is now much better than in 2012.
First, the outcome in Figure 8.1 is gross cost, which does not net out the value of the assets the
government acquired concurrently. Laeven and Valencia (2012) choose this measure to “focus
on gross fiscal costs instead of net because the gross amount reflects the intensity of the
intervention.” The pre-crises size of the Icelandic banking sector alone implies a very intense
intervention, but as we will see, a significant portion of that intervention is likely to be
recovered. The second reason is the stability contribution amounting to 18% of GDP and paid by
creditors of the failed banks to fulfill so-called stability conditions in exchange for exemption
from the capital controls for the estates (see Section 9).

Table 8.1. Government debt incurred as a result of bank support and restructuring during and
after the crisis.
 % of GDP                                                2008    2009    2010    2011    2012     2013    2014    2015    2016    Total
 Liabilities
 CBI Holding Company                                        -      3,1     5,8     5,1     2,0      3,8     3,8     5,0     7,4    -17,5
                                                         53,5
 Saving banks                                                             -0,1     0,0     -1,1                                     -1,2
 FX transaction with CB of Luxembourg                                      1,1                                                       1,1
 State guarantees                                                 -0,2    -1,7                                      0,0             -1,9
 New banks                                                  -              0,1     0,2     0,1      0,7     1,1     2,1     2,4     -5,2
                                                         12,0
 Taxes on the estates                                                                                       1,7     1,2     0,2      3,0
 HFF                                                                      -2,0             -0,7    -0,2                             -3,0
 Debt relief program                                                                                       -2,0    -0,9    -0,8     -3,7
 Lower tax revenues due to the debt relief                                                                 -0,1    -0,2    -0,5     -0,7
 program

 Assets
 CBI Holding Company                                     36,3     -5,5    -6,4    -4,7     -1,9    -3,5    -5,4    -3,4    -5,2      0,3
 Equity in the new banks                                   8,6     0,7     1,7     0,5     2,5      0,0    -0,1    -0,5    -1,6     11,8
 Subordinated debt in the new banks                        3,3    -0,1    -0,3     0,2     0,1     -0,4    -0,2    -1,3    -1,3      0,0
 Stability contribution                                                                                             7,9     1,5      9,4
 Stability contribution - equity in the new banks                                                                           8,8      8,8


 Gross position                                             -      2,9     3,2     5,3     0,2      4,2     4,6     7,3     8,6    -29,1
                                                         65,5
 Net position                                               -     -1,9    -1,7     1,3     0,9      0,4    -1,1    10,0    10,7      1,1
                                                         17,4
 Accumulated net position                                   -        -       -       -       -       -       -     -9,5     1,1      1,1
                                                         17,4     19,3    21,0    19,7    18,8    18,4    19,5
 Sources: CBI Holding Company, Islandsbanki, Arion banki, Landsbankinn, Glitnir, Kaupthing and Landsbanki annual reports, Central Bank
 of Iceland FSR 2015/1 and FSR 2016/1, The Icelandic National Audit Office report to the Parliament June 2012 and authors’ calculations.


Table 8.1 shows the gross and the net cost of the crisis by dividing nominal cost in each year
with nominal GDP of that year, the same methodology as used in the IMF assessment from
2012.86

The largest outlay is attributed to the Central Bank of Iceland Holding Company (CBI Holding
Company), amounting to -53.5% of GDP gross cost or -17.2% of GDP net (see Table 8.1). This
holding company was established to unwind assets that the Central Bank of Iceland and the



86
     IMF (2012).
Treasury took over during the crisis.87 Most of the assets were repossessed by the Central Bank
on account of its collateralized lending to the failed banks, the “love letter trade” we discussed in
some detail in Section 2. The write off due to the “love letter” claims were estimated 17.2% of
GDP in 2008 and additional 1.4% of GDP in 2009, although the eventual write offs due to
collateralized lending by the Central Bank ended up closer to 14.5% of GDP. This is the largest
portion of the net fiscal cost of the crises. Additional write downs of other assets were also
necessary, most notably around 2.5% of GDP write down on Danish bank FIH. FIH, a subsidiary
of Kaupthing, was accepted as collateral on an emergency liquidity funding loan of 0.5 billion
euros extended to Kaupthing two days before the bank’s failure. The Central Bank only
recovered around half of the emergency loan when FIH was sold in 2010, resulting in a loss of
about 2.5% of GDP. The CBI Holding Company also further wrote down some claims against
savings banks, an insurance company and other smaller assets. In 2016 most of remaining CBI
Holding Company assets were sold, so there is good reason to believe that the current estimate is
close to right.

The second largest cost is the state refinancing of the new domestic banking system, with a gross
cost of 12% of GDP in 2008. The refinancing was in the form of equity injection and
subordinated loans. Since 2008 the recovery of these assets, in the form of dividends, interest
payments and installments, has been 6.8% of GDP. The net cost still outstanding is 5.2% of
GDP. Additionally, the government’s stake in the new banks, based on the crisis equity injection,
has the book value of 11.8% of GDP (see Table 8.1). The market value of the equity is however
uncertain, and will be discussed in more detail shortly.

Other government expenses in connection to the crisis are much smaller. Outlays due to smaller
savings banks are included in the CBI Holding Company line in the table. The recapitalization of
the House Financing Fund (HFF) was necessary to offset losses on mortgages. Lastly there is net
fiscal gain in 2010 due to a transaction between the Central Bank of Luxembourg and the Central
Bank of Iceland. The Central Bank of Luxembourg was at this time the largest holder of the
offshore krona position (see in more details in Section 9) which was wound down in this
transaction.88

The aftermath of the crisis involved more fiscal revenues that counter the initial outlays. The
single most important is the so-called stability contribution from the creditors of the failed banks,
amounting to 18.2% of GDP (see Section 9). Half of the stability contribution is directly or
indirectly connected to ownership stakes in two of the new banks, resulting in the state now

87
   The CBI Holding Company was formally established late 2009, with a balance sheet book value of 490.6 b.ISK.
The claim value was 289.1 b.ISK higher, which is the amount of initial write offs. In 2009 the Central Bank and the
Treasury recovered 72.1 b.ISK of assets from collateralized lending. This is added to the initial opening balance
sheet of the CBI Holding Company. This method involves a slight overestimation of the gross position as a small
portion of the assets on the CBI Holding company opening balance sheet were claims that came about in 2009,
following the failure of a few smaller banks.
88
   This relates to lending from the ECB and the collateral that one Icelandic bank posted before its failure, in part to
replace the “love letters” that ECB had rejected. In 2010 the Central Bank of Iceland took over this collateral and
paid the ECB the nominal amount owed in full. Yet since the ECB had applied significant haircuts to the collateral,
the Central Bank of Iceland was able to resell these assets to Icelandic pension funds 12 days later at a profit. The
price was at a 25% discount from listed price, but yet this trade resulted in a profit corresponding to 1.1% of GDP at
that time.
owning over 99% in Islandsbanki (formerly Glitnir) and dividends and sales proceeds of Arion
banki (formerly Kaupthing) will be split between the state and claim holders.89 This added an
estimated 8.8% of GDP in state ownership in banks, resulting in it owning what amounts to
20.6% of GDP in bank equity at book value at the end of 2016. Other post crisis revenues
include a tax on the estates of the failed banks amounting to 3% of GDP.

The fiscal cost of the Icelandic crisis critically depends on the assumed market value of the new
banks. In Table 8.1 we value them at book value. This results in accumulated fiscal gain of 1.1%
of GDP at year end 2016.90 This estimation is subject to uncertainty, however.91

The actual sale price of the new banks relative to their current book value affects the fiscal
gain/losses through two channels. First, directly through the shares the government holds. This
number is shown under “Equity funding for the new banks” in Table 8.1. Second, it affects the
stability contribution shown in the last line of Table 8.1. If the banks are sold at a 10% discount
from book value this results in an increase in fiscal cost amounting to over 2% of GDP. Figure
8.3 and Table 8.2 show the sensitivity of our estimate to different values of price-to-book as of
the end of 2016. The range from p/b=1.25 to p/b= 0.25 gives fiscal gain/loss from 7.2% to -
14.8% of GDP.92

Our conservative baseline scenario is price to book 75 percent, resulting in accumulated fiscal
loss 4.9% of GDP. There are a number of reasons we choose this relatively conservative
baseline. First, in February a 30% stake in Arion banki was sold in a private placement at price
close to p/b=0.8.93 Other things could also affect the price of the banks including relatively high
capital requirements and heavy tax burden compared to banks in other countries. The banks also
operate in one of the smallest currency area in the world, hence with limited domestic growth
opportunities. Rules and regulation put in place following the crises based on the understanding
that there is no lender of last resort in foreign currency, further limit international growth. We
therefore assume that a conservative price of the Icelandic banks is more likely.




89
   The state already held a 99% stake in Landsbankinn.
90 Jonsson and Sigurgeirsson (2017) estimated the fiscal gain, excluding the HFF and the debt relief program, 2.6%
of GDP at year end 2015. Our result with the same components shows gain of 8.6% of GDP. The main difference is
based on better data using the CBI Holding Company annual reports.
91
   The government injected about 12% of GDP into the banks, it has recuperated about 6.8% of GDP in repayments
of subordinated debt and dividend payments, leaving 5.2% of GDP. The current book value of the government’s
stake in the banks is 11.8%.
92
   The Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2015/1 used a little more conservative range for price to book or 0.5 to 1.
93
   Announcement from Arion banki, 19.03.2017.
 Figure 8.3. Net fiscal cost of the crisis, end of             Figure 8.4. Government debt.
 2016.

          10                                                              100
     % of GDP




                                                               % of GDP
                                                                           90
                5                                                          80
                                                    P/B                    70
                0                                                          60
                    1.25   1.00   0.75   0.50        0.25
                                                                           50
          -5
                                                                           40
                                                                           30
       -10
                                                                           20
                                                                           10
       -15
                                                                           0




                                                                                1998
                                                                                1999
                                                                                2000
                                                                                2001
                                                                                2002
                                                                                2003
                                                                                2004
                                                                                2005
                                                                                2006
                                                                                2007
                                                                                2008
                                                                                2009
                                                                                2010
                                                                                2011
                                                                                2012
                                                                                2013
                                                                                2014
                                                                                2015
                                                                                2016
                                                                                                                   2017 - Q2
       -20
         Source: Authors calculations.                              Source: Statistics Iceland.


The fiscal costs amassed in the aftermath of the crisis are limited to the debt relief program for
households. This program involved direct write downs of inflation-indexed household mortgage
loans and tax relief on private pension fund withdrawals used to pay down mortgage loans. The
direct government expenses to compensate financial institutions for loan write downs was 3.7%
of GDP and income tax losses from 2014 to 2019 are estimated at 0.7% of GDP.94

In the last line in Table 8.1 we report accumulated net loss, evaluating at book value both the
equity in the new banks and the assets in the CBI Holding Company. In 2010 the accumulated
net loss of the banking crisis peaked at 21.0% of GDP and it was 19.7% at the end of 2011,
according to our estimate. This is slightly higher than the estimated fiscal cost reported by the
IMF in April 2012, which was 19.2%, and slightly lower than the 23.7% cost estimated by
Leaven and Valencia (2012).95

In 2012 Leaven and Valencia estimated gross fiscal outlays of 44% of GDP and net increase in
public debt of 72% of GDP. Our estimate in Table 8.1 is that gross fiscal outlay amounted to
65.5% of GDP, which puts the Icelandic crisis as the most expensive crisis in gross terms in the
Leaven and Valencia dataset, see red column in Figure 8.1. Net increase in public debt is 67.7%
of GDP from 2007 to the peak in 2011. This moves Iceland’s ranking one place back in the
comparison of net increase in public debt, from the seventh to eighth place (see red column
Figure 8.2). Importantly, this measure of fiscal cost only looks at the increase in debt four years
after the crisis. Significant costs have been recouped since then which, coupled with robust




94
 Assuming 30% income tax on average on pension.
95
 It is worth noting that at the start of the crisis, when Iceland entered a standby agreement with the IMF, the cost
was estimated at -40 percent of GDP, see IMF (2012).
recovery in GDP, puts government debt as a fraction of GDP at 45.5%, down 50 percentage
points from its peak and only 18.1 percentage points above the pre-crisis level.96

For robustness, we also use a method suggested by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO
(2016)) for the estimation of the cost of the U.S. Treasury’s Troubled Asset Relief Fund. It
involves computing the payment and income stream connected to the crisis with appropriate
discount rates. Using this method and the five-year government bond rate in Iceland as the
discount rate, our estimated fiscal cost of the crisis is 0.8% of 2016 GDP, when we use the book
value of the equity in the new banks (see Table 8.2). With our baseline of price 75 percent of
book value, the fiscal cost of the crisis is 6.8% of 2016 GDP. Table 8.3 shows the sensitivity in
these calculation with respect to p/b, and the range p/b=1.25 to p/b=0.25 gives fiscal gain/loss
from 5.3 to -16.7 percent of 2016 GDP. This is almost identical to the result using the IMF
methodology.

Table 8.2. Net position of fiscal cost based on price to book 1.25-0.25 on the government share
in the new banks.
                                  p/b = 1.25    p/b = 1    p/b = 0.75    p/b = 0.5   p/b = 0.25
 Net position (b. ISK)                127          -20        -165         -291          -405
 Net position (% of 2016 GDP)         5,3         -0,8        -6,8         -12,0        -16,7
 Sources: Islandsbanki, Arion banki and Landsbankinn annual reports, Central Bank of Iceland FSR
 2016/1 and authors calculations.

These estimates of the fiscal cost do not take into account a few items. One is possible gains or
losses from the settlement of the stock of offshore krona. This settlement was closely linked to
the build-up of foreign currency reserves at the Central Bank following the crisis, which was also
costly. This estimation also does not account for potential output losses and the degree to which
that affected the government’s budget. There was a substantial loss in tax revenues and also
increases in crisis related costs, such as unemployment benefits. As we can see in Figure 8.4,
public debt is currently about 18% of GDP higher than it was prior to the crisis in 2008, and
much of this can be accounted for by the drop-in government revenues in the aftermath of the
crisis.

9. The role of capital controls and balance of payments
As explained in Section 5, capital controls were adopted in Iceland on November 28, 2008 and
they remained in place until the winter of 2016-2017, when they were gradually lifted. The
loosening of the controls followed the fulfillment of stability conditions by foreign creditors of
the old bank estates. In 2008 the capital controls in conjunction with an IMF program stabilized
the currency within a few months, fulfilling its main objectives. The capital controls restricted
capital movement and placed repatriation restrictions on foreign currency export revenues. They
were quite effective in the former in part due to the simplicity and low connectivity of Iceland to
the international financial system. In the first months following the failure of the banks, and the
subsequent closure of the payment lines those banks, the Central Bank of Iceland served as the


96
  An example of a large difference between gross and net fiscal costs is also the Swedish banking crises, where the
gross fiscal outlay was 3.6% of GDP (Laeven and Valencia 2012) while the net fiscal loss was 2% or less (Englund
1999 and Ingves and Lind 1997)
intermediary in all payments to and from Iceland.97 This simplified the supervision of the capital
controls greatly. Connectivity increased over the period, but only modestly and through the large
banks which were supervised well. Export revenues repatriation was however not satisfactory
until all ambiguity concerning the prohibition on unilateral importation of offshore krónur was
removed in October 2009.98 This effectiveness of capital controls may be difficult to replicate in
a larger, more complex and highly connective economies.99 In these first years of the capital
controls the krona was trading on the offshore market with at least a 20% discount, suggesting
outflow pressures the controls were aimed at containing.100

Why were capital controls held for so long? A key reason was that lifting them risked a capital
flight, leading to balance of payment crisis, currency depreciation and potential risk to financial
stability. The main source for these concerns were likely capital flows from the old banks in
liquidation. It may seem surprising that private banks in liquidation continue to pose a significant
risk to financial stability years after their failure. Going through the details of why this
assessment was made gives an interesting case study of possible balance of payment crisis and
the application of capital controls to manage those risks.

To understand the problem better, it is useful to look at the source of possible capital flight. It
mainly came from three sources. First, at the end of 2015 the total remaining assets of the estates
of the three large banks amounted to well over Icelandic GDP. The problem is that only 6
percent of the claims into the estate were from domestic creditors, while 41% of the assets of the
estates were domestic (see Figure 9.1). This meant that a lot of domestic assets, mostly
denominated in krona, would be liquidated, converted into foreign currency and distributed to
foreign creditors. It was estimated in 2015 that this settlement of the failed banks’ estates would
have a negative impact on Iceland’s already strained international investment position (IIP)
amounting to nearly 18% of GDP.101 Additionally there were deep concerns about the effect on
the already fragile domestic currency and the knock-on effect of that on firms and households.




97
    https://www.cb.is/publications-news-and-speeches/news-and-speeches/news/?NewsID=58deef1c-622b-49ac-
808e-5683aba3753f. Still now there are only 7 lines connecting Iceland to the international financial system, CBI,
four commercial banks and two payment solution firms.
98
    Prior to that exporters sold their foreign currency for krona offshore to investors, mostly carry traders, who owned
krona. Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2012/1.
99
    Már Guðmundsson (2012).
100
    Offshore market means trade between non-residents abroad.
101
    This estimate was based on the position in Q3 2015. The difference between the value of domestic assets that
would have reverted to foreign creditors and foreign assets that would have reverted to domestic creditors. Central
Bank of Iceland, FSR 2016/1. It is taken into account that some of the domestic assets were already collateralized or
pre-funded with underlying foreign assets
 Figure 9.1. Estimated domestic/foreign                            Figure 9.2. Offshore krona assets
 breakdown of assets and claims of the old banks

                                                                              40
  120




                                                                   % of GDP
                                                                              35

  100                                                                         30

                                                                              25
   80
                                                                              20
                                                 59
   60                                                                         15
                    94
                                                                              10
   40
                                                 18                            5
   20                                                                          0
                                                 23                             2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
    0                6
                                                                                   Deposits
                   Claims                       Assets                             Treasury bonds and bills
                                                                                   Housing Finance Fund
        Domestic     Domestic, ISK   Domestic, FX        Foreign
                                                                      Source: Central Bank of Iceland EoI 2016.
   Source: Central Bank of Iceland FS 2015/1.



The second source of outflow pressure was liquid krona assets in the hands of non-residents (see
Figure 9.2). This was largely the remnant of the pre-crisis carry trades, see section 5. It was in
the form of krona deposits and government bonds amounting to about 35% of GDP at the
beginning of 2009. The stock of liquid krona assets held by non-residents declined to about 14%
of GDP between 2009 and 2015 as a result of the Central Bank’s foreign currency auctions and
other direct transactions. This still implied a threat to the balance of payments at the end of 2015,
amounting to 14% of GDP, or double the current account surplus at the time.

The third source of capital outflow concern was domestic firms, individuals and in particular
pension funds that in 2009 sought to maintain their assets in foreign currency due to lack of
confidence in the domestic currency.
 Figure 9.3. The balance of payments problem

             20
  % of GDP



             18
             16
             14
             12
             10
              8
              6
              4
              2
              0
              Unhedged domestic          Offshore ISK
              assets of the failed
                     banks
      Source: Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2016/1.


The combined amount of potential negative balance of payment effect from the first two sources
was estimated to be about 32% of GDP at the end of 2015 (see Figure 9.3). The risk of domestic
investment flight from Iceland was, however, always heavily reliant on the credible alleviation of
the capital outflow pressures from the first two sources and on general economic conditions.
Concurrently to these outflow pressures, ongoing external debt deleveraging, continued to be a
strain on the economy. A key concern was that there was too little latitude for these additional
capital outflows, since terms on international financial markets remained very tight after the
crisis, forcing domestic firms to aggressively pay down their external debt. Policymakers also
judged that the terms in international financial markets would continue to be tight as long as this
balance of payment problem was looming.

In 2014 the repayment schedule of the economy was extended with an agreement between one of
the new banks and the estate of the old banks. This provided latitude in the near-term external
refinancing need, allowing improved terms on international financial markets for the government
and the new banks. Now the most pressing problem was the potential risk from unwinding the
old banks’ estates.102 As the economy continued to recover, the constraints posed by the capital
controls became costlier for firms and individuals, and the government continued to pay high
interest rates on the fiscal debt incurred in connection to the financial crisis.

The capital controls prevented any payments from the estates of the old banks to claim holders
and liquid funds, both in foreign currency and ISK, started to pile up within the estates as the
unwinding proceeded. The winding-up boards continued to request exemptions from the capital
controls while the Icelandic government continued to decline the requests on the grounds of risks


102
    The CBI stated that “before the relaxation of capital controls can even be considered, the settlement of DMBs
[old banks] in winding-up proceedings must be placed in a firm framework” Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2013/1.
to exchange rate and financial stability.103 The banks’ excessive borrowing in foreign markets
during the run up to the crisis had created a systemic risk externality that remained in place years
after the borrowing took place and threatened to materialize. This kind of externality is for
example modeled in Korinek (2013). The question now was, who should bear the cost of this
externality? The Icelandic government pointed the finger at the claim holders.

In June 2015, the government presented stability conditions which would have to be fulfilled
prior to any payout from the estates of the old banks. The stability conditions were presented as
ensuring macroeconomic and balance of payments equilibrium in the domestic economy.104 The
claim holders had a great incentive to fulfill the stability conditions as a large portion of their
foreign assets were already liquid meaning that the capital controls were the only thing standing
between them and the money. An added incentive came from the government’s threat that, in
absence of a settlement via the stability contribution, it would impose a 31% tax on the estates to
“deal with the externality” (Guðmundsson 2016).

The old bank estates fulfilled the stability conditions through composition agreements in 2015.
The estates agreed to transfer assets, amounting to 18% of GDP at the time (according to our
estimates) to the Icelandic government. The stability contribution was payable in the domestic
assets, including a large domestic commercial bank.105 This, as the government said, removed a
major obstacle to lifting capital controls.

In the next months, the government preceded to minimize the potential risk of the liquid krona
assets in the hands of non-residents we showed in Figure 9.2. In May 2016, these investors were
invited to participate in a single auction or else be ring fenced in deposit accounts with close to
zero interest rate. Around a third of the total amount was tapped off in the auction and direct
transactions after the auction at a 37% discount from the official exchange rate.106 The CBI
purchased another third of the krona in 2017 at a 16% discount. Currently the outstanding
amount of ring-fenced liquid krona assets in the hands of non-residents is 3.5% of GDP.107

The capital controls were lifted for Icelandic firms and the public in the winter of 2016-2017.




103
    Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2016/1.
104
    Ministry of Finance https://eng.fjarmalaraduneyti.is/capital-controls/q-and-a/ Further it says that the
“repercussions of unprepared liberalisation would be the collapse of the Icelandic króna, an almost unprecedented
surge in inflation, a wave of bankruptcies, and economic instability.”
105
    Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2016/1.
106
    Central Bank of Iceland FSR 2016/2.
107
    Central Bank of Iceland announcement from January 13, 2017 and Central Bank of Iceland announcement from
June 23, 2017.
10. Lessons
Iceland is a tiny economy with many unusual features. It is tempting to write off its banking
crisis as one-off saga, a frenzy, unlikely to be repeated anytime soon anywhere else. A frenzy it
was, but we think there may be some important lessons to be learned.

Following the East-Asian crisis of the 1990s, where excessive capital flows and increasing
leverage also culminating in a banking crisis, there was a tendency for economists to treat it as a
special case, unlikely to be borne out in more developed economies. There was even a special
word used to describe those economies: “crony capitalism” (see e.g. Kang (2002)) Presumably
this was meant to separate these economies from “regular” advanced capitalistic societies.108

As early as 2006, when faced with a mini-crisis, Icelandic banks, domestic and foreign
commentators and the government, heavily publicized that Iceland was an advanced economy
(fifth highest GDP per capita in the world in 2006 according to some measures), with among the
highest life expectancy in the world, literacy rate, non-existent unemployment and very low
government debt. Furthermore, international indexes were touted which showed that Iceland
ranked among the first in terms of low corruption, fifth in terms of economic freedom, first in
terms of freedom of the press, and so on. The overall perception meant to convey was that
Iceland was an advanced Nordic country with strong institution and well-functioning democracy
that had little in common with emerging market countries. This, presumably, was meant to draw
a clear distinction to “crony capitalists.” What could possibly go wrong?

The banks grew too fast and became too large on the back of implicit and explicit guarantees.
Their funding was funneled into loans to a large extent to the same groups of related parties and
to insiders, i.e. the owners of the banks. In hindsight, the evidence we presented here suggest that
universal large exposure rules, that are meant to limit concentration risk and are crucial to banks
viability, were broken for years before the failure of the banks. Owners of the banks had
disproportionate access to the banks funds, despite rules on insider borrowing. How could this
happen? While we have already pointed to one cause, namely complacency by supervisors and a
general view that “the banks are in the best position to regulate themselves”, it is worth
highlighting that nobody in position of power knew, or in any event had the full picture what the
banks were doing. Firm ownership in most western democracies is opaque. The only reason we
know how much lending was channeled to groups of related parties and to insiders in Iceland is
because of the crash, because Althingi appointed investigation commission and the
establishment of a special prosecutor of the failed banks that prosecuted the bankers.109 This
work involved untangling a complex web of holding companies, with several interlocking cross
ownerships as we have documented. We have already noted that the pattern of insider lending we
document in Iceland is not unique, pointing out examples such as Ireland and Mexico, even if a
detailed cross-country comparison is beyond this paper. But it is worth noting, however, that

108
    Icelanders were particularly fast to reject any likeness and the OECD and other international institutions did not
draw a line between Iceland and the Asian crises until after the fact, despite all the same warning signs (OECD 2007
and NY times (April 2008) „Iceland, a Tiny Dynamo, Loses Steam‘. Gylfason (2008) does however compare the
external liabilities in Iceland to those in Asia prior to the crisis.
110
    The lender of last resort of subsideries is the hosting Central Bank. The subsideries of the Icelandic banks did
however not recieve loan of last resort funding for their subsidieres, requestes for such loans were declined. As one
bank managers says „bank of England refused to see us [Kaupthing Singer and Friedlander] as a British bank”. SIC
chapter 20, pg. 170.
these patterns are typically discovered only after bank failures. Monitoring lending to insiders,
and coming up with workable definitions of them, remains a major challenge from the
perspective of bank supervision, which often have to rely on the banks themselves to report these
exposures. Lack of firm ownership transparency is one of the principal underlying problem.

The lack of transparency of ownership of companies is not only problematic from the perspective
of insider lending but also for large exposures. In 2006 and 2007 it became clear that several of
the Icelandic banks customers had become “too big to fail” for the banks. The banks had an
incentive to keep their borrowers “alive”, in hope of resurrection, as failure of the borrower
could have dragged down the bank itself. This is a bit reminiscent of the “zombie firm” theory of
Caballero et al (2008) that we discussed in section 7. The narrative, in section 3, of the
repatriation of many foreign loans of the bank’s main customers, as foreign banks stepped away,
seems like a clear example of the importance of strongly regulating large exposures. To do that
we need some clear and workable rules on large exposures, including how to define groups of
firms, along with regulatory powers to enforce the rules.

The heavy practice of funding own shares and each other’s shares gives another important
lesson. Issuing loans to buy bank shares, in particular if banks have correlated risks, will leave
the banking system as a whole with less equity to absorb losses, a problem that we have noted is
not isolated to the Icelandic saga. A key lesson is the need for strong enforcement of rules
against banks purchasing their own shares, funding their own shares as well as rules against cross
funding shares of financial institutions. Again, opaqueness in firm ownership and holding
companies greatly complicates supervision of rules of this kind.

The Icelandic saga is also a good illustration of “gamble for resurrection” or “bet on life”. Much
of the most reckless behavior of the banks was happening at the bitter end which greatly
increased the cost to their creditors and the economy as a whole. The lessons for regulators
seems to be to try to develop indicators of bank stress early on so that interventions can be done
earlier rather than later.

The banking crisis in Iceland highlights the difference between implicit guarantees in
international banking The Icelandic government had a strong ex post incentive to bail out
deposits in the domestic portion of the banks while it had little incentive to risk tax payers’
money to bail out depositors in foreign branches. One should put a large discount on any
assumed implicit guarantee of nation states on their own banks liabilities once those liabilities
cross the border.

A second lesson concerning implicit guarantees on short term liabilities, usually deposits, is that
irrespectively of the governments incentive to bail out deposits in foreign currency it may not be
credible. The deposits in the Icelandic banks foreign branches were in foreign currency and
stopping a run on those deposits was way beyond the capacity of the CBIs reserves. This leads us
to another potential lesson.

The Icelandic crisis highlights the problem of cross currency banking. The banks operations were
increasingly in foreign currency, both borrowing and lending, while the lender of last resort was
the Central Bank of Iceland.110 Once the crises hit the banks became illiquid in foreign currency
fast, and with no lender of last resort in foreign currency, they were bound to fail, irrespectively
if they were solvent or not. In fact, the Icelandic banks never ran out of Icelandic krona’s – as we
have documented. What they lacked was a lender of last resort in euros, sterling and so on. We
documented that the banks did have some access to ECB via their subsidiaries in Luxembourg.
However, as those borrowing increased the ECB made it clear that that it was already beyond
what it considered acceptable amount for even a loan of last resort.111 Meanwhile, many other
countries solved issues of this kind by entering swap line arrangements between different central
banks. Despite desperately trying to do so, the Central Bank of Iceland was unable to enter such
agreements with any foreign central banks. In theory, thus, once banks are allowed to operate in
different currencies or across borders they can become victims of self-fulfilling runs simply
because they do not have access to a lender of last resort in some of the currency they operate
in.112

The economic literature on capital flows is also very relevant to the Icelandic story. Capital
inflow rose fast in the years before the crisis. Borrowing from abroad increased exponentially,
led by the Icelandic banks, who funneled the funds to firms and households. The capital inflow
bonanza increased the likelihood of a full blown financial crises. As the crises hit the sudden stop
threatened the solvency of local governments, firms and households. The Icelandic case is a
vivid example of how capital inflows can amplify economic fluctuations and it also illustrates
that looming capital flight greatly complicates policy. A key lesson is that more attention needs
to be paid to capital flows, and policy tools developed to react to them.

We are not in a position to judge the extent to which any legal lessons can be drawn from the
crisis. Let us just note, however, that both Icelandic courts and the EFTA courts have written
judgement which gave the governments extraordinary latitude to take actions to maintain
financial stability during systemic crises of these proportions.

In the eye of the storm lessons are also important. One relates to how the bank assets and
liabilities were split up, but in retrospect the decision to split the bank into foreign and domestic
appears to have worked well. It kept domestic banking services throughout the crisis without
overextending government finances. Despite being one of the most fiscally expensive crisis
historically in gross terms, the net fiscal cost will likely end up being somewhere between zero
and five percent of GDP. Still there are some lessons to be learned from the split up of the banks.

110
    The lender of last resort of subsideries is the hosting Central Bank. The subsideries of the Icelandic banks did
however not recieve loan of last resort funding for their subsidieres, requestes for such loans were declined. As one
bank managers says „bank of England refused to see us [Kaupthing Singer and Friedlander] as a British bank”. SIC
chapter 20, pg. 170.
112
    See Benediktsdottir, Danielsson and Zoega (2011). Iceland has implemented strict rules on term conversion in
foreign currency, within the framework of liquidity rules. It requires a liquidity coverage ratio in foreign currency
and net stable funding ratio in foreign currency as well. This is also used as means to prevent foreign deposit
collecting, by requiring banks to hold fully liquid assets against foreign deposit liabilities, making such deposit
collecting unsustainable.
112
    See Benediktsdottir, Danielsson and Zoega (2011). Iceland has implemented strict rules on term conversion in
foreign currency, within the framework of liquidity rules. It requires a liquidity coverage ratio in foreign currency
and net stable funding ratio in foreign currency as well. This is also used as means to prevent foreign deposit
collecting, by requiring banks to hold fully liquid assets against foreign deposit liabilities, making such deposit
collecting unsustainable.
First of all, it was well known in 2008 that the banks were struggling. It would have been prudent
to have a resolution plan in place.113 Second it is important to consider other things besides
capital when you are laying the foundation for a new bank. More consideration should have been
paid to some important features of the new banks such as their term mismatch and liquidity, their
asset encumbrance and their currency mismatch.114

The write downs that were done as the new domestic banks were formed were undoubtedly
important, providing scope to clean up firms’ and household balance sheets without affecting the
new banks’ capital and prevent in some instances the costly process of bankruptcies.

While the capital controls appear to have stabilized the currency, they did remain in place long
with associated distortions. We discussed in section 9 the main reason for this were concerns of
capital flight, associated collapse in the currency and possible risks to financial stability. The
necessary steps to resolve those risks were understood as early as 2013.115 The government
issued the stability conditions in the middle of 2015 and the old banks estates fulfilled them a
few months later. The capital controls were almost fully lifted, without any noticeable risk
materializing, about a year later. Since the main ingredient for the so-called stability conditions
were already understood as early as 2013, it seems quite possible that the controls could have
been lifted more rapidly and thus possibly speeding up the economic recovery further.

The recovery in Iceland from the crisis also hints towards several broad lessons. Iceland suffered
the largest banking crisis on record, in terms of the size of failed bank balance sheet vs GDP.
The output cost of the banking crisis appears however close to average according to various
measures we document in chapter 7. We think that four things may be important to explain this.
First, the recovery was to some extent reliant on large scale default and sub sequential write off
on private external liabilities. 116 This was, for one, the basis for the newly established financial
system, which supported point two and three. Second, there is a long tradition in economic
thought that highlights that in case of banking crisis it is of vital importance to clean up
overleveraged balance sheet of firms. As we have documented, this was done relatively
aggressively in Iceland, which may account for some of the recovery. Third household debt
deleveraging has been emphasized in the literature as important to speed up recovery. Here too,
the Icelandic saga provides and interesting example of this. Fourth, the theory on optimal

113
    SIC chapter 20 pg. 141.
114
    Due to term mismatch the new banks needed liquidity support for some time following their establishment. The
encumbrance of two of the three new banks was so high it could have caused problems if a second wave of crisis
would have hit, lowering the amount of assets available for the government to minimize depositor’s loss. This
increased the fiscal risk associated with the government blanked guarantee on domestic deposits. All of the liabilities
in foreign currency, excluding deposits in foreign currency in branches in Iceland, were left in the old banks, while
some of the domestic asset that were transferred to the new banks were in foreign currency. This meant that the old
banks were short in foreign currency, an issue that was resolved with a stability contribution, while the new banks
were long in foreign currency. That was partially solved by the government injecting a portion of their equity in the
form of subordinated debt in foreign currency.
115
    Central Bank of Iceland, Financial Stability 2013/1
116
    A large amount of the write-offs were born by creditors outside of Iceland as we have documented. This may
have played some part in the output recovery and it may limit somewhat the extent to which the Icelandic response
can be thought of as a role model. It may be difficult in many cases to limit write-offs to this extend to investors and
individuals outside the economy in question.
currency areas emphasizes the benefit of having own currency when shocks hit. Exports
increase, here in particular tourism, while imports decline. It seems quite plausible that this
played a constructive role in the recovery.

11. Conclusion
In this paper, we documented the rise and fall, and then the resurrection of Iceland, which was
sort of a ground zero in the financial crisis, when its entire banking system failed. We have not
attempted to present quantitative or formal model to estimate the importance of various forces at
play during the Icelandic crisis. This is by design. Instead, we present the Icelandic crisis as a
fascinating case study that serves to highlight several models in macroeconomic, finance and
banking, speaking to a rich literature developed before and after the crisis.

It is sometimes said that the crisis caught the economic profession as a total surprise. It is true
that most economists were caught by surprise. But as we have seen, several of the features of this
particular case study, Iceland, does in fact correspond quite closely with several of the theories
that can be found in the economic literature. Perhaps what was missing was not so much lack of
theories about banking, finance and macroeconomics, that explain the potential risks and
possibility of a crisis. Missing was that economist and others were giving the relevant theories
enough weight.

References
Akerlof, George A and Paul Romer (1993). "Looting: The economic underworld of bankruptcy
for profit." Brookings papers on economic activity 1993.2: 1-73.
Acharya, Viral V., Sreedhar T. Bharath, and Anand Srinivasan. "Does industry-wide distress
affect defaulted firms? Evidence from creditor recoveries." Journal of Financial Economics 85.3
(2007): 787-821.

Basel committee on Banking Supervision. (1991). Measuring and Controlling Large Credit
Exposures.
Benediktsdóttir, Sigríður, Margrét V. Bjarnadóttir, and Guðmundur A. Hansen. "Large exposure
estimation through automatic business group identification." Annals of Operations Research
247.2 (2016): 503-521.
Benediktsdottir, Sigridur, Jon Danielsson, and Gylfi Zoega. "Lessons from a collapse of a
financial system." Economic Policy 26.66 (2011): 183-235.
Benigno, Pierpaolo, Gauti B. Eggertsson, and Federica Romei. Dynamic debt deleveraging and
optimal monetary policy. No. w20556. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.
Bernanke, Ben S. The global saving glut and the US current account deficit. No. 77. 2005.
Bernanke, Ben S. The courage to act: A memoir of a crisis and its aftermath. WW Norton &
Company, 2015.

Boyd, John H., and Hendrik Hakenes. "Looting and risk shifting in banking crises." Journal of
Economic Theory 149 (2014): 43-64.
Bracke, Thierry, and Michael Fidora. "Global liquidity glut or global savings glut? A structural
VAR approach." (2008).
Brunnermeier, Markus K. "Deciphering the liquidity and credit crunch 2007–2008." The Journal
of economic perspectives 23.1 (2009): 77-100.
Buiter, Willem H.: “Central banks and financial crises.“ Discussion paper no 619. Financial
Markets Group, London School of Economics and Political Science (2008).
Caballero, Julián A. "Do surges in international capital inflows influence the likelihood of
banking crises?." The Economic Journal 126.591 (2016): 281-316.
Caballero, Ricardo J., and Arvind Krishnamurthy. “International and Domestic Collateral
Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises” Journal of Monetary Economics, December
2001 48(3), pp 513-548.
Caballero, Ricardo J., Takeo Hoshi, and Anil K. Kashyap. "Zombie lending and depressed
restructuring in Japan." The American Economic Review 98.5 (2008): 1943-1977.
Calavita, Kitty, Robert Tillman, and Henry N. Pontell. "The savings and loan debacle, financial
crime, and the state." Annual review of sociology 23.1 (1997): 19-38.
Calvo, Guillermo A. "Capital flows and capital-market crises: the simple economics of sudden
stops." (1998).
Central Bank of Iceland, EoI 2010.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2008.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2012/1.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2013/1.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2015/1.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2016/1.
Central Bank of Iceland, FSR 2016/2.
Chari, V. V., and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2016. "Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal
Regulation: A Macroeconomic View." American Economic Review, 106(9): 2458-93.
Danske Bank (2006), “Iceland: Geyser Crisis”, Research, March 21.
Diamond, Douglas W., and Philip H. Dybvig. "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity."
Journal of political economy 91.3 (1983): 401-419.
Dornbusch, Rudi. A primer on emerging market crises. No. w8326. National Bureau of
Economic Research, 2001.
Eggertsson, Gauti B., and Paul Krugman. "Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap: A Fisher-
Minsky-Koo approach." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127.3 (2012): 1469-1513.
Englund, Peter. "The Swedish banking crisis: roots and consequences." Oxford review of
economic policy 15.3 (1999): 80-97.
Financial Supervisory Authority Annual Report 2009.
Financial Times (2017), “Irelands de-globalized’ data calculate a smaller economy,” July 18.
Fitch Ratings (2006), “Iceland: Macro Imbalances Trigger Negative Outlook” Special Report, 21
February.
Guerrieri, Veronica, and Guido Lorenzoni. "Credit crises, precautionary savings, and the
liquidity trap." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.3 (2017): 1427-1467.
Guðmundsson, Már. “The Financial Crisis in Iceland: Policy responses and lessons to be learnt”.
2012.
Guðmundsson, Már. “Iceland’s recovery: Facts, myths, and the lessons learned”. 2016.
Gylfason, Thorvaldur „Events in Iceland: Skating on thin ice?“ Vox 2008.
IMF (2012) „Iceland“ IMF Country Report No 12/89.
IMF (2017) “Iceland’s Tourism Eruption” Selected Issues, IMF Countries Report No. 17/164.
Ingves, Stefan, and Goran Lind. "Loan loss recoveries and debt resolution agencies: The
Swedish experience." Banking soundness and monetary policy (1997).
Jiménez, G. og J. Saurina; „Credit Cycles, Credit Risk, and Prudential Regulation. “ International
Journal of Central Banking, 2:2, 2006: 65–98.
Johnsen, Gudrun. Bringing down the banking system: Lessons from Iceland. Springer, 2014.
Johnson, Simon, Rafael LaPorta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000.
“Tunneling.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 90 (2): 22-27.
Jonsson, Asgeir. Why Iceland?: How One of the World's Smallest Countries Became the
Meltdown's Biggest Casualty. McGraw Hill Professional, 2009.
Jonsson, Asgeir, and Hersir Sigurgeirsson. The Icelandic Financial Crisis: A Study into the
World s Smallest Currency Area and its Recovery from Total Banking Collapse. Springer, 2017.
Kareken, John H., and Neil Wallace. "Deposit insurance and bank regulation: A partial-
equilibrium exposition." Journal of Business (1978): 413-438.
Korinek, Anton. "Regulating capital flows to emerging markets: An externality view." (2010).
Krugman, Paul (1991), “Iceland’s Exchange Rate Regime: Policy Options,” mimeo, can be
found at https://www.gc.cuny.edu/CUNY_GC/media/LISCenter/pkrugman/krugman-iceland-
1991.pdf
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Guillermo Zamarripa. "Related lending." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118.1 (2003): 231-268.
Laeven, Luc, and Fabian Valencia. "Systemic banking crises database: An update." (2012).
Merrill Lynch (2006), “Icelandic Banks: Not What You Are Thinking” Global Securities
Research and Economics Group, European Credit Research, 7 March.
Mian, Atif, Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi. "Household balance sheets, consumption, and the
economic slump." The Quarterly Journal of Economics128.4 (2013): 1687-1726.
OECD (2007) “Financial Markets in Iceland” ECO/WKP(2007)9.
Rajan, Raghuram G. "Why bank credit policies fluctuate: A theory and some evidence." The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109.2 (1994): 399-441.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. "Recovery from financial crises: Evidence from
100 episodes." The American Economic Review 104.5 (2014): 50-55.
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Vincent R. Reinhart. Capital flow bonanzas: an encompassing view of
the past and present. No. w14321. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2008.
Special Investigation Commission (SIC). Páll Hreinsson, Tryggvi Gunnarsson and Sigríður
Benediktsdóttir. “Aðdragandi og orsakir falls íslensku bankanna 2008 og tengdir atburðir”. 2010.
Sharpe, Steven A. "Asymmetric information, bank lending, and implicit contracts: A stylized
model of customer relationships." The journal of finance 45.4 (1990): 1069-1087.
