                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


        OLDER AMERICANS WOULD WORK LONGER IF JOBS WERE FLEXIBLE

                                         John Ameriks
                                        Joseph S. Briggs
                                         Andrew Caplin
                                          Minjoon Lee
                                       Matthew D. Shapiro
                                       Christopher Tonetti

                                       Working Paper 24008
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24008


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2017, Revised October 2018


This research is supported by a program project grant from the National Institute on Aging P01-
AG026571. Andrew Caplin, Joseph Briggs, and Christopher Tonetti acknowledge the support
of the Sloan Foundation Working Longer Program for this project. This research uses data
from the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI) that was developed under the NIA program project
P01-AG026571. The Vanguard Group Inc. supported the data collection of the VRI.
Vanguard's Client Insight Group and IPSOS SA were responsible for implementing the VRI
survey and provided substantial input into its design. The design of the VRI benefited from the
collaboration and assistance of Wandi Bruine de Bruin, Alycia Chin, Mi Luo, Brooke Helppie-
McFall, Ann Rodgers, and Feiya Shao, as part of the program project, and from Annette
Bonner (Vanguard), Sophia Bunyaraksh (Vanguard), and Wendy O'Connell (IPSOS SA). For
documentation of the VRI, including a dynamic link to the survey instrument, see http://ebp-
projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of The Vanguard Group, Inc., the Federal Reserve Board, or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24008.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by John Ameriks, Joseph S. Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro,
and Christopher Tonetti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Older Americans Would Work Longer If Jobs Were Flexible
John Ameriks, Joseph S. Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and
Christopher Tonetti
NBER Working Paper No. 24008
November 2017, Revised October 2018
JEL No. E24,J22,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

Older Americans, even those who are long retired, have strong willingness to work, especially in
jobs with flexible schedules. For many, labor force participation near or after normal retirement
age is limited more by a lack of acceptable job opportunities or low expectations about finding
them than by unwillingness to work longer. This paper establishes these findings using an
approach to identification based on strategic survey questions (SSQs), purpose-designed to
complement behavioral data. These findings suggest that demand-side factors are important in
explaining late-in-life labor market behavior and need to be considered in designing policies
aimed at promoting working longer.

John Ameriks                                             Minjoon Lee
The Vanguard Group, Inc.                                 Department of Economics
PO Box 2600, MS V36                                      Carleton University
Valley Forge PA 19482                                    Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6
john_ameriks@vanguard.com                                Canada
                                                         minjoon.lee@carleton.ca
Joseph S. Briggs
Federal Reserve Board of Governors                       Matthew D. Shapiro
20th Street and Constitution Avenue N.W.                 Department of Economics
Washington, D.C. 20551                                   University of Michigan
joseph.s.briggs@frb.gov                                  611 Tappan St
                                                         Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
Andrew Caplin                                            and NBER
Department of Economics                                  shapiro@umich.edu
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor                              Christopher Tonetti
New York, NY 10012                                       Graduate School of Business
and NBER                                                 Stanford University
andrew.caplin@nyu.edu                                    655 Knight Way
                                                         Stanford, CA 94305
                                                         and NBER
                                                         tonetti@stanford.edu
1       Introduction
In many advanced economies, the share of the population that is of standard working ages 20–64 is
projected to fall significantly in the coming decades (Gruber and Wise, 1998, 2007, OECD, 2006).
This shift poses several economic challenges, notably increased financial strain on public pension and
healthcare programs.1 In response, many countries are starting to enact or at least consider policies
that encourage older workers to work longer. The appropriate policy depends on whether lack of
employment beyond historically normal retirement ages more reflect the supply side of the labor
market—i.e., older workers’ unwillingness to work under market and institutional incentives—or the
demand side—i.e., employers’ unwillingness to provide work arrangements that older workers desire.
Yet the relative importance of supply and demand factors remains elusive because there is no obvious
behavioral imprint of frustrated desires. Little is known about the opportunity sets generating observed
retirement behavior, and many of the choices are confounded by shocks, such as to the physical health
of workers or financial health of firms.
    In this paper, we introduce an approach to separating supply- and demand-side forces using strate-
gic survey questions (SSQs). The SSQ responses indicate that older Americans have a strong will-
ingness to work, especially in jobs with flexible schedules. Using this information, we estimate a key
structural parameter in a model of retirement behavior, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution of
labor supply (IES).
    SSQs are stated preference questions purpose-designed to complement available behavioral data
on labor market outcomes. Building on previous work using similar types of survey questions (Barsky,
Juster, Kimball and Shapiro, 1997, Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer and van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Ameriks,
Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro and Tonetti, 2017, 2018), we designed the SSQs to be comprehensible and
meaningful to respondents. These SSQs do not confound a desire to work with perceived job op-
portunities. They directly control for job opportunities in hypothetical situations, which allows us
to identify willingness to work independent from what workers expect to find available in the actual
labor market. Indeed, we pose questions that allow us to estimate willingness to work in arrangements
that may not currently be prevalent, involving, in particular, a flexible schedule. The SSQ approach is
particularly useful in the context of late-in-life work where the gap between the desired and available
opportunities may play an important role. In particular, given the evidence on part-time options being
relatively more common among post-career bridge jobs (Maestas, 2010 and Rupert and Zanella, 2015)
or self-employment (Ramnath, Shoven, and Slavov, 2017), we seek to answer whether older workers
would take up jobs with flexible schedules even if that is not part of their current opportunity set.
    We implemented the SSQs in the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI), a panel of American Van-
guard clients more than 55 years old. The VRI sample is healthier, wealthier, and more educated than
the general population of older Americans and most respondents work or worked in occupations that
do not require much physical strength. Since physical deterioration is not a main force limiting work
of the VRI sample, it is a particularly useful sample for studying the motives for continued work that
are the focus of this paper.
    1
    See Fuchs (1984), De Nardi, Imrohoroglu, and Sargent (1999), Lee and Skinner (1999), Kotlikoff, Smetters, and
Walliser (2002), and Attanasio, Kitao, and Violante (2007).


                                                       1
   We find that older individuals would work longer, especially if schedules were flexible. Based on
the SSQs, many people would take the option to work fewer hours, even if it involved a more than
proportional reduction in earnings. Even those who are long retired have strong willingness to work,
especially in a job with a flexible schedule.

   • About 40 percent of respondents that were not working at the time of the survey, mostly in their
      late 60s or 70s, are willing to work again if all the conditions were the same as their last job,
      including the hourly wage, the total number of hours, and the type of job.

   • Willingness to work becomes much stronger if they can choose the number of hours worked
      instead of having to work the same number of hours as in their last job. About 60 percent
      of non-working respondents would be willing to return to work with such a flexible schedule.
      Furthermore, 20 percent of them would be willing to take more than a 20 percent hourly wage
      reduction to do so.

This preference for a flexible work schedule is also consistent with actual labor-market transitions of
VRI respondents: A flexible schedule is more common in post-career, pre-retirement bridge jobs than
in career jobs and is commonly reported as a desired characteristic in respondents’ post-career job
searches.
   If individuals would be willing to work longer were jobs flexible, what then explains the low
equilibrium incidence of part-time work late in life? The findings from the SSQs on labor supply
strongly support the possibility that employers do not find it profitable to employ older workers later-
in-life on part-time schedules. Even though the paper does not have direct evidence on labor demand,
its price and quantity findings from the supply side quantify the strength of the demand-side factors
needed to explain why the modal U.S. worker transitions directly from full-time work to complete
retirement.
   To relate the paper’s findings to equilibrium labor-market outcomes, we use the SSQs to estimate
parameters of the late-in-life labor supply model developed in Rogerson and Wallenius (2013, RW
hereafter). Many workers directly transition from a full-time career job to complete retirement. Pref-
erences for smoothing leisure would imply a more gradual decline in labor supply. The RW model
addresses the challenge this work pattern poses to standard theories of labor market outcomes. In the
RW model, a preference for a smooth lifecycle profile of leisure consumption, and therefore distaste
for abrupt retirement, can be overcome by either a large IES or a nonconvexity in production that
discourages part-time employment. As RW note, separately identifying these two factors is difficult,
and the IES values estimated from retirement transitions critically depend on the strength of the as-
sumed nonconvexities. In addition to providing new measures of willingness to work, the SSQs are by
design particularly informative of structural parameters that govern late-in-life labor market behavior.
Our estimates suggest preferences for smoothing labor that are generally in line with prior estimates,
providing further evidence that a lack of acceptable job opportunities, likely due to a nonconvexity in
production, accounts for the discrete labor force exits. Furthermore, by directly estimating the IES
using SSQs, we place bounds on the size of the production nonconvexities needed to explain observed
labor market life-cycle patterns.


                                                   2
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we provide an overview of our
sample and survey, and analyze the observed late-in-life labor market behavior of our sample, focusing
on evidence that flexibility in the work schedule is associated with working longer. Section 3 introduces
the SSQs and documents the reservation wages at which workers would accept job offers of various
types. In Section 4 we address the challenge of separately identifying demand- and supply-side factors
based on the RW model and use the SSQs to place bounds on the nonconvexities on the production
side that discourage part-time work. We discuss related literature in Section 5. Section 6 concludes.


2     Labor Market Activity After a Career Job: The Role of Flexible
      Schedules
In this section we first introduce the sample and survey used in this paper. We then present the main
findings from our measures of historical employment and job search that speak to older Americans’
interests in post-career employment and the role of flexible schedules in promoting working longer.

2.1   Sample and Survey
This paper uses the Vanguard Research Initiative (VRI), a linked survey-administrative data panel
drawn from account holders at The Vanguard Group, Inc., a leading investment management company.
The VRI is composed of a sample of account holders at Vanguard who are at least 55 years old, have
at least $10,000 in their Vanguard accounts (to ensure their non-trivial engagement with Vanguard),
and have internet access enabling them to complete the online surveys. See Ameriks, Caplin, Lee,
Shapiro and Tonetti (2014) for more detailed descriptions of the sample selection criteria, summaries
of demographic and financial variables, and comparison to other data sets.
    VRI Survey 4, which studies labor market participation and retirement, is the primary data source
for this paper.2 This survey consists of two parts. The first gathers a detailed history of employment
and search behavior, extending the job history battery from the Health and Retirement Survey (HRS)
to cover retirement paths and employment in post-career bridge jobs. The second section of the survey
comprises the SSQs, which we analyze in Section 3.
    This study uses the 2,772 respondents who completed VRI Survey 4. Appendix A provides selected
sample characteristics (Appendix Table A.1) as well as a comparison of the VRI to the HRS (Appendix
Table A.2). The VRI sample is on average wealthier, healthier, and more educated than a representa-
tive population. These differences diminish considerably when compared to the HRS subsample that
meet the VRI sample selection criteria. Forty-one percent of the HRS respondents in the age range
meet the VRI sampling restrictions (HRS respondents are “VRI eligible” if they have financial assets
greater than $10,000 and have internet access). This subsample of the HRS is slightly less educated
and less healthy than the VRI. Because VRI participants remain healthier longer and have higher
human capital (as proxied by education), this sample represents a population strata that likely remain
   2
     VRI Survey 4 was administered in October 2015. See http://ebp-projects.isr.umich.edu/VRI/survey_
overview.html for more details on this and all other VRI surveys.




                                                   3
productive longer and for whom understanding sudden labor force withdrawals is particularly policy
relevant.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics on respondents’ employment status (by age) at the time of the
survey. For those who are employed, it also shows whether they are working in a career job or a bridge
job, where a career job is defined as the longest or main job respondents held after age 40 and a bridge
job is any job held after leaving a career job.3 For those who are not employed, it shows whether
they report being retired or not. We observe a significant increase in non-employment between ages
60 and 65, the primary ages at which individuals qualify for public and private pensions. The vast
majority of those that are not employed report that they are retired. The decrease in the employment
rate over age is mainly driven by the decrease in the share of respondents working in their career jobs.
Employment status patterns look broadly similar to those of the general population except that the
share of respondents working in a bridge job is higher in the general population.4

                                          Table 1: Employment status


                                                                 By Age                             Total
                                              55-59      60-64     65-69     70-74      75+
             Employed (%)                       83.5      64.5      32.9       19.8     10.8         35.3
                 In a career job (%)            64.1      44.8      17.3        7.8      4.4         21.7
                 In a bridge job (%)            19.4      19.7      15.6       12.0      6.4         13.6

             Not employed (%)                   16.5      35.4      67.0       80.3     89.2         64.7
                 Retired (%)                    11.7      33.3      65.8       79.3     88.3         63.1
                 Not retired (%)                4.8       2.1       1.2        1.0      0.9          1.6

             N                                  273       522        646       632       699         2,772



    Next, we turn to the characteristics of the career jobs held by the VRI sample. One key job
characteristic we focus on in this paper is flexibility in work schedule. A job is defined to offer a
flexible schedule if the worker has the ability to change either the number of hours per week or the
number of weeks per year worked. Therefore, we focus on the ability to change the length of work,
not the timing of work (which days or which weeks). To measure whether respondents worked in jobs
with flexible schedules we asked:

       If you wanted to work a different regular work schedule, would your employer (business) have
       allowed you to change your regular hours per week?
   3
     When respondents have multiple bridge jobs, the survey focuses on the most recent one.
   4
     See Appendix Table A.3 for comparison to the HRS. The career job in the HRS is defined solely based on the
length of tenure, i.e., as the longest job respondents had in their life, because the survey does not provide information
on subjective importance of the jobs they had. A part of the difference in the incidence rates of a bridge job may come
from this difference in the definition of the career job.



                                                           4
      If you wanted to work a different regular work schedule, would your employer (business) have
      allowed you to change your regular weeks per year?

   Table 2 presents key characteristics of career jobs of the VRI sample for those who retired from
their career jobs and those who are still working on their career jobs. Most of the career jobs are full
time jobs. The most common number of working hours is 2,080 per year, which is 40 hours per week
for 52 weeks. Note that the average salary of those who are still working tends to be lower due to
a reduction in hours for some workers. More than half of the sample worked in their career jobs for
more than 20 years. The most common industry is professional, scientific, and technical services while
the most common occupation is management. Few are self-employed. Having a flexible work schedule
is rare. In short, this paper examines labor market transitions of those who were mainly employed on
long, full time career jobs that are typically professional and not physically demanding, and typically
had no flexibility in their schedules. We find similar career job characteristics for the VRI-eligible HRS
sample (see Appendix Table A.5).
   The career job characteristics are overall similar between those who have already quit their career
jobs and those who are still working on their career jobs, though the latter group is more likely to be
self-employed and more likely to have a flexible schedule. This may be confounding two effects. On
the one hand, it may be due to selection along job characteristic dimensions that encourage working
longer. On the other hand, those who are still working are also more likely to be in younger cohorts
and those characteristics might be related to that cohort. These confounding effects are demonstrated
by the fact that those who are still working on their career jobs, compared to those who already quit
their career jobs, tend to be younger but at the same time tend to stay on those jobs until older.
   To disentangle these factors, we examine career job characteristics for those who are still working
on their career jobs over different age groups (see Appendix Table B.1). The share of workers with a
flexible schedule goes up from 36% before age 63 to 71% after age 65. The share of self-employment
changes from 9% to 24% between these two age groups. These findings show that it is primarily the
selection effect that makes these characteristics more common among those who are still on their career
jobs compared to those who have already quit them. This, in turn, suggests that these characteristics
are preferred by older workers and hence encourage them to work longer, consistent with the findings
by Ramnath, Shoven, and Slavov (2017). Appendix B.1 presents more detailed descriptions of career
job characteristics by age groups.

2.2   Labor Market Activity After a Career Job: Lessons from Bridge Jobs Held
      and Search Behavior
In what follows we document three main findings from our measures of historical employment and job
search behavior. First, about half of the sample who have separated from their career jobs either had
a post-career bridge job or at least looked for such an opportunity. Second, bridge jobs are much more
likely to have a flexible work schedule compared to career jobs. Third, flexibility in work schedule
was the most popular job characteristic among those who searched for a bridge job. These findings
suggest a significant willingness to work beyond a career job and an important role of flexibility in
work schedule in encouraging working longer.

                                                    5
                                  Table 2: Career job characteristics

 A. Retired from career job                  Age, years worked, salary, hours worked
                                       10p    25p     50p     75p          90p       Mean
 Age:                                    60     64      69     75           79          70
 Age when left:                          50     55      60     63           67          59
 Years worked:                           8      14      22     31           37          22
 Salary (in 2015$):                   30,866 58,253 91,467 133,398       196,379     111,698
 Hours worked (per year):              1,260  1,924   2,080  2,184        2,600       2,027
 Self-employed:                       Yes                                                6.9%
                                      No                                                 93.1%
 Had a flexible schedule:             Yes                                                27.6%
                                      No                                                 72.4%
 Health insurance provision:          Yes                                                86.2%
                                      No                                                 13.8%
 Most common industries:              Professional, scientific, and technical services   17.8%
                                      Manufacturing                                      14.5%
                                      Educational services                               12.7%
 Most common occupations:             Management                                         25.6%
                                      Education, training, library                       10.6%
                                      Business and financial operations                  9.8%

 B. Working on career job                      Age, years worked, salary, hours worked
                                       10p       25p    50p     75p          90p       Mean
 Age:                                   58        59      62     66           72         63
 Years worked:                           8        14      21     30           38         22
 Salary (in 2015$):                   14,089    44,000 78,000 117,000      165,000     92,428
 Hours worked (per year):              480      1,664   2,080  2,080        2,600      1,842
 Self-employed:                       Yes                                                15.9%
                                      No                                                 84.1%
 Had a flexible schedule:             Yes                                                47.7%
                                      No                                                 52.3%
 Health insurance provision:          Yes                                                72.0%
                                      No                                                 28.0%
 Most common industries:              Professional, scientific, and technical services   18.6%
                                      Manufacturing                                      10.7%
                                      Educational services                               10.5%
 Most common occupations:             Management                                         19.1%
                                      Business and financial operations                  11.3%
                                      Computer and mathematical                          9.0%

Notes: N=2,149 for Panel A and N=601 for Panel B.




                                                    6
2.2.1    Bridge Jobs

Though a sudden withdrawal from the labor force around typical retirement ages is the most common
retirement pattern in our sample, a significant fraction of the sample work beyond age 65 either on
their career job or a bridge job.5 Of 2,772 respondents, we find that 2,149 respondents have separated
from their career jobs, with 811 of these individuals engaging in a post-career bridge job. Given that
some might still return to the labor market, this is clearly a lower bound. Hence, the 38% of VRI
respondents that had a bridge job in the VRI is roughly comparable to the 52% of HRS respondents
documented in Maestas (2010).
    Characteristics of bridge jobs and how they compare to those of career jobs hint at which job
characteristics are valued by older Americans. Table 3 compares characteristics of bridge jobs and
career jobs for the respondents who had a bridge job. There are several notable patterns. First, both
wages and hours of bridge jobs are lower than those of the career job for the majority of observations
(Panel A). Second, in Panel B, we observe that bridge jobs are more likely to be self-employed (23%,
compared to 6% in career jobs) and more likely to have a flexible work schedule (54%, compared to
24% in career jobs). The increase in the share of jobs with a flexible work schedule comes from the
fact that 36% of observations moved from a career job with a non-flexible schedule to a bridge job
with a flexible schedule, while the share of transitions from a career job with a flexible schedule to a
bridge job with a non-flexible schedule is only 6% (Panel C). Third, bridge jobs are much less likely to
provide health insurance (Panel B). In particular, the share of bridge jobs providing health insurance is
lower above age 65 (35%, compared to 54% below age 65), when workers become eligible for Medicare.
Taken together, Table 3 suggests that older workers want to move to jobs with less burdensome work
and greater flexibility in work schedule and that they are willing to accept a decrease in earnings and
benefits.
    The above patterns are consistent with workers’ preference for more flexible employment. It could
be, however, that workers transitioning to post-career employment move to industries and occupa-
tions that incidentally have more flexibility. We indeed observe that a significant fraction of bridge
jobs entail a change in industry (43.6%) or occupation (35.1%), though major changes in occupation
characteristics are less common (Table 4, Panel A).6
    To address these confounding effects, we examine whether the likelihood of obtaining work schedule
flexibility in a bridge job depends on whether the worker changed industry or occupation (Table 4,
Panel B). Those who change either industry or occupation are indeed more likely to have a flexible
schedule on bridge jobs, but the effect is quite small. Slightly more than half gained flexibility when
they changed industry (51%) or occupation (53%). The numbers are smaller but similar for those who
stayed in the same industry (44%) or in the same occupation (44%). Changing occupation category
does not significantly affect the likelihood of gaining work schedule flexibility. In Appendix B.2 we
   5
      Recall that the survey defines the career job as the longest and most important job held since age 40. The survey
asks about one subsequent job (if any)—either the current job for those still working or the last job. We define this
post-career job as the bridge job for this analysis.
    6
      To examine changes in occupation characteristics, we classify occupations into three categories based on the type of
abilities most required per occupation: human capital, social capital, and physical strength. The classification is based
on a principal component analysis on the list of required abilities from ONET.



                                                            7
                             Table 3: Comparison: bridge jobs vs. career jobs


                                           A. Hours and Earning

                                               Ratio of Bridge/Career
                              10p          25p        50p              75p          90p      Mean
     Hours                    0.06         0.21       0.74               1            1      0.65
  Hourly wage                 0.19         0.44       0.80             1.14          1.7     1.06
  Annual salary               0.03         0.10       0.44             0.87         1.18     0.54


                               B. Job Characteristics, Career to Bridge

                 Self-                                        Flexible                      Health Insurance
               Employed                                       Schedule                         Provided
        Career              Bridge                  Career          Bridge                  Career       Bridge
         6.4%               23.3%                   24.0%           53.5%                   87.8%        41.0%


                            C. Gaining/Losing Work Schedule Flexibility

                                                             Bridge Job
                                                              Schedule
                                                   Flexible      Not Flexible
    Career Job           Flexible                   17.6%            6.4%
     Schedule           Not Flexible                36.0%           40.0%

 Notes: N=812. Characteristics of career versus bridge jobs for respondents with bridge jobs. Winsorization at 1% and
 99% levels is used in calculating the mean values.



provide a more detailed analysis of the transitions between industries and occupations on the one
hand and changes in the share of flexible jobs within each industry and occupation on the other hand,
confirming this broad finding. We conclude that changes in industry or occupation do not fully explain
the increased prevalence of flexible schedules in bridge jobs.

2.2.2    Job Search after Career Job

The willingness to work reflected in the actual job histories analyzed above is likely underestimated,
both because some workers may still find post-career-job employment after we fielded the survey and
because some workers who desired a bridge job might not have been able to find one. To provide further
insight into willingness to work and more information on the job characteristics that are desired and
not just found, we turn now to job search behavior.7
   7
     Faberman, Mueller, Sahin, and Topa (2017) also field an original survey to study job search behavior. Their focus
is on the differences in search behavior and labor market outcomes between employed and non-employed individuals.



                                                          8
           Table 4: From career to bridge jobs: changes in occupation, industry, and flexibility


 A: Changes in Industry/Occupation

                                                              Yes             No
 Changed Industry                                           43.6%            56.4%
 Changed Occupation                                         35.1%            64.9%
 Changed Occupation Category*                               26.7%            73.3%


 B: Fraction Who Gained Flexibility
                                                                             Conditional on:
                                                         Changed                Changed                 Changed
                                                         Industry              Occupation             Occ. Category
                                                        Yes         No         Yes        No           Yes         No
 Gained Flexibility:                                  51.1%      44.3%        53.0%     44.3%         47.7%      46.6%
 Stayed Fixed-Schedule:                               48.9%      55.7%        47.0%     55.7%         52.3%      53.4%

Notes. Panel A tabulates the share of workers who changed industry, occupation, or occupation category between career
and bridge jobs. It includes every respondent who had a bridge job (N=812).
Panel B calculates the share of respondents who obtained flexibility in work schedule in the bridge job, conditional on
whether they changed industry/occupation or not. The panel includes the subset who did not have a flexible schedule in
their career jobs (N= 617).
*We define three broad occupation categories based on the type of abilities most required per occupation: human capital,
social capital, and physical strength. The classification is based on a principal component analysis on the list of required
abilities from ONET.



    Among those who directly transitioned to complete retirement after their career jobs, only 11%
(147 out of 1,336) report having looked for a new job opportunity. In contrast, 80% (657 out of 812)
of those who had a bridge job actively looked for such an opportunity, while only 20% of those found
their bridge job without reporting searching. Thus, most workers who report having searched actively
successfully found employment. This suggests either that most older non-workers are not interested in
post-career employment or that they are not interested in the jobs they believe they would be likely
to find.
    Table 5 summarizes what job characteristics individuals looked for when they searched. We find
further suggestive evidence that flexibility is an important characteristic for workers pursuing bridge
jobs: 40% want flexibility in deciding the number of hours and 31% want flexibility in how to allocate
these hours. Furthermore, 33% want less responsibility, suggesting pursuit of jobs that are less bur-
densome, while 30% want to be more of their own boss. We also find strong heterogeneity in what
older workers look for—there is no single characteristic that is searched for by more than 40%, and all
considered characteristics, except for better health insurance, are searched for by at least 10% of the
sample.



                                                            9
                           Table 5: Search behavior: what workers looked
                           for


                             Characteristic                     % looked for
                             Change life:
                             Different industry                       23.5
                             Different occupation                     27.4
                             Move to a better location                20.8
                             Flexibility:
                             More flexible hours                      39.9
                             More flexible schedule                   31.0
                             Autonomy:
                             Less responsibility                      32.5
                             More of my own boss                      29.7
                             Other job characteristics:
                             More pay                                 19.9
                             Less commuting time                      25.1
                             More job security                        15.3
                             Better health insurance                   7.8

                           Notes: N=804. Respondents who searched after career job.


    Overall, these findings echo those from analyzing bridge jobs held. Flexibility appears to be an
important factor among those considering working after their career jobs.

2.2.3   Summary

From our measures of employment history and job search behavior we derive the following two main
findings. First, about half of our sample reveal an interest in working after exiting a career job by either
searching for or securing such employment. Second, when searching for post-career employment, older
workers prioritize flexibility in their work schedule. Hence, we find a significant desire for post-career
employment in general and for a bridge job with a flexible work schedule in particular. Still, about half
of the sample retired from a career job without even looking for a post-career employment opportunity.
This, however, does not necessarily imply that these respondents are not interested in working longer,
as their behaviors also reflect their perception of available jobs in the market. Direct measurement of
labor supply preferences requires controlling for demand-side factors, which is achieved in the SSQs
introduced in the next section.


3    Measurement of Willingness to Work Using SSQs
In this section, we introduce and analyze measures of individual preferences for supplying labor. The
SSQs we pose directly control for job opportunities in hypothetical situations. This approach allows us

                                                     10
to identify willingness to work independent of what workers expect to or are able to find in the actual
labor market. By measuring labor supply in different working environments, we can quantify workers’
interest in considered job characteristics. In particular, we focus on the role of flexibility in schedule,
defined as the ability to change the number of regular working hours, in encouraging working longer.
By comparing how willingness to work varies depending on the number of working hours, the SSQs
also allow us to infer a labor-supply parameter that is crucial in retirement decisions, the intertemporal
elasticity of labor supply (IES, see Section 4 for the estimation of the IES). In addition to presenting
details of SSQ design and the information they contain on willingness to work, we also present a
number of internal and external validation checks on the responses.

3.1    Design of SSQs
The SSQs considered in this paper all have a similar structure. The SSQs ask respondents that are
currently not working (“non-workers” hereafter) whether or not they would accept a hypothetical job
opportunity. Characteristics of the hypothetical job offer are based on a “reference job,” which is
constructed based on the characteristics of the most recent job the respondent had (recorded from
the first part of the survey). Hence, the reference job is the career job for those who did not have a
bridge job and it is the last bridge job for those who had a bridge job. Anchoring hypothetical job
opportunities to the job characteristics from actual work history helps respondents put themselves in
the hypothesized situation and also links their SSQ responses to the actual choices they have made.
    We use four SSQs that differ in characteristics of the job or in timing of the job offer. For the job
characteristics, we focus on whether the job allows a flexible schedule or not. In the “fixed schedule”
scenario, the number of hours is fixed to that which respondents worked in the last year of their
reference job. In the “flexible schedule” scenario, the respondents are allowed to choose the number of
hours. Jobs with fixed and flexible schedules are hypothetically made available at two points of time,
at the moment of the survey and at the moment of retirement from the reference job.8
    For each job offer, the SSQ first asks whether the respondent would accept it if the salary were the
same as that in the reference job and then elicits the respondents reservation wage.9 If the respondent
accepts the job offer, the SSQ further asks for the lowest salary at which the respondent would still
accept the offer. If the respondent rejects the job offer, the SSQ further asks for the lowest salary at
which the respondent would switch to accepting the offer. This reservation wage allows us to quantify
a respondent’s willingness to work in each circumstance.
    We illustrate key features of the SSQs by presenting one in detail: A job with a fixed schedule
available at the moment of the survey. At the beginning of the question, the following text is shown
to the respondents:
   8
      Additional SSQs were asked but not used in this paper. See Appendix C for the complete list of the SSQs and
detailed scenarios.
    9
      Under the flexible schedule scenario, the offered salary varies proportionally with the chosen number of hours.




                                                         11
   In the questions that follow, we are interested in what you would choose if you were to have
   certain decisions to make about your employment situation. While the choices that we describe
   are hypothetical, we ask you to do your best to assess what you would choose if you were to
   face these choices today.
   In the scenario that follows, you will be asked to make a choice between Options A and B.
   Option A will be to immediately accept a specified employment opportunity that will be open
   only for a short window (say one week) and will then become unavailable. Option B is instead to
   pursue other possibilities including searching for another employment situation or not working.

       • Option A is a new employment situation that involves a fixed work schedule. Other
          than this possible difference, the new employment situation matches your reference
          employment situation in terms of occupation, annual earnings, and all other charac-
          teristics.

       • Option B is instead to pursue other possibilities including searching for another employ-
          ment situation or not working.

    To better clarify the situation, the question provides additional details:

       • Option A matches your reference employment situation not only in terms of occu-
          pation, annual earnings, and current work schedule, but also in all other aspects that are
          important to you that are not specified in the above table [that summarizes the reference
          job characteristics].

       • If you choose Option B, Option A is no longer available.

       • If you choose Option A you will be able at any later point to quit and to pursue other
          possibilities, including searching for another employment situation or not working.

       • Pay in Option A changes over time as you would expect it to in your reference position.

       • [Omitted if single] In this choice and in all that follow, please suppose that your spouse
          behaves in a manner that is consistent with your choices. If your spouse’s employment
          situation would differ depending on whether you choose Option A or Option B, please
          take this dependence into account in answering the question.

    Then the respondent is asked to choose between Option A and Option B. A respondent who chose
Option A (Option B) is further asked:10
  10
     Feldstein and Poterba (1984), Holzer (1986), and Krueger and Mueller (2016) use a similar survey approach to elicit
the reservation wages of unemployed workers.




                                                          12
       • Starting at the reference salary, imagine that earnings for Option A were to decline
         (increase). What earnings level for Option A would be just low (high) enough that you
         would switch to Option B (Option A)?

   Respondents are allowed to skip the SSQs, but conditional on completing the survey the item
non-response rate to the SSQs is almost zero. There are 1,771 non-workers who answered all four of
the SSQs used in this paper. We divide this group further into those who never had a bridge job
and those who had a bridge job because these two groups may have different preferences for labor
supply and because the reference job is qualitatively different across these two groups. There are 1,337
non-workers without a bridge job and 434 respondents with a bridge job. The reference job is the
career job for those who did not have a bridge job and it is the last bridge job for those who had a
bridge job.

3.2   Willingness to Work at the Time of the Survey
In this subsection, by using the SSQs with hypothetical job opportunities that are available at the time
of the survey, we confirm that older Americans have a strong willingness to work longer. This strong
desire to work is present even if they cannot choose the number of hours they work. Futhermore,
allowing a flexible work schedule boosts people’s willingness to work significantly.

Fixed Schedule Scenario

Even in the fixed schedule scenario, in which respondents have to work the same number of hours as
in their reference job, the acceptance rate is fairly high. The blue (darker) bar in Figure 1 plots the
acceptance rate in this scenario. About one third of non-workers with no bridge job (Panel A) accept
this offer while 44 percent of those who had a bridge job (Panel B) accept it. Acceptance means that
the respondent would come back to the labor market at a salary that is the same as in the reference
job. The acceptance rate for the former group is surprisingly high, given that the vast majority of them
(89 percent) did not even search for a new job opportunity after leaving their career jobs (and had not
returned to work at the time of the survey). This demonstrates that, at least for these individuals,
they are not working not because of their lack of interest in working, but because of a (perceived)
lack of job opportunities that are as attractive as their reference jobs. A non-negligible fraction of the
respondents are willing to work even at a lower wage than that they used to earn. Twenty percent
of those who did not have a bridge job and 30% of those who did are willing to accept a 10% wage
reduction to work in the hypothesized situation. Even with a 20% wage reduction, some respondents
(10% and 20% respectively for each group) are still willing to work.

Flexible Schedule Scenario

When the hypothetical offer adds flexibility by allowing the respondent to adjust the number of
working hours, willingness to work increases significantly. The yellow (lighter) bar in Figure 1 shows
the increase in the acceptance rate in the flexible schedule compared to the fixed schedule. When the
schedule is flexible, at the reference hourly wage, more than half of the sample would accept the offer.

                                                   13
                            Figure 1: Would current non-workers return to work?

                 A. Had no bridge job                                              B. Had a bridge job




Note: N=1,337 for Panel A and 434 for Panel B. Wage reduction is calculated relative to the wage of the
reference job. The blue (darker) bars represent the acceptance rates under a fixed schedule scenario and the
yellow (lighter) bars represent the increases in the acceptance rates with a flexibility in the work schedule.



This is half as many again as with the fixed schedule. The increase in the acceptance rate in both
groups is about 20 percentage points. This means that 20% of individuals did not want to work under
a fixed schedule at this hourly wage, but were willing to work at the same hourly wage if they could
choose the number of hours. Moreover, many are willing to accept a significant wage reduction as long
as they can choose their own work schedule. About 10% more non-workers are willing to take a 10%
wage reduction compared to the fixed schedule scenario, for example.
    Figure 2 presents the full distribution of the reservations wages, normalized as a fraction of the
individual’s reference job wage. For any value of the reservation wage between 50% and 150% of the
reference wage, the acceptance rate is higher (i.e., the CDF is higher) when the offer comes with a
flexible schedule. In both scenarios, the slope of the distribution, and hence the extensive margin
elasticity, is the largest going from 70% to 100% of the reference wage.
    Conditional on accepting the offer with a flexible schedule at the reference hourly wage, we find an
overall tendency to reduce work, with a large degree of heterogeneity in the desired change in hours
worked (Table 6, Panel A). The median respondent (whether they had a bridge job or not) wants about
10% fewer hours than the reference schedule, showing that for most non-workers, their preference for
a flexible work schedule is associated with a modest desired reduction in the number of hours.


3.3     Willingness to Work at the Time of Retirement from the Last Job
The second set of SSQs concern hypothetical job opportunities that were made available at the time
of retirement from their last job (i.e., immediately after they separated from their last job).11 These
   11
     For those who retired within the last two years, the survey did not ask this set of SSQs because for them the situation
at the time of retirement is too similar to that at the time of the survey.


                                                            14
                   Figure 2: Reservation wage distribution of current non-workers

               A. Had no bridge job                                           B. Had a bridge job




Note: Reservation wage is calculated as a fraction of the wage the respondent had in their reference job. The
figure plots the CDF of reservation wages in the range between 0.5 and 1.5.


                                 Table 6: Desired reduction in hours (%)


                     A. Time of the Survey
                                                     10p     25p    50p    75p     90p     N
                     Had no bridge job              -15.4     0     11.4    44.6   69.6   710
                     Had a bridge job               -11.8     0      9.4    39.7   62.5   291


                      B. Time of retirement
                                                     10p     25p    50p    75p     90p     N
                     Had no bridge job               -2.9     0     19.2    50.0   71.2   545
                     Had a bridge job                 0       0      7.7    27.3   50.0   294

                    Notes: This table includes respondents who would accept the offer of a flex-
                    ible schedule at the reference hourly wage.


questions aim to investigate which hypothetical job opportunities would have changed their decision
to stop working.
   Figure 3 summarizes the acceptance rates from the fixed and flexible schedule scenarios. Overall
patterns are similar to those for job opportunities made available at the time of the survey. Even
when the offer does not allow for any flexibility in schedule, the acceptance rate is fairly high at the
reference wage. It is 30% for those who retired from their career jobs and 60% for those who retired
from their bridge jobs. Some individuals would have been willing to take a significant wage reduction
if they could have had such a job opportunity right after they left their last job. 20% of those who
retired from their career jobs and 40% of those who retired from their bridge jobs would have been
willing to take at least a 10% wage reduction.


                                                        15
                      Figure 3: Would current non-workers have continued to work?

                 A. Had no bridge job                                             B. Had a bridge job




Note: N=1,226 for Panel A and 432 for Panel B. Wage reduction is calculated relative to the wage of the last
job.



    Allowing for a flexible schedule again increases willingness to work, but the effect is smaller at
the time of retirement than at the time of the survey. At the reference wage, flexibility increases
the acceptance rate by 10 percentage points for both groups compared to the fixed schedule scenario,
which is still significant but smaller than the 20 percentage point increase we saw from the questions
that offered jobs at the time of the survey. The effect is even smaller when there is a wage reduction
of 10% or more.
    For those who did not have a bridge job, the smaller effect is due to a lower acceptance rate for a
job with a flexible schedule at the time of retirement. This may suggest a certain amount of burn-out
(Maestas and Li, 2007, Jacobs and Piyapromdee, 2016): some respondents did not even want to work
part-time immediately after leaving their career job. Indeed, the acceptance rate for the opportunity
with a flexible schedule at the time of the survey was 10% lower for those who stopped working less than
two years ago compared to those who stopped working more than two years ago, further suggesting
burn-out. On the other hand, for those whose reference job is a bridge job, the smaller effect is due
to a higher acceptance rate for a fixed schedule job. This may suggest that they had already adjusted
hours as desired in the bridge job.12 These patterns are also clear from the full distribution of the
reservation wages (Figure 4). At the time of retirement (the solid curves), reservation wages tend to
be lower when the offer comes with a flexible schedule, but the gap between the two curves is smaller
than that from the time of the survey (the dashed curves). The extensive margin elasticity is again
the largest from 70% to 100% of the reference wage.
   12
      Conditional on being willing to accept the offer at the reference hourly wage, the desired reduction in working hours
at the time of retirement is slightly larger for those who retired from a career job and slightly smaller for those who
retired from a bridge job, compared to the desired reduction at the time of the survey (Table 6, Panel B).




                                                            16
                     Figure 4: Reservation wage distribution at the time of retirement

                 A. Had no bridge job                                              B. Had a bridge job




Note: Reservation wages are calculated as a fraction of the wage respondents had in their reference jobs. The
figure plots the CDF of reservation wages in the range between 0.5 and 1.5. The figure also shows the
distributions for job offers at the time of the survey for the corresponding scenarios and groups in dashed
curves for comparison.



3.4     Robustness and Credibility
Credibility of the findings in this paper hinges on the quality of responses to the SSQs. In the absence of
a pecuniary incentive to elicit truthful and accurate survey responses as is typical in field experiments
(e.g., Mas and Pallais, 2017a), careful design of survey questions and ex-post tests on responses are
necessary to make sure that respondents paid enough attention to and understood the hypothesized
situations and also that the responses reflect true preferences as manifested in measured behavior. As
part of the survey design, we implemented a pilot survey with a small sample who provided us detailed
feedback on the SSQs that helped improve the main survey. In addition, we support credibility of
the SSQ responses using a number of internal and external consistency tests. This subsection reports
the results from two external consistency tests, which show that the SSQ responses are related to
certain observed behaviors in a reasonable manner. Appendix E reports additional credibility results,
including tests that document a within-person internal consistency of responses and comprehension
tests that show respondents understood the hypothetical situation and questions.

3.4.1    Search Behaviors and SSQ Responses

As external validation, we examine whether the SSQ responses are consistent with respondents’ actual
post-career-job search behavior. Table 7 compares the acceptance rate of the offer under different
scenarios at the time of the survey, for respondents grouped based on their search behavior.13 Allowing
   13
     We run this test only for the non-workers who did not have a bridge job. For those who had a bridge job, what they
were looking for after quitting the career job, e.g., fewer working hours, might have already been reflected in the bridge
job they actually had, which serves as the reference job in the SSQ. If that is the case, offering further flexibility in the
SSQ may have limited effect for them.



                                                             17
for a flexible schedule in the SSQs indeed had the largest impact on those who actually searched for a
flexible schedule. The increase in the acceptance rate due to flexibility in work schedule for that group
(36 percentage points) is larger than that for those who never searched (18 percentage points) and for
those who searched for other job characteristics (20 percentage points). Despite the small sample size
of the first group, the increase in the acceptance rate for that group is significantly different from that
for those who never searched at the 5 percent level. Appendix E.1 confirms a similar pattern from
the search for another job characteristic that is not the focus of this paper. The consistency between
the SSQ responses and actual search behavior suggests that the SSQ responses contain information
on individuals’ true preferences.

                           Table 7: Search behaviors and SSQ responses: accep-
                           tance rate at the time of the survey


                                                                N     Acceptance rate

                            Searched for                              Fixed      Flexible

                            Did not search                   1,188      33.7        51.5
                            Flexibility                        63       34.9        71.4
                            Other than flexibility             84       33.3        64.3

                           Notes: The tabulation includes only non-workers who did not have
                           a bridge job.



3.4.2    Reasons for Separation and SSQ Responses

The first part of the survey includes a battery of questions adapted from the HRS concerning the
reasons why individuals separated from their previous jobs. Respondents are asked to choose the most
important reason from options such as retirement, family obligation, health issues, etc. Most non-
workers (in particular 90% of those who did not have a bridge job) report that they quit to retire.14
Yet, some indicate that they were forced to leave the job by reporting reasons such as being laid off,
discharged, and employer closing or selling the business.
    In Table 8 we compare the SSQ responses between those who were forced to leave their previous job
(defined as those who report any of “laid off,”“discharged,”“employer closed business,” and “employer
sold business” as the main reason for the separation) and those who were not forced to leave the
previous job (defined as the compliment of the former, most of them reporting “retirement” as the
main reason). We expect those who were forced to leave their last job to be more likely to accept
an offer made at the time of that separation. Table 8 confirms that this is indeed the case. In both
fixed and flexible schedule scenarios at the time of retirement, the acceptance rate is higher for those
who report being forced to leave their last job. The difference is larger for those who did not have a
  14
     We debated whether or not to include retirement on the list of choices because it obscures the reason for separation,
but for comparability with the HRS we did include it.



                                                           18
bridge job. This pattern is consistent with those who were forced to leave their job having wanted to
continue to work if they could find a reasonably good offer while those who were not forced to leave
having wanted to have at least some time off.

                Table 8: Reasons for separation and SSQ responses: acceptance rate at
                the time of retirement


                  Group                      Separation reason            Fixed      Flexible        N

                  No bridge job              forced to leave               50.4         57.0        130
                                             not forced to leave           29.9         43.1       1,105

                  Had a bridge job           forced to leave               67.0         73.0        100
                                             not forced to leave           60.5         66.6        334

                Notes: A separation is classified as forced if the respondent mentioned any of “laid off,”
                “discharged,”“employer closed business,” and “employer sold business.”


    It may seem puzzling that 30% of people who do not report being forced to leave their career job
would, at the moment of separation, accept a job offer with similar characteristics to their career job
and a fixed work schedule. It is possible that, even though they report not being forced to leave, they
were experiencing negative changes in working conditions or anticipating such declines. To examine
this possibility, we use a question from the first part of the survey that asks whether respondents
experienced any change in working conditions around the moment of a job separation, regardless of
whether they were the main reasons for retirement or not. The share of those who experienced any
negative changes in working conditions is higher among those who would accept the job offer with a
fixed schedule (21%) than those who would not (10%).15 In addition, 22% of those who would accept
the job offer report that they had a special early retirement incentive offer (18% for those who would
not). Taken together, this additional evidence provides potential reasons why many in this sample
decided to leave their career jobs even if they remained willing to work under the same conditions.

3.5     Summary
The SSQs allow us to identify a strong and prevalent willingness to work among older Americans.
One third of current non-workers in the VRI report being willing to work again at the time of the
survey, even if they could not choose the number of hours worked, as long as they could find a job
that has similar characteristics to the last job they had. Many of them also report being willing to
take a significant wage reduction to have such a job opportunity. The estimated willingness to work
is much stronger than that which can be inferred from the behavioral data only. In particular, of all
the people who transitioned directly from working in a career job to not working at all, only 11%
   15
     Individuals are defined to have experienced negative changes in working conditions if they report any of the following:
“supervisor encouraged departure,”“coworker encouraged departure,”“waged reduced (or about to be reduced),”“would
have been laid off,”“new job duties,” or “new job location.” Other options included in the question are “hours reduced,”
“became eligible for a pension,”“employer changed health insurance,” and “special early retirement incentive offer.”


                                                            19
searched for work after quitting their career job, but one third would be willing to work again in a
job with similar characteristics to their career job. This difference between labor market outcomes,
labor search behavior, and reported desire to work demonstrates the importance of controlling for
demand-side factors, or workers’ perceptions of those factors, in measuring willingness to work late in
life.
    The SSQs suggest that older workers have a strong preference for flexibility in their work schedules.
Allowing for flexibility not only increases the acceptance rate at the reference wage (by 20 percentage
points at the time of the survey), it also increases the wage reduction workers are willing to accept. This
suggests that the increase in the share of jobs with a flexible schedule among bridge jobs documented
in the previous section is at least in part driven by workers’ preferences.
    Strong willingness to work is not confined to a specific age group. Indeed we find that the acceptance
rates in each scenario are fairly similar across all the age groups where we have dense observations
(i.e., ages 60-80). This again suggests that demand-side factors play an important role in explaining
the sudden withdrawal from the labor force of individuals in their mid to late 60s. We also find that
acceptance rates do not significantly vary with wealth across the wide range of wealth in the VRI
sample. This suggests that the strong willingness to work documented in this paper is not confined
just to those with substantial financial savings in late life.
    Though the SSQs are asked with hypothetical job opportunities, tests of the credibility of the
responses suggest that such purpose-designed questions can elicit useful information about respondents’
true preferences.


4       IES Estimation Using the SSQs
SSQ responses indicate a stronger preference for reduced hours and greater flexibility among older
Americans than observed retirement patterns imply. Furthermore, as highlighted in Rogerson and
Wallenius (2013, RW hereafter), the prevalence of abrupt retirements is puzzling in the context of
standard models of labor supply in which individuals prefer to smooth leisure utility. In RW’s model
strong enough production nonconvexities or a large enough intertemporal elasticity of substitution
of labor supply (IES) are able to generate abrupt retirements. As emphasized by RW, patterns of
abrupt retirement are not enough to separately identify the strength of production nonconvexities and
the IES. In this section we show how to identify the IES independent of production nonconvexities
by combining SSQ responses with RW’s model. We then estimate the IES for each respondent and
calculate the strength of production nonconvexities needed to explain typical retirement patterns. Our
estimates suggest IES values slightly towards the high end, but within the range, of previous estimates
that use micro data. These values of the IES provide further evidence that demand side constraints
or production nonconvexities are responsible for the prevalence of abrupt labor force exits.
    We first document the relationship between production nonconvexities, the IES, and hour-profiles/labor
force exit, as well as the challenge in identifying the IES in the presence of nonconvexities. We show
that SSQ responses identify the IES independent of production nonconvexities and then present our es-
timated IES distribution. Finally, as a credibility check, we show that the IES estimates are negatively



                                                    20
correlated with searching for flexible jobs, as expected.

4.1   The Identification Problem with Behavioral Data Alone
The IES is a key parameter in studying retirement behavior, as it determines how individuals want
to allocate the hours they work over their lifetime. An individual with a low IES wants to smooth
hours worked over time, while an individual with a high IES is comfortable with highly variable hours
worked over the life cycle, including possibly periods of full time work and full retirement.
   As noted in RW, there is an inconsistency between the low IES commonly estimated in micro
studies and that typically needed in models to rationalize observed retirement behavior: generating an
abrupt retirement requires an IES much larger than one, but most of the empirical studies (leveraging
labor supply responses to tax changes) suggest an IES much smaller than one (see Keane, 2011, for a
survey). To reconcile this inconsistency, RW propose introducing a nonconvexity in production that
limits workers’ desire to choose to work part-time en route to labor force exit. Of course, this suggests
that inferring the IES from behavioral data is contingent on the assumed strength of the production
nonconvexity. In fact, any observed retirement behavior can be rationalized by any value of the IES
for some freely-chosen production nonconvexity.
   The model used in RW is as follows. In their model with age-dependent preferences and wages,
nonconvexity in production, and time and expenditure fixed costs of work, a household chooses ct and
ht to solve:
                                         "                                   #
                                     T
                                                      (1 − eh̄ − ht )1−1/γ
                                 Z
                            max          U (ct ) + αt                          dt                    (1)
                                   t=0                      1 − 1/γ
                                  Z T                   Z T
                             s.t.      (ct + ec̄) dt =       (w0,t hθt ) ht dt + Y,                  (2)
                                   t=0                     t=0

where t is the age subscript, ht is the amount of labor supplied (normalized as a fraction of the total
time endowment), γ parameterizes the intertemporal elasticity of substitution for leisure, αt is the
weight on utility from leisure, e is an indicator function for currently working, h̄ and c̄ are time and
expenditure fixed costs of working, and Y is total life-time resources other than labor earnings. Let
wt = w0,t hθt denote the hourly wage. θ is the elasticity of wage to hours and controls the strength
of the nonconvexity in production and w0,t is the scalar that anchors the age-profile of wages. The
hourly wage is an increasing function of the number of hours worked, which captures the disadvantage
to part-time working. Given the amount of labor supplied, γ pins down the IES by:

                                              dht /ht    1 − eh̄ − ht
                                     IES :=           =γ              .                              (3)
                                              dwt /wt         ht

For simplicity, it is assumed that there is no uncertainty, no time discounting, and that the interest
rate is zero. This model abstracts from some factors that might be relevant to workers near normal
retirement ages, including Social Security and pension benefit accrual, burn out, and human capital.
In Section 4.5, we discuss how inclusion of these factor would affect the main results of the current
section.


                                                      21
    Suppose that either αt is increasing or w0,t is decreasing over age. Then households would want to
work more when younger and less when older. More importantly, given the values of the fixed costs
of working (c̄ and h̄), if the IES is high or the nonconvexity in production (θ) is strong, then this
incentive is sufficiently strong to generate a direct transition from working full-time to retirement.
    To be more specific, suppose we want to generate the typical retirement pattern from this model
that at certain age, say t = r, a worker who was working hr number of hours, suddenly transitions
into no work. For r to be the optimal retirement age, the following first order condition needs to be
satisfied at that age:
                                                                                                  !
                         0   ∗                                 1      (1 − eh̄ − hr )1−1/γ
                       U (c      )(w0,r h1+θ
                                         r     − c̄) = αr           −                                 ,           (4)
                                                            1 − 1/γ         1 − 1/γ

where c∗ is equal to lifetime labor earnings plus Y under the assumption that U (·) represents a
preference for consumption smoothing and a normalization of T = 1. The left hand side of equation
(4) is the marginal benefit to working longer and the right hand side is the marginal cost. In addition,
for hr to be the optimal number of working hours at r, the following first order condition needs to be
satisfied:

                                    U 0 (c∗ )(1 + θ)w0,r hθr = αr (1 − eh̄ − hr )−1/γ .                           (5)

The left hand side is the marginal benefit to increasing hours worked and the right hand side is the
marginal cost. By dividing both sides of these two first order conditions, we obtain the exact value of
θ that is just large enough to generate a direct transition from working hr hours to no work:16

                                                                            1
                    θ = (1 − ĉ)hr (1 − 1/γ)                                                        − 1.          (6)
                                                   (1 − h̄ − hr   )1/γ (1   − (1 − h̄ − hr )1−1/γ )

This equation relates the IES and θ. When the IES is higher, the household is more sensitive to
the financial disincentives associated with part-time working (the fixed costs and nonconvexity in
production), so it is more discouraged from working part-time and more likely to choose a direct
transition to retirement. In addition, when θ is higher, the hourly wage reduction associated with
part-time work is larger, so the household faces a larger disincentive to part-time working. Thus, for
a higher θ, direct retirements can be rationalized with a lower value of the IES.
    Figure 5 presents this trade-off graphically by plotting equation 6, with the shaded region corre-
sponding to the parameter space that can generate abrupt retirement from full-time work.17 Following
RW, we assume that the fixed cost of working in terms of foregone leisure is 4% of the time endow-
ment (h̄ = 0.04) and the fixed cost in terms of expenditure is 14% of full-time earnings (ĉ = 0.14).
We use these values of fixed costs as our baseline calibration for all following exercises.18 In addi-
  16
    Following RW, we assume the expenditure fixed cost of working (c̄) to be proportional to labor earnings at hr .
                                                           c̄
Hence, the parameter ĉ in equation (6) is defined as ĉ =  (1+θ) .
                                                            w0,r hr
  17
     Full-time work is calibrated as 2,000 hours per year, or hr = 0.385, which is common among career jobs of the VRI
sample as well as the HRS sample.
  18
     In Appendix D.2 we report results from alternative calibrations.



                                                             22
tion to highlighting the role of the IES and nonconvexity in production in generating retirement from
full-time work, this figure also reveals the identification challenge associated with using behavioral
data only (the direct transition to retirement in this case). While the observed behavior excludes
certain combinations of these two factors—all of the parameter values outside of the shaded area can
be ruled out—there remains a substantial area of the parameter space that can rationalize transitions
from full-time work to retirement. Any value of the IES can be consistent with the observed behavior
depending on the assumed value of θ. For example, if θ is 0.3, then the IES needs to be larger than 0.9
to rationalize abrupt retirement (blue line in Figure 5). But if θ is 1, then the IES can be as small as
0.4 (red line in Figure 5). The opposite is also true: any value of θ can rationalize sudden retirement
depending on the value of the IES. If we can pin down one of the two parameters using an additional
source of information, then the observed behavior places bounds on the values the other parameter
can take. This motivates our estimation of the IES using the SSQs.

              Figure 5: Required IES and θ to generate retirement from full-time work




Note: The green area contains the combinations of the IES and θ that are consistent with a direct transition
from full-time work to retirement when full-time work is calibrated as hr = 0.385 (2,000 hours per year). The
boundary of the area corresponds to equation (6). The blue line represents values of the IES that are
consistent with a direct transition if θ = 0.4 while the red line represents those for θ = 1.0.




4.2   Identifying IES using SSQ Responses
The SSQs collect two different wage and hour pairs (under a fixed and flexible schedule) that make
an individual indifferent to working or exiting the labor market. In this section we demonstrate that




                                                     23
this is sufficient to identify an individual’s IES, independent of the nonconvexity in production.19
Intuitively, a small IES corresponds to a steep increase in the marginal disutility of extra work. Thus,
a respondent with a smaller IES would be willing to accept a larger wage reduction in order to work
fewer hours. We formally derive this relationship below.
    First, suppose that hf ixed is the number of hours respondents have to work in the fixed schedule
scenario and wf ixed is the reservation hourly wage that makes respondents indifferent between accepting
this job offer and not working for the considered moment. If the marginal value of resources, U 0 (c∗ ),
is not affected by this choice (which is a good approximation for the VRI sample because they have
high financial wealth and relatively short remaining time to work), the extensive-margin indifference
condition in equation (4) determines the reservation wage, wf ixed , as:
                                                                                                             !
                                                                           1      (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ
                             U 0 (c∗ )(hf ixed wf ixed (1 − ĉ)) = αt           −                                ,                   (7)
                                                                        1 − 1/γ           1 − 1/γ

where αt may depend on the time the question concerns (i.e., the time of the survey or the time of
retirement). The right-hand side is the foregone utility from giving up leisure to work the fixed number
of hours, while the left-hand side is the value of income from this job.
    Second, let hf lex be the number of hours chosen under the flexible schedule scenario and wf lex be
the reservation hourly wage that makes respondents indifferent between accepting this offer and not
working at the considered moment. At the reservation wages, utility is the same whether working a
fixed or a flexible schedule, yielding the following relationship:
                                                                                                                             !
             0       ∗                                              (1 − h̄ − hf lex )1−1/γ   (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ
           U (c )(hf ixed wf ixed − hf lex wf lex ) = αt                                    −                                    ,   (8)
                                                                           1 − 1/γ                    1 − 1/γ

where the right-hand side is the leisure cost of working longer and the left-hand side is the value
of additional income from working longer. This equality holds at the reservation wages because the
outside option of not accepting the offer is equal across scenarios.
    By dividing equation (7) by equation (8) and rearranging terms, we get:
                                                                                                                     !
                         wf lex    hf ixed       (1 − ĉ)((1 − h̄ − hf lex )1−1/γ − (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ )
                                 =            1−                                                                         .           (9)
                         wf ixed   hf lex                        1 − (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ

Since we are using two questions that place the individual at the same point in time, the time-
varying weight on leisure-utility (αt ) and the marginal utility of income (U 0 (c∗ )) cancel out. Given
the calibrated values of the fixed costs of working (h̄ and ĉ), the only unknown variable in equation
(9) is γ, so we can estimate the IES that is consistent with this condition and observed responses
hf lex , wf ixed , and wf lex .
    Equation (9) is basically an indifference curve. For a given value of the IES (or γ), it determines the
                 h           w
pairs of { hffixed
               lex
                   , wffixed
                         lex
                             } that make the individual indifferent between working under the fixed schedule
and the flexible schedule (where the level of wf ixed satisfies equation (7)). Figure 6 plots the indifference
   19
        See Pistaferri (2003) for an alternative identification strategy based on subjective expectations of wage growth.



                                                                        24
curves for various values of the IES. The lower is the IES, the steeper is the indifference curve. The
marginal disutility of work increases faster with a lower IES, hence a worker with a lower IES would
accept a larger wage reduction for a given reduction in hours. As the IES increases, the curve becomes
flatter.20 This demonstrates why the IES is a key parameter in explaining retirement behavior in RW’s
model: Those with a small IES highly value the option to work part-time, so unless the nonconvexity
in production is strong, they will choose a part-time bridge job over abrupt retirement. On the other
hand, for those with a high IES, a small penalty for part-time work is enough to discourage them from
working part-time and hence to induce a transition from full-time work to complete retirement.

                           Figure 6: SSQ responses and IES: Indifference curves




                                            h      w
Note: Each curve connects the pairs of { hffixed
                                             lex
                                                 , wffixed
                                                       lex
                                                           } that make the worker with the considered value of IES
indifferent between working under the fixed schedule and flexible schedule scenario, under hf ixed = 0.385,
                                                                         h lex
h̄ = 0.04, and ĉ = 0.14. The figure zooms in the range [0.5, 1.0] for hffixed where most of the responses fall.


                               h       w
    An observed pair of { hffixed
                              lex
                                  , wffixed
                                        lex
                                            } from the SSQ allows us to pick which indifference curve the
respondent is on. This, in turn, allows us to estimate the IES value for this respondent as the one
that corresponds to the chosen indifference curve.
                          h        w
    Some responses ({ hffixed
                          lex
                              , wffixed
                                    lex
                                        }) cannot be rationalized with any value of the IES. For some of
these responses, we can assign them either top- or bottom-coded values of the IES, by extending the
  20
     In the absence of fixed costs of working, the curves are always upward-sloping and they converge to the horizontal
curve as the IES goes to infinity. Fixed costs of working create negative slopes to compensate for the increase in the
average cost of working when the number of hours is reduced, either when the IES is very high or the reduction of the
number of hours is large.


                                                          25
logic of the RW model and allowing the fixed costs to be heterogeneous. Some respondents (4%) choose
a number of hours under a flexible schedule that is too small to be justified under the baseline fixed
costs. But such responses can be rationalized with lower fixed costs and a low IES. Thus, we assign a
low value of IES (0.05) to these responses. On the other hand, some respondents (10%) demand an
hourly wage increase for working fewer hours that is too large to be justified under the baseline fixed
costs. Such responses can be rationalized with larger fixed costs and a high IES. We assign a high
value of the IES (10) to such responses. However, those responses where total earnings from working
fewer hours is greater than or equal to that from working full time (wf lex hf lex ≥ wf ixed hf ixed , the area
above the dotted curve in Figure 6) cannot be justified under any labor supply model with a positive
utility value of leisure regardless of the values of the fixed costs, so they are dropped from the analysis
(10% of the sample).
    Furthermore, some responses do not reveal relevant information for the IES estimation so they
are not included in the estimation. Those who choose to reject both offers at any reasonable wage
do not provide relevant information for the estimation (37% of the sample).21 These individuals may
indeed have low IES since allowing flexibility does not change their decision to retire, though it is not
operational because they also have low preference for work later in life (high αt ). Respondents who
report the same number of hours and reservation wages in both scenarios provide only one effective
observation, which is not enough to construct the indifference curve needed for estimation (10% of the
sample).

4.3     IES Estimates
Figure 7 shows the cumulative distribution of the estimated IES under the baseline calibration of the
fixed costs.22 The median IES estimates are 0.45 when using SSQs with job offers at the time of the
survey and 0.83 when using SSQs with job offers at the time of retirement. These are well in line
with findings from the microeconomic literature: the average among the estimates from the studies
examined in Keane (2011) is 0.31. Recent works including Domeij and Floden (2006) and Chetty
(2012) show that accounting for frictions such as credit constraints and adjustment costs can lead to
a larger estimate: Chetty (2012) suggests 0.5 as a reasonable estimate. RW argues that under the
values of the nonconvexity in production that are often used in the literature the IES needs to be at
least 0.75 to explain the observed retirement behavior.
    Our estimates do not depend on the strength of the nonconvexity in production. In fact, given
the RW model, our estimates provide a range of the nonconvexity in production that are in line with
a transition from full-time work to retirement. According to Figure 5, the median IES estimate from
the offers at the time of the survey (0.45) suggests that θ needs to be larger than 0.85 to generate such
a retirement pattern while that from the offers at the time of retirement (0.83) suggests a range above
0.35. Any value below this threshold is not consistent with a retirement from full-time work for more
than half of the sample. For example, a worker whose IES is 0.45 and works full-time immediately
before retirement would be willing to accept an 8% wage reduction to work 10% fewer hours. However,
   21
      If the reservation wage is given in one scenario but not in the other, we assume a high reservation wage for the latter
(twice of the reference wage).
   22
      See Appendix Figure D.3 for the results from alternative calibrations.


                                                             26
                                   Figure 7: Distribution of IES estimates




Notes: The curves represent CDFs of the estimated IES. Each point corresponds to a respondent. The
horizontal axis shows the estimated IES and the vertical axis shows the share of estimates that are smaller
than or equal to that value of the IES. N=796 for offers at the time of the survey and N= 668 for offers at the
time of retirement.


with θ = 0.85, the wage a firm is willing to pay to such a part-time worker is slightly less than that,
resulting in a direct transition from full-time to no work.23
    Though this is an indirect inference of which validity may be affected by elements not explicitly
considered in the baseline model (see Section 4.5), the estimates obtained from the SSQs, in particular
those from the offers at the time of retirement, are in line with findings from the empirical literature
that uses exogenous variations in the number of hours. This literature either uses variations in hours
induced by Social Security rules (Aaronson and French, 2004) or from the number of children of female
workers (e.g., Rosen, 1976, Moffitt, 1984, and Ermisch and Wright, 1993). Aaronson and French (2004)
find that reducing hours per week from 40 to 20 between ages 62 and 65 results in a 25% wage penalty,
which implies θ = 0.42.
    We also estimate significant heterogeneity in the IES. For about a quarter of respondents, the IES
is less than 0.2 while for another quarter it is larger than 5. The former group will find part-time
working attractive even when θ is as high as 3. The latter group will choose retirement over part-time
work even in the absence of the nonconvexity (θ = 0) since the fixed costs are enough to discourage
them from working part-time.
  23
     Given the fixed costs and increasing marginal disutility of work, the marginal decrease in the reservation wage
associated with fewer hours is larger when the number of hours is closer to full-time work. Therefore, if the only part-
time option allowed is a much larger reduction in hours, say 50% fewer hours, then the value of θ needed to rationalize
an abrupt retirement is only 0.25 if the IES = 0.45 (see also RW).



                                                          27
4.4    IES Estimates and Measured Search Behavior
The RW model we build upon predicts that individuals with a smaller IES value part-time options
more. Relying on this relationship, we provide evidence supporting the validity of our IES estimates
by examining whether the IES estimates predict searching for flexibility, conditional on searching for
a job opportunity, after a career job exit.24 To avoid confounding the analysis due to differences
in reference job type (bridge vs. career), we study those who had a bridge job.25 We use Tobit to
account for the top- and bottom-coding of the IES. Because the IES is right skewed, we consider a log
specification.
    Table 9 reports the association between the log of the IES estimates and searching for a flexible
schedule controlling for key demographic variables including gender, marital status, and age, last job
characteristics such as whether they had a flexible schedule or not and the number of hours, and a
dummy variable for the SSQ from which the IES is estimated. The point estimate suggests that, as
predicted by the model, those who searched for flexibility indeed have a smaller IES. They have on
average a 50% smaller IES than those who did not look for flexibility. Notwithstanding the small
sample size, the estimate is statistically significant at the 10% level. This result provides evidence that
the estimated IES distribution captures true heterogeneity in preferences that affect behavior. The
other coefficients, though some with large estimated effects, are statistically insignificant. Since the
IES estimates are based on SSQs that are designed to extract preferences, the insignificance of these
coefficients is a desired outcome.
                                 Table 9: IES estimates and search behavior


           Variable                                                    Coefficient       Standard error

           Searched for flexibility                                       -0.566*              (0.309)
           Single male                                                     0.565               (0.538)
           Coupled male                                                    0.349               (0.407)
           Coupled female                                                  -0.692              (0.552)
           Age                                                             0.017               (0.023)
           Number of hours in the last job                                 -0.000              (0.000)
           Having a flexible schedule in the last job                      -0.066              (0.348)
           Social capital occupation                                       -0.097              (0.317)
           Physical capital occupation                                     0.399               (0.585)
           SSQ at the time of retirement                                  0.963*               (0.289)


          Note: N = 363. The dependent variable is the log of IES estimates. Tobit is used
          to account for top- and bottom-coding of the IES. Only those who had a bridge job
          are included. * indicates significance under 10% level.

  24
      We focus on jobs they searched for instead of jobs they worked, since jobs worked are more affected by the available
jobs offered in the market.
   25
      The vast majority of those who did not have a bridge job did not search.




                                                           28
4.5   Robustness with Respect to Modeling Assumptions
In this paper, we demonstrate that by using the SSQ responses and the RW model one can estimate
the IES, a key supply-side parameter in explaining retirement behavior. We also show that the
IES estimates provide an indirect estimate of a key demand-side parameter in the RW model, the
nonconvexity in production. One might be concerned that overly-restrictive modeling choices are
driving the results. Note that the RW model used for both the IES estimation and indirect inference
on the nonconvexity parameter abstracts from some factors that might be relevant to workers near
normal retirement ages, including Social Security and pension benefit accrual, burn out, and the
accumulation and loss in human capital. In this subsection, we discuss how our main findings would
be affected by inclusion of these elements in the model.
   By the design of the SSQs, the IES estimates are not affected by inclusion of these elements.
Recall that the IES estimates are obtained from comparing responses to two hypothetical new job
offers available at the same point of time, that are identical except for the number of hours. Choices
in the SSQs do not affect the pension benefits from previous jobs. Also, for workers at or above the
full retirement age (66)—i.e., most of the non-worker sample—additional earnings do not affect Social
Security benefits. If burn-out takes the form of an increase in αt the IES estimates are unaffected,
because burnout does not enter equation (9), the key equation for the IES estimation. αt cancels out
when we compare the fixed and flexible job offers by dividing equation (7) by equation (8) because we
are comparing two offers available at the same point in time. Regarding human capital, it is unlikely
that at older ages human capital accumulation provides additional incentive to work (Heckmann,
Lochner and Taber 1998, Huggett, Ventura and Yaron, 2011). At these ages, what is more likely to
be relevant in workers’ search for a bridge job is a potential loss of firm-specific human capital. But
loss of firm-specific human capital does not enter the estimation equation either because the equation
is based on the reservation wages demanded by workers, not the wages that firms are willing to offer.
   Indirect inference concerning the nonconvexity parameter based on the IES estimates and the RW
model may be affected by inclusion of these elements to a certain extent. RW argue that the mapping
between the IES and nonconvexity parameters that are consistent with observed retirement behaviors
is not significantly affected by Social Security and pensions. For those who are close to or over the full
retirement age, the effect of current income on the total amount of Social Security benefits is limited,
because on the one hand, additional earnings do not affect the average indexed monthly earnings much
at that stage, and on the other hand, workers face limited negative incentive to work even before the
full retirement age under the current rule. So it plays a role similar to non-labor income (Y ) that is
already incorporated in the model (see equation (2)). Private pensions may provide an incentive for an
early retirement, as we observed in Section 3.4.2. As RW argue, however, what matters in this context
is not just a return to work at the previous employer but that to work in general, where the latter is
not affected by an early retirement incentive generated by private pensions from previous jobs. Burn
out provides another reason for a sudden transition to no work at all, but it should be accompanied
by a loss of human capital while not working to explain why retirees do not return to work after
taking some time off. A loss of job-specific human capital may have a direct impact on the inference
on the nonconvexity parameter. When searching for a part-time bridge job, workers may experience


                                                   29
not only a wage penalty due to reduced hours but also a reduction in the wage level (w0,t ) due to a
loss of job-specific human capital. Omitting this factor may overestimate the size of the nonconvexity
parameter. Our results from the offers at the time of the survey suggest a fairly large value of the
nonconvexity parameter (θ needs to be at least 1 to explain abrupt retirement for half of the sample).
This finding may speak for the importance of job-specific human capital.
    A different modeling issue is that we use a utility function that is separable between consumption
and leisure to simplify derivations of the key equations. Neither the IES estimation from the SSQ
responses nor the mapping between the nonconvexity parameter and the IES in the RW model is
affected by allowing nonseparability between consumption and leisure in the utility function. We can
use exactly the same equations for the IES estimation (equation (9)) and for the indirect inference
on the nonconvexity parameter (equation (6)) even when the utility function is nonseparable. See
Appendix D.3 for details.


5    Related Literature
This paper relates to a number of literatures. First, we contribute to an empirical literature that
examines employment patterns late in life, both by documenting the post-career-job work history
and search behavior of the VRI sample and by eliciting their willingness to work using hypothetical
questions. Beginning with Ruhm (1990) and more recently documented by Maestas (2010) and Rupert
and Zanella (2015), it has long been established that following a typical retirement path (i.e., direct
transition from full time career job to full retirement) is becoming less common, with Cahill, Giandrea
and Quinn (2006) noting that post-career employment resembles initial labor market engagement
decades earlier, in terms of involving experimentation. Many of these jobs are part-time or lower paid,
with the classical hump-shaped wage profile reflecting workers willingness to take lower wages for less
work (Cassanova, 2013). Furthermore, many workers return to employment to gain access to employer
sponsored health plans, in particular before becoming eligible for Medicare at age 65 (Madrian, Burtless
and Gruber, 1994, Blau and Gilleski, 2008). Self-employment associated with fewer hours and lower
earnings is also used as a transition path to full retirement (Ramnath, Shoven, and Slavov, 2017). Of
course, some returns to work do not reflect workers’ preferences, with Chan and Stevens (2001) noting
the volatile employment of workers that are fired after age 50 and a number of studies noting the labor
demand side constraints that hinder post-career employment (e.g., Hurd, 1996, Scott, 2004, Kantarci
and van Soest, 2008). Our paper documents that either having a bridge job before full-retirement
or searching for such an opportunity is not rare, but also that using behavioral data alone leads to
under-estimation of older individuals’ willingness to work.
    This paper contributes to a literature that empirically examines the effect of institutional incentives
on late-in-life labor supply by proposing an approach to disentangle the roles played by supply- and
demand-side factors in generating the observed changes in labor market activity. Many studies in
this literature rely on aggregate data leveraging cross-country differences or historical changes within
countries in public pension benefit systems (see for example Blondal and Scarpetta, 1999, Gruber and
Wise, 1999, Johnson, 2001, and Duval 2003). Others use variation in retirement incentives across



                                                    30
households that arise from public or private pension systems and public medical insurance (see for
example Blundell, Meghir and Smith, 2002, Gruber and Wise, 2002, Euwals, van Vuuren, and Wolthoff,
2012, and Gustman, Steinmeier and Tabatabai, 2016). While informative, reactions to such policy
incentives still combine the older individuals’ willingness to work and job availability. The results
in this paper show that for a policy to be effective in encouraging working longer it should address
demand-side factors.
   This paper also relates to a literature that matches structural models to observed retirement pat-
terns in order to estimate the importance of various institutions and policies in determining retirement
behavior. Beginning with Berkovec and Stern (1991), a number of papers have highlighted the im-
portance of minimum hours constraints (Gustman and Steinmeier, 1986), social security (Rust and
Phelan, 1997, French, 2005, Blau and Gilleskie, 2006, Van der Klaauw and Wolpin, 2008), and public
and private health insurance (French and Jones, 2011). These papers also suggests ways to over-
come the identification issue associated with using only behavioral data. For example, French (2005)
addresses the selection bias in estimating a wage profile for older workers by generating the same se-
lection process in the model. Identifying all the key supply- and demand-side parameters relying only
on behavioral data is still challenging and these studies have to make assumptions either on the level
or distribution of certain key parameters. A prime example is the assumption on nonconvexity param-
eters in French (2005). Our paper contributes to this literature by providing an alternative method
to separately identify supply- and demand-side structural parameters, so that a lifecycle model can
provide better-informed predictions on the effectiveness of considered policies.
   Finally, this paper relates to two branches of the survey literature. First, the SSQ survey instru-
ments we use in this paper reflect a methodological approach to surveys that attempt to structure sur-
vey questions to quantitatively inform preferences and model parameters in meaningful ways (Barsky,
Juster, Kimball and Shapiro, 1997, Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer and van Nieuwerburgh, 2011, Brown,
Goda and McGarry, 2015, Fuster and Zafar, 2016, Ameriks, Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro and Tonetti,
2017, 2018, Wiswall and Zafar, 2017, among others). Second, we relate to a number of studies that
attempt to use surveys to measure retirement plans (Hurd, 2009) or factors that affect late-in-life labor
supply decisions, including but not limited to the age composition of coworkers (Blau and Shvydko,
2011), career attachment and job satisfaction (Gobeski and Beehr, 2009), pension and hours arrange-
ments (van Soest, Kapteyn and Zissimopoulos, 2007, van Soest and Vonkova, 2014, Kantarci and van
Soest, 2015), and disability (Kapteyn, Smith and van Soest, 2008). Our study differs, however, due to
the level of detail we include in our hypothetical scenarios and the resulting quantitative measures that
this approach delivers which can be directly used to estimate parameters in retirement models. The
survey approach used in this paper also complements the literature on revealed preference for work
arrangements from experiments (Bloom, Liang, Roberts, and Ying, 2015, Mas and Pallais, 2017a,
2017b, among others) and behavioral data on workers’ choices (Chen, Chevalier, Rossi and Oehlsen,
2017, Sorkin, 2018, among others).




                                                   31
6    Conclusion
By combining new behavioral data on late-in-life employment and job-search activity with hypothetical
SSQs, we find a strong and prevalent willingness to work among older Americans. At the time of the
survey, many individuals, even those years removed from their last job, would like to return to work if
they found a job similar to the last job they held. Individuals also expressed a willingness to continue
working at the time of retirement. The willingness to work is stronger when jobs offer a flexible choice
of hours worked. Individuals are willing to take substantial earnings reductions to gain hour flexibility.
From these findings we conclude that labor force participation near and after normal retirement ages
is limited more by a lack of acceptable job opportunities or low expectations about finding them, in
particular jobs with part-time or flexible schedules, than by unwillingness to work longer. Given that
the sample used in this paper tend to be healthier, wealthier, and more educated than the population of
older Americans, and also that they had occupations that do not much require physical strength, limits
from the demand side might be more prevalent for the general older population. Thus, demand-side
factors (e.g., a nonconvexity in production that discourages part-time hires) are likely to be important
in explaining current late-in-life labor market behavior and need to be considered in designing policies
aiming to promote working longer. Our results suggest that any policies that induce firms to provide
jobs with a flexible schedule to older Americans, even at a wage lower than what they used to have,
will bring many back to the labor market. On the other hand, what policies would induce firms to do
so and whether those policies would be welfare-improving depend on whether and why firms are less
willing to hire older workers, in particular on a part-time basis. Hence, the findings from this paper
call for further research on these demand side issues (see Goldin and Katz, 2011, Neumark, Burn and
Button, 2016, and Burtless, 2017 as examples of recent work).


References
 [1] Aaronson, Daniel and Eric French (2004): “The Effect of Part-Time Work on Wages: Evidence
    from the Social Security Rules,” Journal of Labor Economics, 22, 329-352.

 [2] Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti
    (2017): “Long-Term-Care Utility and Late-in-Life Saving,” Vanguard Research Initiative Working
    Paper.

 [3] Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti
    (2018): “The Long-Term-Care Insurance Puzzle: Modeling and Measurement,” Vanguard Re-
    search Initiative Working Paper.

 [4] Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn van Nieuwerburgh (2011): “The Joy
    of Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from
    Bequest Motives,” Journal of Finance, 66, 519-561.

 [5] Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Minjoon Lee, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti
    (2014): “The Wealth of Wealthholders,” Vanguard Research Initiative Working Paper.

                                                   32
 [6] Attanasio, Orazio, Sagiri Kitao, and Giovanni L. Violante (2007): “Global Demographic Trends
    and Social Security Reform,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 54, 144-198.

 [7] Barsky, Robert B., F. Thomas Juster, Miles S. Kimball, and Matthew D. Shapiro (1997): “Pref-
    erence Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
    Retirement Studies,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 537-579.

 [8] Berkovec, James and Steven Stern (1991): “Job Exit Behavior of Older Men,” Econometrica, 59,
    189-210.

 [9] Blau, David M. and Donna B. Gilleskie (2008): “The Role of Retiree Health Insurance in the
    Employment Behavior of Older Men,” International Economic Review, 49, 475-514.

[10] Blau, David M. and Tetyana Shvydko (2011): “Labor Market Rigidities and the Employment
    Behavior of Older Workers,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 64, 464-484.

[11] Blondal, Sveinbjorn and Stefano Scarpetta (1999): “The Retirement Decision in OECD Coun-
    tries,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 202.

[12] Bloom, Nicholas, James Liang, John Roberts, and Zhichun Jenny Ying (2015): “Does Working
    from Home Work? Evidence from a Chinese Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130,
    165-218.

[13] Blundell, Richard, Costas Meghir, and Sarah Smith (2002): “Pension Incentives and the Pattern
    of Early Retirement,” Economic Journal, 112, C153-C170.

[14] Brown, Jeffrey R., Gopi Shah Goda, and Kathleen McGarry (2016): “Heterogeneity in State-
    Dependent Utility: Evidence from Strategic Surveys,” Economic Inquiry, 54, 847-861.

[15] Burtless, Gary (2017): “Age Related Health Costs and Job Prospects of Older Workers,” Paper
    presented at the SIEPR Working Longer and Retirement Conference.

[16] Cahill, Kevin E., Michael D. Giandrea, and Joseph F. Quinn (2006): “Retirement Patterns from
    Career Employment,” The Gerontologist, 46, 514-523.

[17] Casanova, Maria (2013): “Revisiting the Hump-Shaped Wage Profile,” Mimeo.

[18] Chan, Sewin and Ann Huff Stevens (2001): “Job Loss and Employment Patterns of Older Work-
    ers,” Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 484-521.

[19] Chen, M. Keith, Judith A. Chevalier, Peter E. Rossi, and Emily Oehlsen (2017): “The Value of
    Flexible Work: Evidence from Uber Drivers,” NBER Working Paper, No. 23296.

[20] Chetty, Raj (2012): “Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions: A Synthesis of Micro
    and Macro Evidence on Labor Supply,” Econometrics, 80, 969-1018.

[21] De Nardi, Mariacristina, Selahattin Imrohoroglu, and Thomas Sargent (1999): “Projected U.S.
    Demographics and Social Security,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2, 575-615.

                                                33
[22] Domeij, David and Martin Floden (2006): “The Labor-Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Con-
    straint: Why Estimates are Biased,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 9, 242-262.

[23] Duval, Romain (2003):    “The Retirement Effects of Old-Age Pension and Early Retirement
    Schemes in OECD Countries,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers No. 370.

[24] Ermisch, John and Robert Wright (1993): “Wage Offers and Full-Time and Part-Time Employ-
    ment by British Women,” Journal of Human Resources, 28, 111-133.

[25] Euwals, Rob, Annemiek van Vuren, and Daniel van Vuuren (2012): “The Decline of Substitute
    Pathways into Retirement: Empirical Evidence from the Dutch Health Care Sector,” International
    Social Security Review, 65, 101-122.

[26] Faberman, R. Jason, Andreas I. Mueller, Aysegul Sahin, and Giorgio Topa (1984): “Job Search
    Behavior among the Employed and Non-Employed,” NBER Working Paper No. 23731.

[27] Feldstein, Martin and James Poterba (1984): “Unemployment Insurance and Reservation Wages,”
    Journal of Public Economics, 23, 141-167.

[28] French, Eric (2005): “The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and Retirement
    Behavior,” Review of Economic Studies, 72, 395-427.

[29] French, Eric and John Bailey Jones (2011): “The Effects of Health Insurance and Self-Insurance
    on Retirement Behavior,” Econometrica, 79, 693-732.

[30] Fuchs, Victor R. (1984): “Though Much is Taken: Reflections on Aging, Health, and Medical
    Care,” NBER Working Paper No. 1269.

[31] Fuster, Andreas and Basit Zafar (2016): “To Buy or Not To Buy: Consumer Constraints in the
    Housing Market,” American Economic Review, 106, 636-640.

[32] Gobeski, Kirsten T. and Terry A. Beehr (2009): “How Retirees Work: Predictors of Different
    Types of Bridge Employment,” Journal of Organizational Behavior, 30, 401-425.

[33] Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz (2011): “The Cost of Workplace Flexibility for High-
    Powered Professionals,” Annals of American Academy of Political and Social Science, 638, 45-67.

[34] Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier (1986): “A Structural Retirement Model,” Econo-
    metrica, 54, 555-584.

[35] Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier, and Nahid Tabatabai (2016): “The Affordable
    Care Act as Retiree Health Insurance: Implications for Retirement and Social Security Claiming,”
    NBER Working Paper No. 22815.

[36] Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (1998): “Social Security and Retirement: An International
    Comparison,” American Economic Review, 88, 158-163.



                                                34
[37] Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (1999): “Social Security, Retirement Incentives, and Retire-
    ment Behavior: An International Perspective,” EBRI Issue Brief, 209, 1-22.

[38] Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (2002): “Social Security Programs and Retirement around
    the World,” Research in Labor Economics, 18, 1-40.

[39] Gruber, Jonathan and David Wise (2007): “Introduction” to Jonathan Gruber and David Wise
    eds., Social Security Programs and Retirement around the World: Fiscal Implications of Reform,
    University of Chicago Press.

[40] Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner and Christopher Taber (1998): “Explaining Rising Wage
    Inequality: Explorations with a Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with
    Heterogeneous Agents,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 1, 1-58.

[41] Huggett, Mark, Gustavo Ventura and Amir Yaron (2011):        “Sources of Lifetime Inequality,”
    American Economic Review, 101, 2923-2954.

[42] Holzer, Harry J. (1986): “Reservation Wages and Their Labor Market Effects for Black and
    White Male Youth,” Journal of Human Resources, 21, 157-177.

[43] Hurd, Michael D. (1996): “The Effect of Labor Market Rigidities on the Labor Force Behavior
    of Older Workers” in David Wise ed., Advances in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago
    Press.

[44] Hurd, Michael D. (2009): “Subjective Probabilities in Household Surveys,” Annual Review of
    Economics, 1, 543-562.

[45] Jacobs, Lindsay and Suphanit Piyapromdee (2016): “Labor Force Transitions at Older Ages:
    Burnout, Recovery, and Reverse Retirement,” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
    Finance and Economics Discussion Series No. 2016-053.

[46] Johnson, Richard (2001): “The Effect of Old-Age Insurance on Male Retirement: Evidence from
    Historical Cross-Country Data,” FRB of Kansas City Research Working Paper No. 00-09.

[47] Kantarci, Tunga and Arthur van Soest (2008): “Gradual Retirement: Preferences and Limita-
    tions,” De Economist, 156, 113-144.

[48] Kantarci, Tunga and Arthur van Soest (2015):      “Full or Partial Retirement? Effects of the
    Pension Incentives and Increasing Retirement Age in the Netherlands and the United States,”
    Netspar Discussion Paper No. 2013-038.

[49] Kapteyn, Arie, James P. Smith and Arthur van Soest (2008): “Dynamics of Work Disability and
    Pain,” Journal of Health Economics, 27, 496-509.

[50] Keane, Michael P. (2011): “Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature,
    49, 961-1075.


                                                35
[51] Kotlikoff, Laurence J., Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser (2002):    “Distributional Effects in a
    General Equilibrium Analysis of Social Security” in Martin S. Feldstein and Jeffrey B. Liebman
    eds., The Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform, University of
    Chicago Press, 327-361.

[52] Krueger, Alan B. and Andreas I. Mueller (2016): “A Contribution to the Empirics of Reservation
    Wages,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8, 142-179.

[53] Lee, Ronald and Jonathan Skinner (1999): “Will Aging Baby Boomers Bust the Federal Budget?”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13, 117-140.

[54] Madrian, Brigitte C., Gary Burtless, and Jonathan Gruber (1994): “The Effect of Health Insur-
    ance on Retirement,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1994 (1), 181-252.

[55] Maestas, Nicole (2010): “Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work after Retirement,”
    Journal of Human Resources, 45, 718-748.

[56] Maestas, Nicole and Xiaoyan Li (2007): “Burnout and the Retirement Decision,” Michigan Re-
    tirement Research Center Research Paper No. 2007-166.

[57] Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais (2017a): “Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements,” Amer-
    ican Economic Review, 107, 3722-59.

[58] Mas, Alexandre and Amanda Pallais (2017b): “Labor Supply and the Value of Non-Work Time:
    Experimental Estimates from the Field,” NBER Working Paper, No. 23906.

[59] Moffitt, Robert (1984): “The Estimation of a Joint Wages-Hours Labor Supply Model,” Journal
    of Labor Economics, 2, 550-566.

[60] Neumark, David, Ian Burn, and Patrick Button (2016):       “Experimental Age Discrimination
    Evidence and the Heckman Critique,” American Economic Review, 106, 303-308.

[61] OECD (2006): “Live Longer, Work Longer,” OECD report.

[62] Pistaferri, Luigi (2003): “Anticipated and Unanticipated Wage Changes, Wage Risk, and In-
    tertemporal Labor Supply,” Journal of Labor Economics, 21, 729-754.

[63] Ramnath, Shanthi, John B. Shoven, and Sita Nataraj Slavov (2017): “Pathways to Retirement
    through Self-Employment,” NBER Working Paper No. 23551.

[64] Rogerson, Richard and Johanna Wallenius (2013): “Nonconvexities, Retirement, and the Elas-
    ticity of Labor Supply,” American Economic Review, 103, 1445-1462.

[65] Rosen, Harvey (1976): “Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wages-Hours Determination,”
    Econometrica, 44, 485-507.

[66] Ruhm, Christopher J. (1990): “Bridge Jobs and Partial Retirement,” Journal of Labor Economics,
    8, 482-501.

                                                36
[67] Rupert, Peter and Giulio Zanella (2015):     “Revisiting Wage, Earnings, and Hours Profiles,”
    Journal of Monetary Economics, 72, 114-130.

[68] Rust, John and Christopher Phelan (1997): “How Social Security and Medicare Affect Retirement
    Behavior in a World of Incomplete Markets,” Econometrica, 65, 781-831.

[69] Scott, John C. (2004): “Is Phased Retirement a State of Mind? The Role of Individual Preferences
    in Retirement Outcomes,” Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association
    of America.

[70] Shimer, Robert. (2010): Labor Markets and Business Cycles, Princeton University Press.

[71] Trabandt, Mathias and Harald Uhlig (2009): “How Far are We from the Slippery Slope? The
    Laffer Curve Revisited,” NBER Working Paper, 15343.

[72] van der Klauuw, Wilbert and Kenneth I. Wolpin (2008): “Social Security and the Retirement
    and Savings Behavior of Low-Income Households,” Journal of Econometrics, 145, 21-42.

[73] van Soest, Authur, Arie Kapteyn and Julie M. Zissimopoulos (2007): “Using Stated Preferences
    Data to Analyze Preference for Full and Partial Retirement,” RAND Working Paper Series No.
    WR-345.

[74] van Soest, Authur and Hana Vonkova (2014): “How Sensitive are Retirement Decisions to Finan-
    cial Incentives? A Stated Preference Analysis,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, 29, 246-264.

[75] Sorkin, Isaac (2018): “Ranking Firms Using Revealed Preference,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
    nomics, forthcoming.

[76] Wiswall, Matthew J. and Basit Zafar (2017):      “Preference for the Workplace, Investment in
    Human Capital, and Gender,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.




                                                 37
A     Appendix: VRI Sample Characteristics and Comparison with
      HRS Sample
This Appendix compares the VRI sample used in this paper, i.e., those who completed Survey 4,
with the HRS sample from the 2012 wave, focusing on job characteristics. (See Ameriks, Caplin,
Lee, Shapiro and Tonetti, 2014, for the more detailed comparisons using the entire VRI sample.)
We consider the HRS sample who are at least 55 years old to match the age eligibility for the VRI
sample (“age-eligible” sample). To account for the effects of the additional sampling screens used
in the VRI, that the respondents need to have at least $10,000 in their Vanguard accounts and be
internet eligible, we also consider the subset of the age-eligible HRS sample who have at least $10,000
in non-transactional accounts and have internet access (“VRI-eligible” sample).
    Table A.1 presents selected sample characteristics for the VRI sample including age, financial
wealth, marital status, and education levels. Ages are distributed approximately equally in age bins
55–59, 60–64, 65–69, 70–74, and 75+, the median household has about $800,000 of financial wealth,
67% have a partner, 34% are female, 76% have a college degree or higher, and 95% report having good
health or better. Table A.2 summarizes the distribution of corresponding variables in the HRS sample.
The VRI sample tends to be wealthier, more educated, more likely to be married and healthier, though
a large part of this gap is explained by the screens imposed in the VRI sampling. After adjusting for
sampling weights, 41% of the HRS sample satisfy the VRI sampling screens. Employment status
patterns are also similar between the VRI (Table 1) and HRS (Table A.3), though the fraction of
those working in a bridge job is higher in the HRS.
    In terms of the characteristics of the career job (defined as the job with the longest tenure for the
HRS sample), the age-eligible HRS sample (Table A.4) has similar length of tenure, similar working
hours, and lower salary than the VRI sample (Table 2). The gap in the salary is smaller for the VRI-
eligible HRS sample (Table A.5). The most common industries and occupations of the age-eligibile
HRS sample also largely overlap with those from the VRI sample. Overall, these comparisons confirm
that once the sampling screens for the VRI are imposed on the HRS sample, the two samples have
similar job characteristics.




                                                   38
                            Table A.1: VRI respondent characteristics


                                                        Age and Wealth
                           10p         25p         50p            75p            90p          Mean
 Age:                       60          64          69             75             79            70
 Financial wealth:        172,665     394,041     821,252      1,495,714      2,621,855     1,248,491

                               Married                                      Education
                            Yes         No                   < College        College       > College
                            67%         33%                     24%            32%            44%

                                  Sex                                         Health
                                                             Excellent/                           Fair/
                          Female       Male                  Very Good         Good               Poor
                           34%         66%                      73%             22%                5%

Notes: Survey 4 respondents. N=2,772. Financial wealth is from Survey 1 and adjusted to 2015 $.




                                                   39
                            Table A.2: The HRS sample characteristics


 A. Age eligible                                          Age and Wealth
                              10p          25p      50p            75p             90p           Mean
 Age:                          56           60       66             75              83             68
 Financial wealth:           -7,716          0     40,126         257,826         718,126       264,974

                                Married                                       Education
                              Yes          No                  < College         College       > College
                              50%          50%                    72%             13%            15%

                                    Sex                                          Health
                                                               Excellent/                         Fair/
                           Female       Male                   Very Good          Good            Poor
                            52%         48%                       42%              32%             26%


 B. VRI eligible                                          Age and Wealth
                             10p           25p      50p            75p              90p          Mean
 Age:                         56            59       63             70               77            65
 Financial wealth:          21,657        78,706   240,233        599,810        1,229,457      537,920

                                Married                                       Education
                              Yes          No                  < College         College       > College
                              67%          33%                    51%             22%            27%

                                    Sex                                          Health
                                                               Excellent/                         Fair/
                           Female       Male                   Very Good          Good            Poor
                            45%         55%                       58%              29%             13%

Notes: The first panel uses all the “financial respondents” (the respondents who answered questions regarding
household finance in case there are multiple respondents in one household) who are age 55 or above (N=11,741).
For the second panel we impose additional criteria that respondents are internet eligible and have at least
$10,000 in non-transactional accounts (N=3,800). All tabulations are weighted using HRS sampling weights.
Financial wealth is in 2015 $.




                                                     40
                  Table A.3: Employment status: the HRS sample


                                                      By Age                   Total
                                  55-59       60-64    65-69   70-74   75-
 A. Age eligible

 Employed (%)                         73.6    57.9     39.7    29.2    14.9     43.7
     In a career job (%)              41.1    26.8     14.9     8.5    2.8      19.6
     In a bridge job (%)              32.5    31.1     24.8    20.7    12.1     24.1

 Not employed (%)                     26.4    42.2     60.3    70.8    85.2     56.3
     Retired (%)                      18.0    39.2     58.9    69.9    84.1     53.0
     Not retired (%)                  8.4     3.0      1.4     0.9     1.1      3.3

 N                                    2,433   2,037    1,291   1,991   3,989   11,741

 B. VRI eligible

 Employed (%)                         84.5    69.6     47.0    36.2    18.0     58.4
     In a career job (%)              50.0    32.2     18.3    10.4    4.4      28.3
     In a bridge job (%)              34.5    37.4     28.7    25.8    13.6     30.1

 Not employed (%)                     15.5    30.5     53.0    63.8    82.1     41.5
     Retired (%)                      11.8    29.2     52.4    63.2    81.9     39.9
     Not retired (%)                  3.7     1.3      0.6     0.6     0.2      1.6

 N                                    973      763      555     669    840     3,800

Notes: See the notes for Table A.2.




                                               41
                 Table A.4: Career Job Characteristics: Age-Eligible HRS


 A. Retired from career job                                     Years worked
                                           10p        25p       50p        75p        90p       Mean
 Years worked:                              6          10        18         28         34        19

 Most common industries:                  Manufacturing                                          17.3%
                                          Health care and social assist                          11.0%
                                          Retail trade                                            8.6%

 Most common occupations:                 Office and admin support                               13.1%
                                          Sales and related                                      11.2%
                                          Management                                             11.1%


 B. Working on career job                        Years worked, salary, hours worked
                                           10p       25p        50p        75p       90p        Mean
 Years worked:                               7        13         21         32        37          22
 Salary (in 2015$):                       13,716    27,820     50,557     80,249    119,345     68,367
 Hours worked (per year):                 1,000     1,800      2,080      2,340      2,750      2,015

 Self-employed:                           Yes                                                    24.3%
                                          No                                                     75.7%

 Most common industries:                  Health care and social assist                          14.9%
                                          Manufacturing                                          11.2%
                                          Professional, scientific, tech. services               11.2%

 Most common occupations:                 Management                                             14.4%
                                          Sales and related                                      11.7%
                                          Office and administrative support                       9.4%

Notes: Career job is defined as the job with the longest tenure. This table uses all the financial respon-
dents who are age 55 or above and reported the tenure on their longest job (N=8,940 for Panel A and
N=1,891 for Panel B).




                                                   42
                 Table A.5: Career Job Characteristics: VRI-Eligible HRS


 A. Retired from career job                                     Years worked
                                           10p        25p       50p        75p        90p       Mean
 Years worked:                              8          12        20         29         35        21

 Most common industries:                  Manufacturing                                          18.7%
                                          Health care and social assist                          11.8%
                                          Educational services                                    8.1%

 Most common occupations:                 Management                                             18.5%
                                          Office and admin support                               14.6%
                                          Sales and related                                      12.9%


 B. Working on career job                        Years worked, salary, hours worked
                                           10p       25p        50p        75p       90p        Mean
 Years worked:                               9        15         22         32        37          23
 Salary (in 2015$):                       20,165    39,887     64,199     95,682    144,037     84,124
 Hours worked (per year):                 1,144     1,820      2,080      2,392      2,860      2,047

 Self-employed:                           Yes                                                    24.1%
                                          No                                                     75.9%

 Most common industries:                  Professional, scientific, tech. services               14.4%
                                          Health care and social assist                          13.7%
                                          Manufacturing                                          12.1%

 Most common occupations:                 Management                                             18.3%
                                          Sales and related                                      11.5%
                                          Business and financial operation                       10.5%

Notes: Career job is defined as the job with the longest tenure. This table uses all the financial respon-
dents who are VRI-eligible and reported the tenure on their longest job (N=2,890 for Panel A and N=910
for Panel B).




                                                   43
B     Appendix: Additional Results from Behavioral Data
B.1    Career Job Characteristics: Workers, by Age Group
Table B.1 tabulates career job characteristics, among those who are still working on their career jobs,
for three different age groups: not older than 62, between 63 and 65, and older than 65. The share
of workers who are self-employed or have a flexible schedule increases with age, in particular after
65. Only 9% of workers were self-employed before age 63 while 34% of those older than 65 are self-
employed. The share having a flexible schedule changes from 36% to 71% between these two age
groups. This finding suggests that it is primarily the selection effect that makes these characteristics
more common among those who are still on their career jobs compared to those who have separated
from their career job. This, in turn, suggests that these characteristics are preferred by older workers
and hence encourage them to work longer, consistent with the findings by Ramnath, Shoven, and
Slavov (2017).
    There are other patterns that are notable. The number of hours worked decreases significantly, in
particular in the left tail, after age 65. This suggests again that flexibility in the work schedule is more
valued in late life. Being able to reduce the work burden at the beginning of the pathway to retirement
seems to be appreciated by older workers. There is no noticeable change in hourly wage. This might
be a result of two competing forces: older workers being less productive putting downward pressure
on measured earnings and workers with higher wages selecting into working longer putting upward
pressure on measured earnings. Note also that the share of jobs with health insurance provision drops
significantly at age 65. This may reflect older workers becoming eligible for Medicare at this age.
    There are also changes in the distribution of industries and occupations across the age groups.
Those working in the manufacturing or transportation and warehousing industries are less likely to
stay longer while those who work in professional, scientific, and technical services or educational
services are more likely to stay longer. Those who have management positions tend to stay shorter
while those who have education-related occupations tend to stay longer.
    These findings hint at the job characteristics that encourage workers to stay in their career jobs,
even after the normal retirement ages. Having control over their own work schedules (either through
self-employment or by having a flexible schedule) seems to be an important factor, and being able to
reduce the work burden at the beginning of the pathway to retirement turns out to be a key reason
workers want flexible hours.

B.2    Career to Bridge Job Transition and Gaining Flexibility in Work Schedule
In this appendix we provide a more detailed decomposition of the share of bridge jobs with flexible
schedules. In particular, we investigate how much of the increase in the share of jobs with flexible
schedules from career jobs to bridge jobs is driven by transitions into an industry or occupation where
having a flexible schedule is more common and how much is due to an increase in the share of flexible
jobs within each industry or occupation. In Table B.2, we list the common industries and occupations
for the sample who ever had a bridge job, along with the share of career and bridge jobs in each
category (second and third columns) and the share of jobs with flexible schedules among the jobs in


                                                    44
             Table B.1: Career Job Characteristics: Workers, by Age Group

 A. Age ≤ 62                                   Salary, hours worked, hourly wage
                                       10p       25p      50p          75p       90p      Mean
 Salary (in 2015$):                   30,000    57,000   85,000       123,782   177,964   101,169
 Hours worked (per year):             1,440     2,080    2,080         2,340     2,600     2,062
 Hourly wage (in 2015$):                19        28       40            58       85        51

 Self-employed:                       Yes                                                 8.8%
                                      No                                                  91.2%

 Had a flexible schedule:             Yes                                                 36.3%
                                      No                                                  63.7%

 Health insurance provision:          Yes                                                 83.0%
                                      No                                                  17.0%
 B. Age 63-65                                  Salary, hours worked, hourly wage
                                       10p       25p      50p          75p       90p      Mean
 Salary (in 2015$):                   32,000    52,000   85,000       120,917   200,000   107,770
 Hours worked (per year):              884       1820    2,080         2,250     2,600     1,944
 Hourly wage (in 2015$):                19        28       42            58       120       62

 Self-employed:                       Yes                                                 11.0%
                                      No                                                  89.0%

 Had a flexible schedule:             Yes                                                 50.9%
                                      No                                                  49.1%

 Health insurance provision:          Yes                                                 85.4%
                                      No                                                  14.6%
 C. Age ≥ 66                                   Salary, hours worked, hourly wage
                                      10p        25p      50p          75p       90p      Mean
 Salary (in 2015$):                   3,500     15,500   50,000       94,000    155,000   64,202
 Hours worked (per year):              156       480     1,540        2,080      2,160    1,337
 Hourly wage (in 2015$):                14        23       44           64        99        61

 Self-employed:                       Yes                                                 33.7%
                                      No                                                  66.3%

 Had a flexible schedule:             Yes                                                 71.2%
                                      No                                                  28.8%

 Health insurance provision:          Yes                                                 39.2%
                                      No                                                  60.8%
Notes: N=321 for group A, N=117 for group B, and N=163 for group C.




                                                45
            Table B.1: Career Job Characteristics: Workers, by Age Group (Continued)

             D. Share of selected industries                                   Age group

                                                                          ≤62 63-65 ≥ 66
             Professional, scientific, and technical services            17.7% 17.1% 21.5%
             Manufacturing                                               12.8% 12.0%    5.5%
             Transportation and Warehousing                              11.8%   8.6%   3.1%
             Health Care and Social Assistance                            6.2% 12.8%    8.6%
             Educational Services                                         7.5%   6.8% 12.9%
             E. Share of selected occupations                                 Age group

                                                                          ≤62     63-65      ≥ 66
             Management                                                  21.5%    22.2%     12.3%
             Business and financial operations                            9.4%    12.8%     14.1%
             Computer and mathematical                                    9.0%     6.8%     10.4%
             Office and administrative support                            8.7%    10.3%      8.6%
             Education, training, library                                 4.4%     3.4%     11.0%
           Notes: N=321 for group A, N=117 for group B, and N=163 for group C.


each category (the last two columns).26
   We find that increases in the share of flexible jobs in each sector dominates the effect of transitions
to more flexible industries and occupations. The share of flexible jobs varies across industries and
occupations and there is indeed a tendency to switch to industries and occupations that are more
likely to offer a job with flexible schedule. For example, older workers tend to leave the manufacturing
industry, which has the lowest share of flexible jobs, while educational services, other services, and
retail trade, which have higher shares of flexible jobs, attract more workers in late life. The extent of
such switches, however, turns out to be too small to explain the large increase in the share of flexible
jobs among bridge jobs. On the other hand, there is an increase in the share of flexible jobs within each
industry, and the size of that increase is comparable to the overall difference in the share of flexible jobs
between the bridge and career jobs. The same pattern also holds for occupations. Hence we conclude
the reason a greater fraction of bridge jobs offer flexible schedules is mainly because people move to
jobs with more flexibility while staying within their industry or occupation and is not primarily due
to transitions to more flexible industries and occupations.




   26
      Among 20 industry categories and 23 occupation categories used in the survey, we present the most common 8
industries and occupations.


                                                      46
                    Table B.2: Industry and Occupation: Prevalence and Flexibility

                                                                                                 Share of
 A: Industry                                                     Prevalence (%)*           flexible jobs (%)**
                                                                 Career Bridge             Career       Bridge
 Professional, scientific, and technical services                   23.0     20.6              26.7        59.9
 Manufacturing                                                      12.6      6.3               8.8        25.5
 Educational services                                                9.7     11.3              31.7        52.2
 Finance and insurance                                               9.4      9.6              17.1        51.3
 Health care and social assistance                                   8.6      9.1              45.7        59.5
 Public administration                                               8.1      7.0              15.2        31.6
 Other services                                                      4.7      8.6              34.2        67.1
 Retail trade                                                        3.1      5.5              32.0        62.2
                                                                                                 Share of
 B: Occupation                                                   Prevalence (%)*           flexible jobs (%)**
                                                                 Career Bridge             Career       Bridge
 Management                                                         26.2     18.6              20.7        49.0
 Business and financial operations                                  11.1     12.7              23.3        63.1
 Computer and mathematical                                           8.9      8.3              20.8        47.8
 Architecture and engineering                                        8.5      6.7              17.4        51.9
 Education, training, and library                                    7.5      9.2              39.4        60.0
 Office and administrative support                                   6.9      9.1              14.3        37.8
 Sales and related                                                   6.4      8.1              21.2        51.5
 Healthcare practitioners and technical                              5.7      5.7              52.2        67.4
Notes: * Prevalence is defined as the share of career and bridge jobs that are in each industry/occupation among the
VRI sample who had a bridge job (N=812).
** This share is defined as the share of jobs with flexible schedule among the jobs in each industry/occupation in the
entire VRI sample, separately for career and bridge jobs.




                                                         47
C      Appendix: Detailed SSQ Scenarios
The SSQs asked in VRI Survey 4 vary in terms of job characteristics, timing of the job offer, and the
sample that received the questions. Table C.1 provides the complete list of the SSQs asked. Considered
alternative characteristics include allowing for a flexible schedule (respondents can choose the number
of hours per year instead of having to work for the same number of hours as in the reference job) and
allowing for an alternative occupation (the opportunity comes with an occupation that is different
than the reference occupation and is the most preferred one by respondents). The SSQs also vary in
terms of the timing of the offer (offer available at the time of the survey, SSQ1A, versus a retrospective
offer assumed to have been available at the time of retirement, SSQ1B). They also vary in whether the
offer is a new employment situation (SSQ1A, SSQ1B) or a continuation of the current employment
situation (SSQ2). In SSQ1A, those who are employed at the time of the survey are asked to imagine
that their current employment situations immediately terminate in a manner that does not affect
their prospects for future employment. The intention is to make them actively consider post-career
employment situations. In SSQ2, they are asked whether they would continue to work in their current
job if the characteristics of the job change in the way assumed in the scenarios.

                                                  Table C.1: SSQs


     Name            Time         Considered job characteristics               Sample asked         Sample size
     SSQ 1A         Survey        Fixed schedule, Flexible schedule                   All                2,758
                                  Alternative occupation
     SSQ 1B      Retirement       Fixed schedule, Flexible schedule             Non-workers             1,658*
                                  Alternative occupation
     SSQ 2          Survey        Fixed schedule, Flexible schedule                Workers                754
                                  Search after separation allowed
                                  Search after separation not allowed

    Notes: Time refers to the reference period of the SSQ, which is either current (time of the survey), or retrospec-
    tive (time of retirement).
    * For those who are retired within the last two years, the survey did not ask SSQ1B because for them the situation
    at the time of retirement is too similar to that at the time of the survey.


    In Section 3.1, we presented details of the scenario offering a job with a fixed schedule at the time
of the survey (SSQ1A). In the remainder of this Appendix we present details of the other scenarios,
focusing on the differences between the various scenarios.

C.1      SSQ1A: Choices at the Time of the Survey

Flexible Schedule Scenario

This scenario is the same as the fixed schedule scenario except that respondents are allowed to choose
the number of hours to work.



                                                           48
      • Option A is a new employment situation that involves a flexible work schedule. Other
         than this possible difference, it matches your reference employment situation in
         terms of all other characteristics.

Then respondents are provided with more detailed rules, precisely defining what a flexible work sched-
ule means.
      • You can change your regular work schedule at the start of each year but not again until
         the start of the next year.

      • You would have to let your employer know your choice of regular work schedule at the start
         of the year and you would be expected to meet these work commitments. For example,
         if you wanted to work half time, you could specify this as half days, or for half as many
         weeks as usual on a seasonal basis.

      • The annual pay is adjusted in proportion (from your reference salary) if you choose to
         work more or less.

      • If you choose option A, there are no restrictions on what you would do with the time that
         you are not working.

Respondents are then asked about their preferred number of hours per week and number of weeks per
year for the following year. The reference salary is adjusted in proportion, and then respondents are
asked whether they would accept the offer or not, and then asked to report the reservation wage that
makes them indifferent between Option A and B.

Alternative Occupation Scenario

This scenario starts with the following question:

      • Would there be an employment situation with a different occupation that you would prefer
         to your reference employment situation under any circumstances?

If the answer is no, respondents skip this scenario. If the answer is yes, then Option A becomes:

      • Option A is a new employment situation that involves a fixed work schedule in
         your most preferred alternative occupation. Other than this, the employment situation
         matches your reference employment situation in terms of annual earnings, as well
         as in as many other characteristics, to the maximum extent possible.

The remainder of the scenario is identical to the fixed schedule scenario.




                                                    49
C.2       SSQ1B: Choices at the Time of Retirement
The structure of SSQ1B is identical to that of SSQ1A except that it concerns choices over hypothetical
opportunities if they had been available at the time of retirement from the last job.27 SSQ1B starts
with the following preamble:

         • In the questions that follow, we are interested in the employment situations that might
            have been of interest to you in the past. Specifically, we will ask you to report the decision
            you would have made immediately after your reference employment situation
            ended.

         • While it may be hard, we ask you not to answer in light of your current knowledge of what
            happened since that time, but rather to answer in terms of how you would have behaved
            if faced with particular employment opportunities at that time. The alternative should
            be as you would have viewed it at that time, not as you now see it.

Other than the time at which the opportunity was available, there is no difference between SSQ1B
and SSQ1A. SSQ1B poses three scenarios, fixed schedule, flexible schedule, and alternative occupation,
structured precisely as in SSQ1A.

C.3       SSQ2: Options Allowed for the Current Job
In SSQ2, the opportunities to be considered involve possible continuation of the current job when
its characteristics are altered in various ways.28 Not accepting the offer means that the respondent
has to quit the current job immediately and pursue other possibilities including searching for another
employment situation or not working. In addition to the value of having a flexible schedule, SSQ2
also measures the option value of being able to search for another job opportunity after quitting the
current job, by examining how responses change when respondents are allowed versus not allowed to
search after quitting the current job. SSQ2 considers four scenarios, (i) fixed schedule not allowing
for search after the current job, (ii) flexible schedule not allowing for search after the current job, (iii)
fixed schedule allowing for search after the current job, and (iv) flexible schedule allowing for search
after the current job.
   The first scenario, in which the respondent has to work a fixed schedule and is not allowed to
search after the current job if they decided to stay in the current job, is presented as follows:
  27
       Hence SSQ1B is asked only to the non-workers.
  28
       Hence SSQ2 is asked only to those who are currently working.




                                                          50
   We are interested in the conditions under which you would want to stay in your reference
   employment situation with a fixed work schedule. In the following scenario you must
   decide between keeping your reference employment situation and instead quitting your current
   employment situation immediately.


   More specifically, you must choose between two options:

      • Option A is to keep your reference employment situation with a fixed work sched-
         ule. You may hold this employment situation for as long as you like. Once you exit this
         employment situation you can no longer be employed in any other employment situation,
         and must exit the labor force permanently.

      • Option B is instead to pursue other possibilities including searching for another employ-
         ment situation or not working.

   Other scenarios are presented as simple variations of this scenario where the respondent either can
work a flexible schedule or is allowed to search after quitting the current job (or both).




                                                   51
D     Appendix: Additional Results from the SSQs
D.1     Full Distribution of Reservation Wages
This Appendix shows the full distribution of reservations wages for all the SSQ scenarios that are
asked to non-workers, separately for those who did and who did not have a bridge job (Figure D.1
for offers at the time of the survey and Figure D.2 for offers at the time of retirement).29 Reservation
wages are normalized as a fraction of the reference salary. A reservation wage less than or equal to 1
means the respondent accepts the offer. Figures focus on the range of the reservation wages between
0.5 and 1.5. For Panel C and D, reservation wages under an alternative occupation are plotted only
for those who could think of some preferred alternative occupation.




   29
      Panel A and B of Figure D.1 and D.2 are included in the main text but also presented here for completeness in
describing the SSQ results.


                                                        52
                Figure D.1: Reservation wage distribution at the time of the survey

 A. Fixed vs. flexible schedule: had no bridge job            B. Fixed vs. flexible schedule: had a bridge job




 C. Alternative vs. reference job: had no bridge job        D. Alternative vs. reference job: had a bridge job




Note: Reservation wage is calculated as a fraction of the wage the respondent had in their reference job. The
vertical axis represents CDF. The figure shows the range of reservations wages between 0.5 and 1.5. For Panel
C and D we include only those respondents who could think of any alternative occupation.




                                                       53
                 Figure D.2: Reservation wage distribution at the time of retirement

 A. Fixed vs. flexible schedule: had no bridge job            B. Fixed vs. flexible schedule: had a bridge job




 C. Alternative vs. reference job: had no bridge job        D. Alternative vs. reference job: had a bridge job




Note: Reservation wage is calculated as a fraction of the wage the respondent had in their reference job. The
vertical axis represents CDF. The figure shows the range of reservations wages between 0.5 and 1.5. For Panel
C and D we include only those respondents who could think of any alternative occupation. The figure also
shows the distributions from the offers at the time of the survey for the corresponding scenarios and groups in
dashed curves for comparison.




                                                       54
D.2       IES Estimates under Different Calibrations of Fixed Cost of Work
In Figure D.3 we show the distribution of the IES estimates under different calibrations: no fixed cost
of work in terms of foregone leisure (h̄ = 0 and ĉ = 0.14, Panel A), no fixed expenditure cost of work
(h̄ = 0.04 and ĉ = 0, Panel B), and no fixed cost of work at all (h̄ = 0 and ĉ = 0, Panel C). The
estimates tend to be larger in the absence of fixed costs, though the overall pattern of the distribution
is not sensitive to the assumed values of fixed costs.
                 Figure D.3: Distribution of IES estimates: alternative calibrations

              A. No fixed leisure cost                            B. No fixed expenditure cost




                                            C. No fixed cost




Notes: The curves represent CDFs of the estimated IES. N=796 for SSQ1A and N= 668 for SSQ1B. Panel A
assumes h̄ = 0 and ĉ = 0.14, Panel B assumes h̄ = 0.04 and ĉ = 0, and Panel C assumes h̄ = 0 and
ĉ = 0.



D.3       IES Estimation under a Nonseparable Utility Function
In the main text we estimate the IES from SSQ responses assuming a separable utility function between
consumption and leisure. In this Appendix we show that the equation used for the estimation is the


                                                   55
same as equation (9) derived from a nonseparable utility function.
   The online Appendix of Rogerson and Wallenius (2013) consider a nonseparable utility function
used in Trabandt and Uhlig (2009) and Shimer (2010):

                                           1 1−η h                      1+ 1 η
                                                                            i
                                              c    1 − κ(1 − η)(eh̄ + h) φ ,                                                (D.1)
                                          1−η

where η, κ, and φ are all positive. Note that this utility function is different from the one in equation
(1) not only in that consumption and leisure are nonseparable but also in that the marginal utility of
leisure when h = 0 is zero. Not to confound the effects of these two differences, we change the above
nonseparable utility function to:
                                              "                                 #η
                                        1 1−η                (1 − eh̄ − h)1−1/γ
                                           c    1 + κ(1 − η)                       ,                                        (D.2)
                                       1−η                        1 − 1/γ

where the marginal utility from leisure is nonzero when h = 0 and the IES is γ 1−ehh̄−h as in (1). By
                                                                                 1
taking the limit η → 1 after subtracting a constant term                        1−η ,   (D.2) becomes the separable utility
function used in (1).
   As in the main text, suppose that the choices in SSQs do not affect the marginal value of resources
(λ). The household decides consumption such that the marginal utility from consumption is equal to
λ. Then the optimal current consumption for a household whose labor supply is h is:
                                                       "                                   #
                                                                        (1 − eh̄ − h)1−1/γ
                                      c∗ (h) = λ−1/η       1 + κ(1 − η)                      .                              (D.3)
                                                                             1 − 1/γ

Plugging this into the utility function, we get the current flow utility for a household whose labor
supply is h as:
                                                       "                                 #
                                            1   −(1−η)               (1 − e h̄ − h)1−1/γ
                            u(c∗ (h), h) =     λ η      1 + κ(1 − η)                       .                                (D.4)
                                           1−η                            1 − 1/γ

   Then the indifference condition between working for the fixed number of hours and not working
can be written as:
                                                              !
      −(1−η)          1      (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ
  λ     η      κ           −                                      = λ(hf ixed wf ixed (1 − ĉ) + c∗ (0) − c∗ (hf ixed )),   (D.5)
                   1 − 1/γ           1 − 1/γ

where the right hand side now takes into account not only the value of additional earnings but also
that of any difference in the consumption between when not working and when working hf ixed . By
plugging (D.3) into (D.5), we get:
                                                                               !
                        −(1−η)           1      (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ
                    λ     η      κη           −                                    = λ(hf ixed wf ixed (1 − ĉ)).           (D.6)
                                      1 − 1/γ           1 − 1/γ

Similarly, the indifference condition between working for the fixed number of hours and working for


                                                                   56
the number of hours chosen by the respondent can be written as:
                                                                          !
       −(1−η)        (1 − h̄ − hf lex )1−1/γ   (1 − h̄ − hf ixed )1−1/γ
   λ     η      κη                           −                                = λ(hf ixed wf ixed − hf lex wf lex ).   (D.7)
                            1 − 1/γ                    1 − 1/γ

Note that equations (D.6) and (D.7) are the same as equations (7) and (8) except for that (D.6) and
                 −(1−η)
(D.7) have λ       η      κη instead of αt multiplied on the left hand side. But this is a term that cancels out
when dividing one indifference condition by the other, so in the end the equation used for estimation
is the same equation (9).
   In addition, one can easily show that the relationship between the necessary nonconvexity in
production to explain an abrupt retirement and the IES is not affected by introducing nonseparability
in the utility function. If we redo the exercise in online Appendix C of Rogerson and Wallenius (2013)
using (D.2) instead of (D.1), we find that the condition for the minimum value of θ required to generate
an abrupt retirement is exactly the same as equation (6).




                                                            57
E         Appendix: Additional Robustness and Credibility Checks on the
          SSQ responses
This Appendix reports results from the additional tests on robustness and credibility of the SSQ
responses that are not reported in the main text. The first test shows external consistency of the SSQ
responses under the alternative occupation scenario by comparing them to actual search behavior. The
next two tests confirm internal consistency of the SSQ responses. The last test confirms understanding
of the hypothetical situation by reporting results from the comprehension tests that were implemented
during the survey.

E.1         Search Behaviors and SSQ Responses: Alternative Occupation
We find consistency between the responses to the SSQs under the alternative occupation scenario
and actual search behavior. Those who actually looked for a job either in a different occupation
or a different industry are more likely to accept the offer in the SSQ that allows for an alternative
occupation.30 As a result, the impact of allowing for an alternative occupation on the acceptance rate
is the largest for this group.

                    Table E.1: Search behaviors and SSQ responses: Alternative Occupation


                                                                             N            Acceptance rate

                                                                                    Reference         Alternative
           Searched for                                                             occupation        occupation

           Did not search                                                  1,188         33.7               26.2
           Alternative occupation/industry                                   53          39.6               47.2
           Other than alternative occupation/industry                        94          30.9               33.0

          Notes: The tabulation includes only retirees who did not have a bridge job. In calculating the acceptance rate
          for an alternative occupation scenario, those who cannot think of any alternative occupation are considered
          as not accepting the job. Hence the acceptance rate is calculated as the multiplication of two probabilities:
          whether they can think of a preferred alternative occupation and whether they will accept the offer made in
          the preferred occupation.



E.2         Consistency in Responses
The SSQs ask about the same types of job but differ in the timing of the offer: one at the time of
the survey and the other at the time of retirement. If the responses truly reflect the respondents’
preferences, we expect there to be a positive correlation between the responses for the same job
characteristics offered at different times.
     For both fixed and flexible schedule scenarios, the extensive margin choices are strongly positively
correlated between the SSQs asked at different times. If a respondent accepts the offer at the time of
    30
         Those who cannot think of an alternative occupation are included as not accepting an offer in that scenario.


                                                               58
the survey then he is more likely to do the same at the time of retirement. The correlation between
the responses to the offers at different times is 0.42 for a fixed schedule scenario and 0.45 for a flexible
schedule scenario, where the t-statistic for the null of no correlation is 19.7 for the former and 21.1 for
the latter.

E.3    Reasonableness of Responses
If the response switches from accept to do not accept when we make the offer more attractive either by
allowing for a flexible schedule or an alternative occupation under the same level of offered salary, then
it can be considered unreasonable. In Table E.2, we calculate the share of unreasonable responses, in
various questions.
   We find that the share of unreasonable responses is small. It is less than 4 percent under any
comparison. The share is still small even when we consider only the switchers, defined as responses
that change at the extensive margin between the two scenarios considered. For each comparison,
between one fifth to a quarter of respondents switched their responses. More than 80% of switchers
switch in the expected direction, in all cases.

         Table E.2: Reasonable Responses: Share of unreasonable changes in responses (%)


                                               Share of unreasonable changes in responses

                                               Among all responses           Among switchers
       Time of the survey
       Allowing for flexible schedule                     1.9                         7.9
       Allowing for alternative occupation                1.7                         6.1
       Time of retirement
       Allowing for flexible schedule                     3.3                        18.8
       Allowing for alternative occupation                3.5                        16.6


      Note: Switchers are defined as those who change their responses between the two scenarios
      considered.


E.4    Comprehension Test Results
Given the intensive use of hypothetical situations in the SSQs, it is important to check whether the
respondents fully understood the assumed scenarios before they answered the SSQs. Whenever the
survey introduces a new type of scenario, it asks a set of comprehension tests to verify that respondents
understood the assumed scenario and associated rules correctly. If the respondents do not correctly
answer all questions on their first try, the questions they missed are repeated. If they incorrectly
answer any questions on their second try, they are told the correct answer.
   Table E.3 summarizes the results of the comprehension tests (the number of questions correctly
answered after their second try). Median respondents answer almost all questions correctly even on
their first try. On their second try, respondents rarely miss any of the questions. This confirms that

                                                    59
the respondents were paying attention during the survey and they did not have much difficulty in
understanding the assumed hypothetical scenarios.

                              Table E.3: Comprehension test results


                                             10p    25p     50p   75p    90p      N

                  Fixed schedule (Best score: 7 for married and 6 for singles)
                  First trial (married)  3       4     6     6      7     1,835
                  Second trial (married) 5       6     7     7      7     1,835
                  First trial (singles)  3       4     5     6      6      923
                  Second trial (singles) 5       5     6     6      6      923

                  Flexible schedule                                     (Best score: 4)
                  First trial                 2         3    4      4      4    2,757
                  Second trial                3         4    4      4      4    2,757

                  Alternative occupation                                (Best score: 3)
                  First trial           2               2    3      3      3    1,264
                  Second trial          3               3    3      3      3    1,264


                 Note: Table shows the number of correct answers from the com-
                 prehension tests for the first and second trials. Best score is the to-
                 tal number of questions asked and it varies across scenarios. Mar-
                 ried are respondents who are married or in a relationship sharing
                 financial decisionmaking. For the fixed schedule scenario the best
                 score is different between married and single respondents as the
                 test asked one more question to the married respondents.




                                                   60
