                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   HOW BARGAINING IN MARRIAGE DRIVES MARRIAGE MARKET EQUILIBRIUM

                                             Robert A. Pollak

                                          Working Paper 24000
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w24000


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                            November 2017, Revised January 2018




An earlier version of this paper was presented as the Presidential Address at the Society of Labor Economists
in Boston in May 2009. Versions of this paper were also presented at the AEA, ESPE, the Milton Friedman
Institute Conference on the New Economics of the Family, the MacArthur Network on the Family
and the Economy, the University of Chicago, Vanderbilt University, the University of Essex, the University
of Michigan, Washington University in St. Louis and the University of Copenhagen. I am grateful
to the participants for their comments. I am also grateful to Gary Becker, Jere Behrman, Ted Bergstrom,
Bart Hamilton, Karen Norberg, Paul Oyer, Alvin Roth, Aloysius Siow, Betsey Stevenson, John Weymark,
and Justin Wolfers and, especially, to my friend and long-time collaborator Shelly Lundberg for helpful
conversations and comments. Neither they nor the workshop participants who made helpful comments
bear responsibility for my use of them. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.
How Bargaining in Marriage drives Marriage Market Equilibrium
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 24000
November 2017, Revised January 2018
JEL No. D1,J12,K36

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper investigates marriage market equilibrium under the assumption that Bargaining In
Marriage (BIM) determines allocation within marriage. Prospective spouses, when they meet in
the marriage market, are assumed to foresee the outcome of BIM and rank prospective spouses on
the basis of the utilities they foresee emerging from BIM. Under these assumptions, the marriage
market is the first stage of a multi-stage game – in the simplest case, a two-stage game – that
must be solved by backwards induction. The marriage market determines both who marries and,
among those who marry, who marries whom. Bargaining in the second and any subsequent stages
determines allocation within each marriage. When BIM determines allocation within marriage,
the appropriate framework for analyzing marriage market equilibrium is the Gale-Shapley
matching model.

In contrast, the standard model of marriage market equilibrium assumes that prospective spouses
make Binding Agreements in the Marriage Market (BAMM) that determine allocation within
marriage. If we assume BAMM and transferable utility, then the appropriate framework for
analyzing marriage market equilibrium is the Koopmans-Beckmann-Shapley-Shubik assignment
model. BIM and BAMM have different implications not only for allocation within marriage but
also for who marries, who marries whom, the number of marriages, and the Pareto efficiency of
marriage market equilibrium.


Robert A. Pollak
Washington University in St. Louis
Arts and Sciences
and the Olin Business School
Campus Box 1133
1 Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130-4899
and IZA
and also NBER
pollak@wustl.edu
1. Introduction

       I investigate marriage market equilibrium under the assumption that Bargaining In Marriage

(BIM) determines allocation within marriage. In contrast, the standard model of marriage market

equilibrium assumes that prospective spouses make Binding Agreements in the Marriage Market

(BAMM) that determine allocation within marriage. I show that BIM and BAMM have different

implications not only for allocation within marriage, but also for who marries, for who marries whom,

for the number of marriages, and for the Pareto efficiency of marriage market equilibrium.

       When BIM determines marriage market equilibrium, I assume that when prospective spouses

meet in the marriage market they foresee the outcome of future bargaining. Taking account of these

outcomes, each man has a ranking of all women, and each woman has a ranking of all men. Under

these assumptions, the marriage market is the first stage of a multi-stage game -- in the simplest case,

a two-stage game -- that must be solved by backwards induction.

       When BIM determines allocation within marriage, a modified version of the Gale and Shapley

(1962) matching model is the appropriate framework for analyzing marriage market equilibrium. In

the original Gale-Shapley model, each man had a ranking of all women, each woman had a ranking

of all men, and these rankings were primitives of the model. I replace the assumption that the rankings

are primitives of the model with the assumption that they depend on the outcomes prospective spouses

foresee emerging from BIM. With this seemingly trivial modification, BIM and the Gale-Shapley




                                                   1
matching model become a credible alternative to the standard marriage market model based on

BAMM and the Koopmans-Beckmann-Shapley-Shubik assignment model.1

       A two-stage example illustrates the relationship between BIM and the marriage market. For

definiteness, suppose that Nash bargaining, the workhorse of the family bargaining literature,

determines allocation within every possible marriage and that the threat point in every possible

marriage is common knowledge to marriage market participants. Then each prospective spouse can

foresee the outcome of Nash bargaining in every possible marriage, calculate his or her utility in every

possible marriage, and rank every possible marriage partner. The threat point may be divorce or may

depend on some measure of control over resources in marriage.

       BIM does not require Nash bargaining. Becker's “altruist model,” the model underlying the

Rotten Kid Theorem, provides a tractable alternative.2 In the altruist model one spouse, for

definiteness, the husband, has the power to impose his preferred allocation subject to his wife's

participation constraint. Thus, the wife's utility depends on the couple's resources and on the weight

the husband places on the wife's well-being (i.e., how "altruistic" or "caring" he is). As with Nash

bargaining, with the altruist model each marriage market participant can calculate his or her utility in

every possible marriage and, on the basis of these utilities, rank potential marriage partners. Using

these rankings, the Gale-Shapley matching model allows us to analyze marriage market equilibrium.

       BIM and the modified Gale-Shapley approach is consistent with all cooperative and

noncooperative bargaining models that uniquely determine the utilities of prospective spouses in


1
  Becker (1973, 1991) was the first to recognize that the assignment model could be used to analyze
marriage market equilibrium. For subsequent developments, see Choo and Siow (2006) and
Chiappori (2017).
2
  See Becker (1991, p. 9; p. 284). All page citations to Becker's Treatise on the Family refer to the
1991 enlarged edition, although virtually all the cited material appeared in the 1981 edition and,
before that, much of it in journal articles.
                                                   2
every possible marriage. The original version of Chiappori's "collective model" assumes that

allocation within marriage is Pareto efficient and that "distribution factors" that reflect bargaining

power within marriage uniquely determine the spouses' utilities (Chiappori, 1988, 1992; Browning et

al., 1994). Thus, the original version of the collective model includes as special cases both Nash

bargaining and the altruist model. Browning et al., (1994, p. 1072) write that the efficiency assumption

"...is particularly attractive in the context of the household since the 'players' have a long-term

relationship and are in an environment that does not change much from period to period."3 Later

versions of the collective model such as Chiappori, Iyigun, and Weiss (2009) assume that allocation

within marriage is determined by Pareto efficient agreements that prospective spouses make in the

marriage market. Pareto efficiency, however, is a less attractive assumption without the Browning et

al. rationale that allocation within marriage is the outcome of a repeated game.

        The analysis of marriage market equilibrium based on BIM and the Gale-Shapley matching

model generalizes from two-stage games to multi-stage games. Because multi-stage games are solved

by backwards induction, the continuation values contain all the information that marriage market

participants need to rank prospective spouses. The utility each marriage market participant associates

with every possible marriage is a sufficient statistic because these utilities determine the rankings that

are grist for the Gale-Shapley mill. Specifications as diverse as Nash bargaining, the altruist model,

and the original version of the collective model provide suitable starting points for the analysis

because the granular structure of bargaining is irrelevant.4



3
  Lundberg and Pollak (2003) argue that major decisions that substantially affect future bargaining
power are much less likely to be efficient than minor decisions that allow spouses to split the
difference or take turns.
4
  The Gale-Shapley analysis is consistent with any model that yields unique utilities, regardless of
whether allocations within marriages are Pareto efficient.
                                                    3
       The standard analysis of marriage market equilibrium assumes that prospective spouses make

Binding Agreements in the Marriage Market (BAMM) that determine allocation within marriage

and, hence, the utility each spouse will receive from the marriage. That is, in the standard model,

allocation within marriage, implements prior agreements that prospective spouses made in the

marriage market.

       Given the large and growing literature on bargaining in marriage, a reader might mistakenly

assume that the marriage market literature consists of two strands, one corresponding to BIM and the

other to BAMM. In fact, the marriage market literature consists of one strand, and that strand is

BAMM. Neither bargaining within marriage nor the Gale-Shapley matching model appear in the

marriage market literature.5

       As the word "binding" implies, BAMM assumes that agreements made in the marriage market

are enforceable. Although prenuptial agreements appear to provide a way in which BAMM might be

enforced, American courts will not enforce contracts about allocation within marriage. In section 6, I

discuss enforcement.

       With BAMM, the solution concept for marriage market equilibrium is the core. If we assume

both BAMM and transferable utility, then the equilibrium assignment (i.e., who marries whom)

maximizes the sum of utilities over all possible marriages. With BAMM and transferable utility, the

assignment model, introduced by Koopmans and Beckmann (1957) and elaborated by Shapley and

Shubik (1971), reduces the task of maximizing the sum of utilities to a linear programming problem.




5
  I am aware of only two recent marriage market papers that mention Gale-Shapley: Del Boca and
Flinn (2014) and Voena (2015). Both follow Becker (1991, p. 126) and assume that all husbands
receive the same fraction of output or utility in every marriage. I discuss the same-fraction
assumption in section 3.
                                                  4
Thus, the conjunction of BAMM and transferable utility substantially simplifies the analysis of

marriage market equilibrium.

       Although the standard marriage market model assumes both BAMM and transferable utility,

these assumptions are independent. BAMM is an assumption about the contracting opportunities

available to prospective spouses in the marriage market, while transferable utility is an assumption

about preferences. Although the analysis of marriage market equilibrium with BIM is not simplified

by transferability utility, I assume transferable utility to facilitate comparisons between the marriage

market implications of BIM and BAMM.

       BIM and BAMM have different implications for the Pareto efficiency of marriage market

equilibrium. With BAMM, because the solution concept is the core, the equilibrium must be Pareto

efficient. With BIM, marriage market equilibrium need not be Pareto efficient even if bargaining in

marriage leads to Pareto-efficient allocations within every possible marriage. Examples based on

Nash bargaining and altruist model illustrate this possibility: inefficiency can arise if a woman

chooses to remain unmarried, rejecting a marriage that would generate a "surplus" -- that is, more

total utility than the sum of the utilities she and her prospective husband would receive as unmarried

individuals. (With transferable utility, the sum of utilities is well-defined.) A woman would reject

such a marriage if she foresaw that her husband would have "too much" bargaining power and would

appropriate so much that she would be worse off than if she never married him.6

       In section 2 I review the literature on bargaining in marriage. In section 3 I discuss marriage

market equilibrium with BIM and in section 4 marriage market equilibrium with BAMM. In section



6
 Without the ability to make BAMM, a prospective husband cannot credibly commit himself not to
exploit his bargaining power advantage even though he would be better off if he could make such a
commitment.
                                                   5
5 I show that BIM and BAMM can have different implications for who marries, for who marries

whom, and for the number of marriages; I also show that this is the case in search models as well as

in frictionless models in which all marriage market participants meet simultaneously. Section 6

discusses three cases in which, it has been argued, marriage market equilibrium under BIM and

BAMM coincide -- costless divorce, prenuptial agreements, and premarital transfers. I argue that none

of these cases justify using BAMM rather than BIM to analyze marriage market equilibrium. Section

7 concludes.

2. Bargaining in Marriage: Theory and Evidence

       The first theoretical models of bargaining in marriage, those of Manser and Brown (1980) and

McElroy and Horney (1981), assumed that cooperative bargaining determined allocation within

marriage and that the threat point was divorce. Their principal objective was to challenge the

traditional "unitary model" of the household in which spouses "pool" their resources and act as a

single "economic agent," maximizing a household utility function subject to household resource

constraints. Divorce-threat bargaining models predict that what McElroy (1990) has called

"extrahousehold environmental parameters" (EEPs) determine allocation in ongoing marriages.

Examples of EEPs include the costs of divorce, the status of divorced individuals, and conditions in

the remarriage market.

       Although the first theoretical models of bargaining in marriage assumed that divorce was the

threat point, more recent work has emphasized control over resources within marriage as a

determinant of bargaining power. The recognition of an "internal" as well as an "external" threat point

allows for the possibility that bargaining within marriage takes place even in societies in which




                                                  6
divorce is not an option as well as in marriages in which divorce is not a credible threat because the

participation constraint is not binding.7

        Evidence that changes in divorce law cause reallocation within existing marriages is

consistent with bargaining or rebargaining in marriage.8 Using US longitudinal data, Voena (2015)

investigates the effect of changes in divorce laws on couples that were married before these changes

were made. She finds that "when unilateral divorce is introduced in states where property is divided

equally, the women who are already married become less likely to work, while no significant change

is observed in states that do not impose an equal division of property." This response, as Voena points

out, is consistent with divorce-threat bargaining.9




7
  The historian Lawrence Stone writes: "It must never be forgotten that England in the early modern
period was neither a separating nor a divorcing society: death was virtually the sole agent for
dissolving marriage" (1990, p. 2). Becker (1991, p. 274) cites Rowntree and Carrier for the fact that
"There were fewer than two (!) divorces per year in England from 1800 to 1850..." (Becker's
exclamation point). The 1857 Divorce Act substantially liberalized the law governing divorce in
England and Wales, yet the number of divorces per year remained under 1000 until the First World
War (see Stone [1990, Table 13.1]). In the 19th century, divorce rates in the United States were
substantially higher than in England; Preston and McDonald (1979) estimate the US divorce rate
was between 5 and 6 percent in the late 1860s. Hartog (2000) emphasizes the importance of
separation and abandonment as alternatives to divorce in the United States in the 19th century.
Predominantly Catholic countries in Europe and Latin America legalized divorce late in the 20th or
early 21st centuries -- Italy in 1970, Portugal in 1975, Brazil in 1977, Ireland in 1997, and Chile in
2004.
8
  There is strong evidence that both the sex ratio and divorce laws affect allocation within marriage,
but many papers fail to investigate the extent to which these factors operate through bargaining in
marriage rather than through the marriage market. On divorce laws, see Chiappori, Fortin and,
Lacroix (2002), Stevenson (2007), and Roff (2017); on the sex ratio, see Angrist (2002), Chiappori,
Fortin, and Lacroix (2002), and Grossbard (2016).
9
  Rangel (2006) investigates the effect of a 1994 legal change in Brazil that made partners in
consensual (i.e., cohabiting) unions eligible for "alimony" when the union ended. Rangel finds that
women who were in consensual unions when the change was made increased their leisure and
decreased both their market work and household work. Rangel attributes these changes to an
increase in women's bargaining power.
                                                      7
        Schultz (1990) and Thomas (1990) provided early empirical evidence that control over

resources within marriage affects allocation within marriage. Their crucial insight was that

unitary models imply that couples pool their resources, while bargaining models allow control

over resources within marriage to influence allocation within marriage. (Whether the empirical

counterpart of control over resources is best interpreted as wealth, income, earnings, or wages is

an open question in both the theoretical and the empirical literatures; see Pollak, 2005.) That is,

unlike the unitary model, bargaining models allow labor supply, expenditure patterns, and the

well-being of children to depend not only on total household resources but also on the proportion

of household resources controlled by each spouse. Using Brazilian data, Thomas found that the

effect of mothers' unearned income on children's survival probabilities was almost 20 times

greater than that of fathers' unearned income. The use of unearned income rather than earnings

mitigates the endogeneity problem that arises because unearned income is not exogenous.

        The "separate spheres" bargaining model of Lundberg and Pollak (1993) provides a

theoretical rationale for the finding that control over resources within marriage affects allocation

within marriage. The separate spheres model assumes that in day-to-day marital bargaining the threat

point is not divorce but a noncooperative equilibrium within marriage. Bergstrom (1996, p. 1926)

memorably characterizes the noncooperative equilibrium as "harsh words and burnt toast," but threats

of violence or actual violence are more ominous possibilities. In the separate spheres model, control

over resources can affect allocation within marriage even when the participation constraint is not

binding (i.e., when neither spouse is sufficiently dissatisfied with the status quo to end the marriage,

but at least one is willing to resort to harsh words and burnt toast).

        Lundberg, Pollak, and Wales (1997) provides empirical support for the claim that control over

resources affects allocation within marriage. The paper avoids the endogeneity problem by using a

                                                    8
natural experiment -- a policy change in the United Kingdom in the late 1970s that transferred a

substantial child benefit from husbands to wives. This exogenous change in control over resources

led to increased expenditures on both women's clothing and children's clothing relative to men's

clothing. Corroborating the control-over-resources claim, Ward-Batts (2008) found that the change

in the British child benefit affected purchases of tobacco products. Specifically, she found a

substantial and statistically significant increase in expenditure on cigarettes and an offsetting decrease

in expenditure on cigars and pipe tobacco, which she called "men's tobacco."

        Empirical research on the effect of control over resources has often focused on "assignable

goods" -- that is, on goods that are assumed to be consumed exclusively by only one member of the

household or, more precisely, to enter the utility function of only one member of the household.

Examples of assignable goods are men's clothing, women's clothing, and children's clothing and the

time husbands and wives allocate to market work, household work, and leisure. Much of the empirical

research is motivated by a policy concern with the health or well-being of children. The British

decision to transfer resources "from the wallet to the purse" by paying the child benefit to mothers

rather than to fathers was based on the belief that "kids do better" when their mothers control a larger

fraction of family resources.

        Many researchers have investigated the effect of control over resources on expenditure

patterns using data from a Mexican conditional cash transfer program, Progresa, and its successor,

Oportunidades. Conditional cash transfer programs almost always provide the cash to mothers rather

than to fathers. To simplify a bit, Progresa payments were conditioned on children attending school

and receiving scheduled immunizations. Progresa and Oportunidades made payments only to mothers

but, because some villages were randomly selected to implement Progresa before others, differences



                                                    9
in the timing of implementation created a research opportunity.10 Researchers compared the

expenditure patterns of households in the earlier villages with those of households in the later villages.

Comparing households with the same level of total expenditure provides a test of the control-over-

resources hypothesis. For example, exploiting these timing differences, Attanasio and Lechene (2002)

and Rubalcava, Teruel, and Thomas (2009) found persuasive evidence that control over resources

affects household expenditure patterns: treated households in villages that implemented Progresa

early spent more on food than households with the same level of total expenditure in villages that had

not yet implemented Progresa. Using Oportunidades data, Angelucci and Attanasio (2013) also found

that control over resources strongly affects expenditure patterns. They conclude that the data are not

consistent with the unitary model of the household, and investigate two possible explanations: that

the observed differences were due to changes in nutritional knowledge or that they were due to

increases in mothers' relative incomes, which they characterize as "a proxy for bargaining power" (p.

150). Angelucci and Attanasio conclude that "The fact that women start to control a sizable proportion

of the family income seems to induce a change in the way households allocate total expenditure

among different commodities" (p. 176).

         Because randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are often regarded as the gold standard for

empirical evidence, a powerful test of the control-over-resources hypothesis would be an RCT that

made payments to mothers in some families and to fathers in others. Armand, et al. (2016) report the

results of such an RCT in Macedonia in which conditional cash transfers were made to mothers in

some municipalities and to fathers in others. The Macedonian results strongly support the conclusion

that control over resources is an important determinant of household expenditure patterns. Armand,



10
     Behrman and Hoddinott (2005) discuss the randomization.
                                                   10
et al. write: "When provided with an additional source of income, mothers and fathers spend income

differently."

        Uncertainty complicates everything. Prospective spouses may recognize that their feelings for

each other may change, that divorce laws may change, and that future wealth, income, earnings, and

wages are stochastic. With BIM, uncertainty is a relatively minor complication. If marriage market

participants know the underlying distributions of shocks, they can calculate the expected utility in

every possible marriage and rank every possible marriage partner on the basis of expected utility. The

standard marriage market model assumes "full commitment" -- in the marriage market prospective

spouses make binding agreements that completely determine allocation within marriage, leaving no

scope for divorce or for rebargaining within marriage. With BAMM, uncertainty is a major

complication because it requires substantially more than marriage market participants knowing the

distribution of shocks.11

        "Limited commitment" is an intermediate case, and is the only admissible intermediate

version of the collective model between full commitment and no commitment. With limited

commitment, utility is reallocated when and only when the participation constraint is binding (i.e.,

when the sharing rule agreed to in the marriage market would leave one spouse worse off than

divorce). When the marriage produces a surplus and the participation constraint is binding, limited

commitment allows reallocation but specifies a particular reallocation. The specified reallocation




11
  Transferable utility with uncertainty is highly restrictive; see Chiappori, Costa Dias, and Meghir
(2016, pp. 10-11).
                                                 11
increases the utility of the spouse at the participation constraint by just enough to keep that spouse in

the marriage.12

        Limited commitment plays virtually no role in the marriage market literature which either

assumes full commitment (i.e., no reallocation, no divorce) or imposes assumptions intended to allow

the full commitment analysis to proceed. For example, Chiappori, Costa Dias, and Meghir (2016) use

the full commitment version of the collective model to establish the efficiency of the educational

choices prospective spouses make before they enter the marriage market. Iyigun and Walsh (2007, p.

510, 515) reach this efficiency conclusion by assuming that divorce is costless. Chiappori, Iyigun,

and Weiss (2009, p. 1709) reach it by assuming that prospective spouses make enforceable prenuptial

agreements that fully insure against divorce. In section 6 I discuss both costless divorce and prenuptial

agreements.

        To summarize: Evidence amassed over the past quarter century has established that

bargaining in marriage is an important determinant of allocation within marriage. Some studies

emphasizes the threat of divorce while others emphasize control over resources within marriage as

sources of bargaining power. There is, however, no consensus about the type of bargaining, the

empirical counterparts of bargaining power, or whether bargaining takes place only when the

participation constraint is binding.




12
   Thus, limited commitment relies on contingent contracts in which the contingencies are not states
but equivalence classes of states specified in terms of utilities. When contracting parties cannot
make full commitments, dynamically efficient agreements must take this form; see Ligon, Thomas,
and Worrall (2002), Ligon (2002), and Mazzocco (2007). Using Japanese longitudinal data, Lise
and Yamada (2015) estimate a dynamic model of allocation within marriage and interpret their
results as consistent with the limited commitment version of the collective model.
                                                   12
3. Marriage Market Equilibrium with Bargaining in Marriage (BIM)

       Gale and Shapley proposed and analyzed the first matching model in their celebrated 1962

article "College Admission and the Stability of Marriage." They described the marriage problem in

three concise sentences: "A certain community consists of n men and n women. Each person ranks

those of the opposite sex in accordance with his or her preferences. We seek a satisfactory way of

marrying off all members of the community."13

       I drop the Gale-Shapley assumption that the rankings are primitives of the model and assume

instead that individuals’ rankings of prospective marriage partners depend on the utilities they foresee

emerging from BIM. Becker (1991) started down this road but turned back. Without acknowledging

that he was doing so, Becker reinterpreted the Gale-Shapley model by replacing the assumption that

individuals' rankings are primitives of the model with the assumption that the rankings depend on the

utilities individuals would receive in marriages. Becker, however, imposed an additional assumption

that vitiated the power of this reinterpretation to provide the basis for an economic analysis of the

marriage market: he assumed that “all men receive the same fraction of output [utility] in all possible

matches” (p. 126).14 Becker recognized that if all men receive the same fraction of output or utility in

all marriages, then the analysis of allocation within marriage would be a project for anthropologists




13
   The Gale-Shapley statement of the problem (“in a certain community”) assumes away the issue
of marriage market definition. The generalization to unequal numbers of men and women is
straightforward. Roth and Sotomayor (1990) provide the definitive exposition and analysis of
matching models.
14
   Working within the household production framework, Becker (1973, p. 816) assumed that every
marriage produces a single output that must be divided between the spouses, but his analysis also
applies with transferable utility. Chiappori (2015) argues that Becker’s insistence on output and his
rejection of transferable utility was a rare misstep.
                                                  13
or sociologists, not for economists. The Gale-Shapley matching model plays no further role in the

Treatise and virtually none in the subsequent marriage market literature.15

        Following Becker, I assume that the rankings depend on the division of output or utility within

marriage, but I drop Becker's assumption that all men receive the same fraction of output or utility in

all possible matches. Instead I assume that prospective spouses understand that allocation within

marriage will be determined by BIM and that they foresee the utilities that will emerge from

bargaining. I assume that if man i marries woman j, the sum of the utilities they receive is uij, while if

he never marries he receives utility uio and if she never marries she receives utility uoj. I assume that

every possible marriage generates a nonnegative surplus, in the sense that uij  uio + uoj. To minimize

notational clutter, I assume

        uio = uoj = 0 for all i, j.

I assume that the marriage market contains equal numbers of men and women (n) and denote the

n × n "utility surplus matrix," S, by

           u11        ⋯    u1n
        S=[ ⋮               ⋮ ]
           un1        ⋯    unn

        I assume that marriage market participants treat bargaining power and, hence, the division of

utility within marriage, as fixed.16 This implies that agreements made in the marriage market are




15
   I am grateful to Vince Crawford for calling my attention to three papers published in the 1980s
that investigate marriage-market models based on Gale-Shapley: Bennett (1988), Crawford and
Rochford (1986), and Rochford (1984). These papers have hardly ever been cited in the marriage
market literature, but they will be if this paper renews interest in approaches based on Gale-
Shapley and BIM.
16
   Prenuptial agreements and premarital transfers can alter bargaining power within marriage and,
hence, the division of utility. I discuss these possibilities in section 6.
                                                   14
cheap talk. If man i marries women j, I denote the expected division of utilities between them by (ũℎ𝑖𝑗 ,

ũ𝑤
 𝑖𝑗 ) and the n × n the "utility division matrix," D, by

              h     w              h     w
            (ũ11 , ũ11 )    ⋯    (ũ1n , ũ1n )
        D=[      ⋮                    ⋮       ]
           (ũhn1 , ũw
                    n1 )    ⋯      h     w
                                 (ũnn , ũnn )

To facilitate comparisons between BIM and BAMM, I assume that utility divisions are Pareto

efficient so that

        ũhij + ũw
                ij = uij,


although the BIM analysis of marriage market equilibrium does not require Pareto efficiency.17 The

marriage market implications of BIM follow from the division matrix and the assumption that the

utilities of unmarried men and unmarried women are 0.18 I do not assume

        ũhij  0 or ũw
                     ij  0.


        Instead, I distinguish between two participation constraints: the "marriage market

participation constraint" (i.e., the constraint facing an unmarried individual considering whether to

enter a particular marriage) and the “ongoing marriage participation constraint" (i.e., the constraint

facing a married individual considering whether to leave a particular marriage).19 The ongoing

marriage participation constraint depends on McElroy's EEPs as well as on the individual's wage rate

and other characteristics. The possibility that a woman might choose to remain unmarried rather than


17
   BIM does not require prospective spouses to have identical expectations about the division of
utility that will emerge from marital bargaining. Divergent expectations may increase the
probability of divorce, but economists have done little to investigate spouses' expectations at the
time they enter marriage.
18
   The assumption of equal numbers of men and women and the assumption that the utilities of
unmarried men and unmarried women are 0 simplify the notation and the exposition, but most of
the analysis does not require these assumptions.
19
   This distinction disappears if we assume costless divorce.
                                                    15
marry a man who would have "too much" bargaining power depends on the distinction between the

marriage market participation constraint and the ongoing marriage participation constraint.

        If each man associates a utility with every possible marriage, he can rank the women in the

marriage market. Similarly, if each woman associates a utility with every possible marriage, she can

rank the men in the marriage market. Under these assumptions, the Gale-Shapley matching model

applies directly to the marriage market.

        Gale and Shapley proposed an intuitively appealing equilibrium concept for matching models,

a “stable matching.”20 They define a stable matching as an assignment of women to men (or,

equivalently, of men to women) that satisfies two properties:

        (i) no married individual prefers being unmarried to his or her current assignment,

        (ii) no two individuals of opposite sexes prefer being married to each other to their current

assignments.

        This definition covers both the case in which the current assignment is being unmarried and

the case in which it is being married to a particular individual. Gale and Shapley proved that if each

individual's ranking is an ordering, as it must be under our assumption that rankings are based on the

utilities individuals expect to emerge from BIM, then a stable matching exists. I denote a stable

matching corresponding to BIM by the mapping F̃(i) = j from the set of men, {1,...,n}, into the set

{0,1,...,n}. If F̃(i) = j, j  0, then man i marries woman j; if F̃(i) = 0, then man i remains unmarried. I

denote the number of marriages by ĩ.

        The analysis of marriage market equilibrium with BIM does not depend on a particular

bargaining model, but it does assume that, for every possible marriage, bargaining implies a utility or


20
 Gale and Shapley also introduced the "deferred acceptance" algorithms for finding stable
matchings; see Roth (2008).
                                                    16
expected utility corresponding to every prospective spouse. Hence, bargaining models with

probabilistic outcomes are admissible, but a solution concept such as the core that specifies a set of

outcomes without specifying the corresponding probabilities is inadmissible.

        Three additional points about the marriage market equilibrium with BIM deserve mention.

First, with BIM the analysis of marriage market equilibrium neither requires nor is substantially

simplified by assuming transferable utility. Second, with BIM the analysis of marriage market

equilibrium is not substantially simplified by assuming equal numbers of men and women. Third,

although the utility or expected utility of each individual in every possible marriage is determined,

the equilibrium assignment of women to men need not be unique.21

4. Marriage Market Equilibrium with Binding Agreements in the Marriage Market (BAMM)

        The standard economic analysis of marriage market equilibrium assumes that prospective

spouses, when they meet in the marriage market, make binding agreements that determine the division

of utility in marriage. With BAMM, these utilities must satisfy conditions that relate the utilities of

married individuals to the utilities they would receive in other marriages and to the utilities they would

receive as unmarried individuals. The comparison with their utilities as unmarried individuals is an

individual rationality condition: individuals will not voluntarily enter a marriage unless they receive

at least the utility they would receive as unmarried individuals. The comparison with the utilities they

would receive in other marriages implies two conditions: (1) no one is willing to offer an unmarried




21
   If individuals' preference rankings are strict (i.e., no ties), then the number of marriages and the
set of individuals who marry are the same at every stable matching; see Roth and Sotomayor (1990,
p. 42, Theorem 2.22). Furthermore, if individuals' rankings are strict, the utility payoffs associated
with different stable matchings have a lattice structure, and the best stable matching for men
(women) is the worst for women (men); see Roth and Sotomayor (1990, p. 36, Theorem 2.16; p. 33,
Theorem 2.13). Eeckhout (2000) establishes a sufficient condition for uniqueness.
                                                   17
individual enough to induce that individual to marry and (2) no one is willing to offer a married

individual enough to bid that individual away from his or her assigned spouse.

        With BAMM, agreements made in the marriage market are assumed to be binding contracts

although enforcement is seldom discussed. Framing their discussion in terms of output rather than

utility, Becker and Murphy (2000, p. 31) provide an explicit statement of the role of bids and offers:

“...the marriage market allows [the men and women in the marriage market] to bid for different

spouses by offering a larger or smaller share of the output they would produce together.”

        The Koopmans-Beckmann-Shapley-Shubik assignment model is the mathematical

foundation of the standard analysis of marriage market equilibrium. With BAMM and transferable

utility, the core of the marriage market game maximizes the sum of utilities over all possible

marriages. Hence, under these assumptions, the assignment model reduces the problem of finding

marriage market equilibrium to a linear programming problem.

        We denote the BAMM equilibrium marriage market assignment by the mapping F̂(i) = j from

the set of men, {1,...,n}, into the set {0,1,..,n}. If F̂(i) = j, j  0, then man i marries woman j; if F̂(i) =

0, then man i remains unmarried. (I leave open the possibility of nonmarriage in order to drop the

nonnegative surplus assumption and discuss nonmarriage in section 5.) Under our assumptions, the

utility surplus matrix, S, which shows the total utility each possible couple produce together, contains

all the information required to calculate the equilibrium assignment. Unless two marriages produce

the same surpluses, the equilibrium assignment is unique but the "imputations" (i.e., the utilities

received by each individual) are not.

        The dual of the social planner’s maximization problem leads to a set of imputation vectors

that show the utility divisions consistent with the equilibrium assignment. Because our assumptions

                                                                                        h      w
imply that all men and all women marry, the vectors in this set are of the form V = [(û11 , û11 ), ...,
                                                      18
(ûhnn , ûw
           nn )] where each vector shows a division of utility in every marriage. I denote the set of


imputation vectors by V: V  V.22

       The literature is silent about the contents of agreements made in the marriage market. One

interpretation is that agreements are state-contingent contracts specifying allocations within marriage

in every state of the world.23 An alternative interpretation is that prospective spouses make prenuptial

agreements or premarital transfers that alter bargaining power within marriage, so that bargaining in

marriage results in a pattern of utility divisions, V*, that clears the marriage market (i.e., V*  V).

Under this interpretation, allocation within marriage is determined by bargaining in marriage, where

agreements or transfers made in the marriage market determine bargaining power in marriage. In

section 6 I argue that neither prenuptial agreements nor premarital transfers provide a plausible way

for prospective spouses to redistribute bargaining power within marriage.

5. Implications of BIM and BAMM for Who Marries Whom and the Number of Marriages

       Using the machinery introduced in sections 3 and 4, in this section I investigate the

implications of BIM and BAMM for who marries whom and for the number of marriages. I first

construct a class of cases in which BIM and BAMM can lead to different marriage market

assignments, and then a class of cases in which BIM and BAMM must lead to identical marriage

market assignments. I then compare the number of marriages under BIM and BAMM. I show that if

every possible marriage produces a nonnegative surplus, then BAMM implies at least as many

marriages as BIM. I then show that if some marriages fail to produce a nonnegative surplus, then BIM


22
   As the number of marriage-market participants increases, the requirements of marriage-market
equilibrium may imply increasingly tight bounds on imputations. In the limit, the set of imputation
vectors may converge to a singleton.
23
   In the introduction to the Enlarged Edition of the Treatise, Becker (1991, p. 14-15) rejects the
state-contingent contracts interpretation.
                                                  19
can imply more marriages than BAMM. Finally, I show that the distinction between BIM and BAMM

is crucial not only in frictionless models in which all marriage market participants meet

simultaneously but also in search models.

        A special case of the altruist model provides a transparent example in which BIM and BAMM

lead to different marriage market assignments. Suppose that each man, if he had the power to allocate

resources within marriage, would divide the utility surplus in the same proportion as every other man.

Formally, this implies that the elements of the BIM utility division matrix are of the form

        ũhij = σ uij for all i, j and        ũw
                                              ij = (1-σ) uij for all i, j.


Hence, in every marriage, husbands receive the same fraction of the surplus. If preferences are strict,

the following simple algorithm leads to the BIM marriage market equilibrium. First form the marriage

that produces the greatest total utility. (The same-fraction assumption implies that this marriage

provides greater utility to the husband and the greater utility to the wife than any other marriage.)

Next reduce the set of marriages by eliminating all marriages involving individuals matched in

previous rounds. From the subset of marriages that remain, form the marriage that provides the

greatest total utility. Repeat this procedure until everyone is matched. (This algorithm also implies

that, with the same-fraction assumption and strict preferences, the BIM marriage market equilibrium

is unique.)

        With this same-fraction specification, BIM and BAMM lead to different marriage market

equilibria unless the BAMM equilibrium happens to be one that includes the marriage that

corresponds to the greatest utility:

        F̃(i)  F̂(i), for some i, i = 1,...,n.

Becker (1991, p. 111) showed that BAMM maximizes the sum of utilities over all possible marriages

but, as he showed, it does not necessarily choose the marriage that corresponds to the greatest utility.
                                                         20
       I next construct a class of cases in which BIM and BAMM imply identical marriage market

assignments by formalizing the intuition that if the BIM utility divisions and the BAMM imputations

are identical, then BIM and BAMM imply the same marriage market assignments:

       F̃(i) = F̂(i), i = 1,...,n.

       There are two potential problems, both related to nonuniqueness. First, although the BAMM

imputations are not unique, their nonuniqueness poses no problem because we can use any BAMM

imputation vector. Second, the BIM stable matching corresponding to a given utility division matrix

need not be unique. Here nonuniqueness requires us to interpret the claim that the BIM and BAMM

assignments are "identical" to mean that the BAMM assignment belongs to the set of BIM stable

matching -- that is, there exists a BIM stable matching identical to the BAMM assignment.

                                               *****

       Except when discussing polygyny or unequal numbers of men and women, economists have

virtually ignored nonmarriage. But even with monogamy and equal numbers of men and women,

some men and some women may remain unmarried.24

       If every possible marriage produces a nonnegative surplus, at least as many marriages form

with BAMM as with BIM. Indeed, if every possible marriage produces a nonnegative surplus, with

BAMM there cannot be both unmarried men and unmarried women in equilibrium. I call this property

"universal marriage." The universal marriage conclusion reflects both the nonnegative surplus

assumption and the assumption that, if there is a mutually advantageous agreement to be made,

individuals will make it. With BAMM and a nonnegative surplus in every possible marriage, if there

were an unmarried man and an unmarried women, both would receive greater utility if they married


24
  Search frictions, which I have thus far ignored, provide an alternative explanation of
nonmarriage.
                                                 21
each other; hence, the maximum number of (monogamous) marriages will form and this implies

universal marriage.25

       With BIM the number of marriages depends not only on whether marriages produce a

nonnegative surplus but also on the division of that surplus, that is, on the outcomes prospective

spouses foresee emerging from bargaining in marriage: unless both prospective spouses foresee that

the utilities they would receive from bargaining are greater than the utilities they would receive as

unmarried individuals, they will not marry each other.26 With BIM, if every possible marriage

produces at least as much utility for each spouse as nonmarriage,

       ũhij  0 for all i,j and ũw
                                 ij  0 for all i,j


then BIM implies universal marriage.

       When we drop the assumption that every possible marriage produces a nonnegative surplus,

more marriages may form with BIM than with BAMM. For example, suppose there are two men and

two women, and that unmarried individuals receive 0 utility. Consider the utility surplus matrix:

              12   4
       S =[          ]
              4    −2

With BAMM there is one marriage: man 1 marries woman 1. With BIM, the number of marriages

depends on the utilities that individuals foresee emerging from bargaining. Suppose the utility division

matrix is



25
   The universal marriage conclusion continues to hold when we redefine "surplus" in a way that
does not presuppose transferable utility: if, for every possible couple, there exists an allocation
within marriage that would make both prospective spouses better off than never marrying, then
BAMM implies universal marriage.
26
   Indeed, even if every possible marriage produces a nonnegative surplus, BIM might nevertheless
lead to a marriage market equilibrium in which no one marries. This would occur, for example, if
husbands would have "too much" bargaining power in every possible marriage so that women
refuse to marry.
                                                      22
                 (11, 1)  (2, 2)
          D =[                    ]
                  (2, 2) (−1, −1)

Then with BIM, man 1 marries woman 2 and man 2 marries woman 1. Hence, with this division

matrix, BIM leads to more marriages than BAMM.

                                                *****

          In search models, as in frictionless models in which all marriage market participants meet

simultaneously, the distinction between BIM and BAMM is crucial.27 The "one draw" search protocol

of Konrad and Lommerud (2010) provides a transparent and tractable illustration because it assumes

away most of the complications of search, allowing us to focus on the contracting opportunities

available to prospective spouses when they meet in the marriage market. In the one-draw protocol, a

man and a woman are drawn at random from the marriage market and offered a take-it-or-leave-it

choice: marry each other or never marry. With BAMM, if every possible marriage produces a

nonnegative surplus and if bargaining is assumed to lead to Pareto efficient agreements, then every

randomly selected couple will agree on a utility division that both prefer to remaining unmarried.

With BIM, the allocations that some randomly selected couples foresee emerging from bargaining

may be worse for one of them than never marrying. In this case, even if every possible marriage

produces a nonnegative surplus, some of the randomly selected couples may not marry. Hence, the

BIM-BAMM distinction is crucial with search frictions.

6. Enforcement: Costless Divorce, Prenuptial Agreements, and Premarital Transfers

          Browning, Chiappori, and Weiss (2014, pp. 311-314) argue that costless divorce allows

prospective couples to enforce agreements made in the marriage market because divorce-threat

bargaining will lead to BIM utilities that mimic BAMM imputations. They also argue that prenuptial


27
     Chade, Eeckhout, and Smith (2017) provide a recent survey of search and matching models.
                                                  23
agreements and premarital transfers enable prospective spouses to enforce agreements made in the

marriage market by fine-tuning the BIM utilities to replicate the BAMM imputations. In this section

I show that these claims are misleading.

        Commitment is the essential feature that distinguishes marriage from cohabitation, and

Becker (1991, p. 30/31) posits that marriage itself is defined by long-term commitment. Marriage

functions as a commitment device precisely because divorce is costly. Costless divorce, because it

negates commitment, is an oxymoron.28

        Prenuptial agreements are unlikely to lead to a pattern of BIM utilities that mimic BAMM

imputations and, hence, provide no support for the use of BAMM to analyze marriage market

equilibrium in a BIM world. There are three reasons. The first is empirical. Few couples make

prenuptial agreements. The conventional wisdom is that in first marriages about 5 percent of couples

make prenuptial agreements, and that in second and higher order marriages this rises to about 20

percent.29 The second is theoretical. Because each prospective spouse has multiple objectives, the

provisions of prenuptial agreements are likely to differ from those individuals would agree to if they

were solely concerned with influencing allocation within marriage. Anecdotal evidence suggests that

prenuptial agreements are used primarily by wealthy prospective spouses seeking to protect their own

interests in the event of divorce or to protect the inheritance interests of their children from previous

relationships. Of course agreements designed primarily for these purposes affect allocation within



28
   If divorced individuals are allowed to remarry, to replicate the BAMM imputations requires both
costless divorce and “costless reentry” into the marriage market. Costless reentry presumably
implies that prospective spouses do not distinguish between parents and nonparents and, among
parents, between custodial and noncustodial parents.
29
   These figures, which are usually cited to Marston (1997), an article in the Stanford Law Review,
are suspect. They are based on two articles published in Money Magazine neither of which cites a
source; see Pollak (2016) for details.
                                                   24
marriage, but we would not expect prenuptial agreements acceptable to both prospective spouses,

each with multiple objectives, to replicate the utilities corresponding to BAMM. The third is legal.

American courts will not enforce provisions of prenuptial agreements that specify allocation within

marriage.30 American courts will oversee the dissolution of marriages, but they will not supervise

ongoing marriages. The legal scholar Saul Levmore (1995) characterizes this rule as "love it or leave

it."

       At first glance, economic theory seems to suggest that individuals would be better off if, in

the marriage market, they could make binding commitments not to divorce and binding agreements

about allocation within marriage. Yet over the last two hundred years, most countries and all

American states have made divorce quicker and easier. Furthermore, marrying couples, when offered

a choice between the "standard marriage" contract and "covenant marriage," overwhelmingly choose

the standard marriage contract which allows easier divorce.31

       At second glance, it is not surprising that prospective spouses, recognizing that their feelings

for each other may change and that future health, wealth, income, earnings, and wages are stochastic,

might prefer greater flexibility to stronger commitment. Transaction cost considerations suggest that

even if courts were willing to enforce contracts specifying allocation within marriage, such contracts

would necessarily be incomplete -- bounded rationality implies that contracts could take account of

only a small fraction of future contingencies and enforcement requires that both contingencies and


30
   Before the 1960s, the only legally enforceable provisions of prenuptial agreements were those
specifying the disposition of assets following the death of a spouse. In the 1960s and 1970s, the
enforceable provisions of prenuptial agreements expanded to include the division of income and
assets following divorce. See Hasday (2014), Case (2011), and Pollak (2011).
31
   Covenant marriage requires premarital counseling and makes ending marriage more difficult by
limiting how quickly and easily couples can divorce. Cherlin (2009, p. 4) writes: "Less than 2
percent opted for [covenant marriage] in Louisiana and in Arkansas which introduced [covenant
marriage] in 2001."
                                                 25
performance are amenable to third-party verification. For these reasons, drawing on transaction cost

analysis, Scott and Scott (1998) describe marriage as a "relational contract."

        With premarital transfers the threshold difficulty is again empirical. Although we can build

models in which prospective spouses use premarital transfers to influence allocation in marriage, there

is no evidence that prospective spouses actually do so.32 Nevertheless, because premarital transfers

operate through both the outside option and bargaining power within marriage, they raise more

interesting theoretical issues than prenuptial agreements. I sketch these in Pollak (2016),

distinguishing between the case in which prospective spouses have sufficient initial assets to make

the transfers needed to replicate the BAMM imputations and the case in which they do not.

Furthermore, prospective spouses contemplating premarital transfers might be concerned about the

possibility that the marriage will fail to take place or, if it does take place, that it will last only briefly.

Those with such concerns might seek to protect themselves with contracts similar in content and

complexity to prenuptial agreements. Finally, unlike transfers between spouses, premarital transfers

can have tax consequences.

7. Conclusion

        Before concluding, cohabitation deserves further comment. Virtually all marriage market

models ignore cohabitation.33 Yet as Stevenson and Wolfers point out, "cohabitation has emerged

as an important institution, as a precursor to and sometimes as a substitute for marriage." In the



32
   Dowry and bride price fit awkwardly into individualistic models of the marriage market because
they are not usually transfers between prospective spouses. Anderson (2007, 150-151) characterizes
these transfers as "payments between families..." and writes, "Such payments typically go hand-in-
hand with marriages arranged by the parents of the respective spouses."
33
   Indeed, virtually all economic discussions of marriage ignore cohabitation. Exceptions include
Brien, Lillard, and Stern (2006), Stevenson and Wolfers (2007), Lundberg and Pollak (2014, 2015)
and Lundberg, Pollak, and Stearns (2016).
                                                      26
United States, most marriages are preceded by cohabitation and cohabitation is usually short-term,

but long-term cohabitation is more common in Northern Europe than in the US.

          If we view cohabitation as a precursor to marriage, then we cannot analyze it using a full

information model in which all prospective spouses meet simultaneously in the marriage market. We

need a search model. Alternatively, if we view cohabitation as a substitute for marriage, then we can

retain the full information-simultaneous meeting framework. We must, however, drop the

assumption that there are only two possible living arrangements, marriage and living alone, and

recognize cohabitation as a third alternative. In Pollak (2016) I sketch a generalization of the

dichotomous matching model to a trichotomous model. The existence of equilibrium in the

trichotomous model follows from essentially the same argument used in the dichotomous

framework. We can reinterpret the trichotomous framework as one in which couples choose between

living alone and two forms of marriage. This is the situation in France and in Italy where marrying

couples must choose between two marital property regimes: common (i.e., community) property and

separate property.34

                                                  *****

          The standard analysis of marriage market equilibrium assumes that prospective spouses make

binding agreements in the marriage market and that these agreements determine allocation within

marriage. With BAMM and transferable utility, the appropriate framework for analyzing marriage

market equilibrium is the Koopmans-Beckmann-Shapley-Shubik assignment model. Pareto

efficiency follows immediately because marriage market assignments and the utilities received by the

spouses are determined by a cooperative game in which the solution concept is the core.




34
     For France, see Laferrère (2001); for Italy, Bayot and Voena (2015).
                                                    27
        With bargaining in marriage, the marriage market is the first stage of a multi-stage game that

must be solved by backwards induction. The second and subsequent stages determine allocation

within each marriage. The first stage, the marriage market, determines who marries and, for those

who marry, who marries whom. The original Gale-Shapley matching model does not provide a basis

for an economic model of the marriage market because it treats marriage market participants’ rankings

of prospective spouses as primitives of the model. I modify the Gale-Shapley model by assuming that

the rankings depend on the allocations that individuals foresee emerging from BIM. With this

modification, BIM and the Gale-Shapley model provide a credible alternative to BAMM and the

Koopmans-Beckmann-Shapley-Shubik assignment model as a framework for analyzing the marriage

market. I show that BIM and BAMM can have different implications not only for allocation within

marriage but also for who marries, who marries whom, the number of marriages, and the Pareto

efficiency of marriage market equilibrium.

       An obvious advantage of basing the analysis of marriage market equilibrium on BIM is

that doing so recognizes bargaining in marriage and connects marriage market equilibrium with

the theoretical and empirical literatures on family bargaining. The alternative, to ignore or deny

that spouses bargain within marriage and base the analysis of marriage market equilibrium on

BAMM, flies in the face of both casual empiricism and econometric evidence.




                                                 28
                                           References


Anderson, Siwan, "The Economics of Dowry and Bride Price," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 21, No. 4, (Fall 2007), 151-174.

Angelucci, Manuela and Orazio Attanasio, "The Demand for Food of Poor Urban Mexican
Households: Understanding Policy Impacts Using Structural Models," American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, Vol. 5, No. 1, (February 2013), 146-205.

Angrist, Josh, "How do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets: Evidence from America's
Second Generation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 117, No. 3, (August 2002), 997-1038.

Armand, Alex, Orazio Attanasio, Pedro Carneiro, and Valérie Lechene, "The Effect of Gender-
Targeted Conditional Cash Transfers on Household Expenditures: Evidence from a Randomized
Experiment," IZA DP 10133, August 2016.

Attanasio, Orazio and Valérie Lechene, "Tests of Income Pooling in Household Decisions," Review
of Economic Dynamics, Vol. 5, No. 4, (October 2002), 720-748.

Bayot, Denrick and Alessandra Voena, "Prenuptial Contracts, Labor Supply and Household
Investments," June 2015.

Becker, Gary S., “A Theory of Marriage: Part I,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 4,
(July/August 1973), 813-46.

Becker, Gary S., A Treatise on the Family, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981; Enlarged
edition, 1991.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy, Social Economics: Market Behavior in a Social
Environment, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2000.

Behrman, Jere R., and John Hoddinott, "Programme Evaluation with Unobserved Heterogeneity and
Selective Implementation: The Mexican PROGRESA Impact on Child Nutrition," Oxford Bulletin of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 67, No. 4, (August 2005), 547-569.

Bennett, Elaine, "Consistent Bargaining Conjectures in Marriage and Matching," Journal of
Economic Theory, Vol. 45, No. 2, (August 1988), 392-407.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., "Economics in a Family Way," Journal of Economic Literature," Vol. 34,
No. 4, (December 1996), 1903-1934.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., “A Survey of Theories of the Family,” in Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded
Stark, eds., Handbook of Population and Family Economics, Vol., 1A. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Company, 1997, 21-79.

                                                29
Brien, Michael J., Lee A. Lillard, and Steven Stern, "Cohabitation, Marriage, and Divorce in a Model
of Match Quality," International Economic Review, Vol. 47, No. 2, (May 2006), 451-494.

Browning, Martin, François Bourguignon, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Valérie Lechene, "Income
and Outcomes: A Structural Model of Intrahousehold Allocation," Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
102, No. 6, (December 1994), 1067-1096.

Browning, Martin, Pierre-André Chiappori, and Yoram Weiss, The Economics of the Family, New
York: Cambridge University Press, 2014.

Case, Mary Anne, "Enforcing Bargains in an Ongoing Marriage," Washington University Journal of
Law and Policy, Vol. 35, (2011), 225-260.

Chade, Hector, Jan Eeckhout, and Lones Smith, "Sorting through Search and Matching Models in
Economics," Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 55, No. 2, (June 2017), 493-544.

Cherlin, Andrew J., The Marriage-Go-Round, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2009.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Rational Household Labor Supply," Econometrica, Vol. 56, No. 1,
(January 1988), 63-90.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Collective labor Supply and Welfare," Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
100, No. 3, (June 1992), 437-467.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, "Gary Becker's Contribution to the Economics of Matching and Marriage,"
Journal of Demographic Economics, Vol. 81, No. 1, (March 2015), 7-11.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Matching with Transfers: The Economics of Love and Marriage,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2017.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Monica Costa Dias, and Costas Meghir, "The Marriage Market, Labour
Supply and Education Choice," Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper W16/09 (2016).

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Bernard Fortin and Guy Lacroix, "Marriage Market, Divorce Legislation,
and Household Labor Supply," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 110, No. 1, (February 2002), 37-
72.

Chiappori, Pierre-André, Murat F. Iyigun, and Yoram Weiss , "Investment in Schooling and the
Marriage Market," American Economic Review, Vol. 99, No. 5, (December 2009), 1689-1713.

Choo, Eugene and Aloysius Siow, "Who Marries Whom and Why," Journal of Political Economy,
Vol. 114, No. 1, (February 2006), 175-201.

Crawford, Vincent P. and Sharon C. Rochford, "Bargaining and Competition in Matching
Markets," International Economic Review, Vol. 27, No. 2, (June 1986), 329-348.

                                                30
Del Boca, Daniela and Christopher J. Flinn, "Household Behavior and the Marriage Market,"
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 150, (March 2014), 515-550.

Eeckhout, Jan, “On the Uniqueness of Stable Marriage Matchings,” Economic Letters, Vol. 69, No.
1, (October 2000), 1-8.

Gale, David and Lloyd Shapley, “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage,” American
Mathematical Monthly, Vol. 69, No. 1, (January 1962), 9-15.

Grossbard, Shoshana, "Marriage and Marriage Markets," IZA DP 10312, October 2016.

Hasday, Jill Elaine, Family Law Reimagined. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2014.

Iyigun, Murat and Randall P. Walsh, "Building the Family Nest: Premarital Investments, Marriage
Markets, and Spousal Allocations," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 74, No. 2, (April 2007), 507-
535.

Konrad, Kai A. and Kjell Erik Lommerud, "Love and Taxes -- and Matching Institutions,"
Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. 43, No. 3, (August 2010), 919-940.

Koopmans, Tjalling C., and Martin Beckmann, “Assignment Problems and the Location of
Economic Activities,” Econometrica, Vol. 25, No. 1, (January 1957), 53-76.

Laferrère, Anne, "Marriage Settlements," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, Vol. 103, No. 3,
(September 2001), 485-504.

Levmore, Saul, "Love It or Leave It: Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Exclusivity of Remedies
in Partnership and Marriage," Law and Contemporary Problems, Vol. 58, No. 2, (Spring 1995),
221-249.

Ligon, Ethan, "Dynamic Bargaining in Households (with an application to Bangladesh)” May 9,
2002.

Ligon, Ethan, Jonathan P. Thomas, and Tim Worrall, "Informal Insurance Arrangements with
Limited Commitment: Theory and Evidence from Village Economies," Review of Economic Studies,
Vol. 69, No. 1, (January 2002), 209-244.

Lise, Jeremy and Ken Yamada, "Household Sharing and Commitment: Evidence from Panel Data on
Individual Expenditures and Time Use," May, 2015

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6, (December 1993), 988-1010.



                                                31
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Efficiency in Marriage,” Review of Economics of the
Household, Vol. 1, No. 3, (September 2003), 153-168.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Cohabitation and the Uneven Retreat from Marriage in
the U.S., 1950-2010," in Leah P. Boustan, Carola Frydman, and Robert A. Margo, eds. Human
Capital and History: The American Record, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014, 241-272.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "The Evolving Role of Marriage: 1950 - 2010," Future of
Children, Vol. 25, No. 2, (Fall 2015), 29-50.

Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Jenna Stearns, "Family Inequality: Diverging Patterns in
Marriage, Cohabitation, and Childbearing," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 30, No. 2,
(Spring 2016), 79-102.

Lundberg, Shelly, Robert A. Pollak, and Terence J. Wales, "Do Husbands and Wives Pool Their
Resources? Evidence from the U.K. Child Benefit," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 32, No. 3,
(Summer 1997), 463-480.

Manser, Marilyn and Murray Brown, "Marriage and Household Decision-Making: A Bargaining
Analysis," International Economic Review, Vol. 21, No. 1, (February 1980), 31-44.

Marston, Allison A., "Planning for Love: The Politics of Prenuptial Agreements," Stanford Law
Review, Vol. 49, No. 4, (April 1997), 887-916.

McElroy, Marjorie B., "The Empirical Content of Nash-Bargained Household Behavior,"
Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 25, No. 4, (Fall 1990), 559-583.

McElroy, Marjorie B., and Mary J. Horney, "Nash-Bargained Household Decisions: Toward a
Generalization of the Theory of Demand," International Economic Review, Vol. 22, No. 2, (June
1981), 333-349.

Mazzocco, Maurizio, "Household Inter Temporal Behaviour: A Collective Characterization and a
Test of Commitment," Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 74, No. 3, (July 2007), 857-895.

Pollak, Robert A., "Bargaining Power in Marriage: Earnings, Wage Rates and Household
Production," NBER Working Paper 11239, April 2005.

Pollak, Robert A., "Legal Enforceability and Bargaining Models of Marriage: Comment on Mary
Anne Case's 'Enforcing Bargains in an Ongoing Marriage,'" Washington University Journal of
Law and Policy, Vol. 35, (2011), 261-272.

Pollak, Robert A., "Marriage Market Equilibrium," NBER Working Paper 22309, June 2016.

Preston, Samuel H., and John McDonald, "The Incidence of Divorce Within Cohorts of American
Marriages Contracted Since the Civil War," Demography, Vol. 16, No. 1, (February 1979), 1-25.

                                               32
Rangel, Marcos A., "Alimony Rights and Intrahousehold Allocation of Resources: Evidence from
Brazil," The Economic Journal, Vol. 116, No. 513, (July 2006), 627-658.

Rochford, Sharon C., "Symmetrically Pairwise-Bargained Allocations in an Assignment Market,"
Journal of Economic Theory, Vol. 34, No. 2, (December 1984), 262-281.

Roff, Jennifer, "Cleaning in the Shadow of the Law? Bargaining, Marital Investment, and the
Impact of Divorce Law on Husbands' Intra-Household Work," IZA DP No. 10527, January 2017.

Roth, Alvin E., "Deferred Acceptance Algorithms: History, Theory, Practice, and Open Questions,"
International Journal of Game Theory, Vol. 36, No. 3, (March 2008), 537-569.

Roth, Alvin E. and Marilda A. Oliveira Sotomayor, Two-sided Matching: A Study in Game-
Theoretic Modeling and Analysis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

Rubalcava, Luis, Graciela Teruel, and Duncan Thomas, "Investments, Time Preferences, and Public
Transfers Paid to Women," Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 57, No. 3, (April
2009), 507-538.

Schultz, T. Paul, "Testing the Neoclassical Model of Family Labor Supply and Fertility," Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 25, No. 4, (Fall 1990), 599-634.

Scott, Elizabeth S. and Robert E. Scott, "Marriage as Relational Contract," Virginia Law Review,
Vol. 84, No. 7, (October 1998), 1225-1334.

Shapley, Lloyd S., and Martin Shubik, "The Assignment Game 1: The Core," International Journal
of Game Theory, Vol. 1, No. 1, (December 1971), 111-130.

Stevenson, Betsey, "The Impact of Divorce Laws on Marriage-Specific Capital,” Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 25, No. 1, (January 2007), 75-94.

Stevenson, Betsey, and Justin Wolfers, “Marriage and Divorce: Changes and their Driving Forces,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 2, (Spring 2007), 27-52.

Stone, Lawrence, Road to Divorce: England 1530-1987, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990.

Thomas, Duncan, "Intra-Household Resource Allocation: An Inferential Approach," Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 25, No.4, (Fall 1990), 635-664.

Voena, Alessandra, "Yours, Mine, and Ours: Do Divorce Laws Affect the Intertemporal Behavior of
Married Couples," American Economic Review, Vol. 105, No. 8, (August 2015), 2295-2332.

Ward-Batts, Jennifer, "Out of the Wallet and into the Purse: Modeling Family Expenditures to Test
Income Pooling," Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 43, No. 2, (Spring 2008), 325-351.

                                                33
