NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CHILDREN, TIME ALLOCATION AND CONSUMPTION INSURANCE
Richard Blundell
Luigi Pistaferri
Itay Saporta-Eksten
Working Paper 24006
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24006

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank the editor and referees, participants at the Becker Memorial Conference at the
University of Chicago, Atlanta FED and the 2017 Macro-Micro Conference in Oslo for helpful
comments. We thank Daniel Grilikhes for excellent research assistance. The authors gratefully
acknowledge financial support from the UK Economic and Social Research Council Research
Centre (CPP) at IFS (Blundell) and ERC grant MicroConLab (Blundell and Saporta-Eksten). All
errors are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Children, Time Allocation and Consumption Insurance
Richard Blundell, Luigi Pistaferri, and Itay Saporta-Eksten
NBER Working Paper No. 24006
November 2017
JEL No. D15,J13,J22
ABSTRACT
We consider the life cycle choices of a household that in each period decides how much to
consume and how to allocate spouses' time to work, leisure, and childcare. In an environment
with uncertainty, the allocation of goods and time over the life cycle also serves the purpose of
smoothing marginal utility in response to shocks. We combine data on consumption, spouses'
wages, hours of work, and time spent with children to estimate the sensitivity of consumption and
time allocation to transitory and permanent wage shocks. These structural parameters describe the
ability of household to self-insure in response to shocks. We find that behavioral responses to
wage shocks depend on the presence of young children. We also find that labor supply crossresponses depend on three counteracting forces: complementarity of leisure time, substitutability
of time in the production of child services, and added worker effects.

Richard Blundell
University College London
Department of Economics
Gower Street
London, ENGLAND
r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk
Luigi Pistaferri
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
pista@stanford.edu

Itay Saporta-Eksten
The Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
P.O.B. 39040
Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv, 6997801
itaysap@post.tau.ac.il

1

Introduction
In a series of seminal contributions, Becker (1965) and Ghez and Becker (1975), emphasized

the importance of understanding the e¤ect of children on how households allocate goods and time
over the life cycle. To quote from Ghez and Becker (1975), “The parent’s utility function is assumed
to depend not only on [consumption of goods], but also on commodities measuring child services
[...] The raising of children requires time, especially wife’s time, and goods. Thus, time and goods
must be allocated between child services and other commodities.” One conclusion of that research
was that children change the optimal allocation of parents’time to work in the paid labor market,
leisure, and childcare. Responses to wage and income changes di¤er across households depending
on the importance of ‘child services’in the parental utility function.
In an environment with uncertainty, the allocation of goods and time over the life cycle also has
the goal of smoothing the marginal utility of wealth in the face of shocks to household resources.
The key parameters governing the ability to smooth marginal utility are the Frisch and Marshallian
(own- and cross-) consumption and labor supply elasticities. For example, a low consumption
Frisch elasticity (a low willingness to accept intertemporal ‡uctuations in consumption) implies a
greater desire to smooth consumption relative to, e.g., a case in which the elasticity is high. A
permanent wage shock faced by the primary earner can be insured through added worker e¤ects
(i.e., increased work of secondary earners). This stabilization e¤ect, re‡ected in the Marshallian
elasticity, is stronger the higher the Frisch elasticity of the secondary earner. But since an increase
in hours of work reduces the amount of time that can be allocated to the production of childcare
services, it is clear that there are important trade-o¤s between producing childcare services and
insuring consumption against shocks. Combining these two issues (the importance of children in
shaping preferences and the demand for insurance) in a uni…ed framework is the goal of this paper.
To our knowledge, this is the …rst paper that attempts to put together these two distinct literatures.
Some of the decomposition exercises we discuss below derive precisely from the goal of isolating the
distinct forces a¤ecting the choice of how to allocate time in response to di¤erent types of events.
To address these goals, we adopt a structural life-cycle approach in which a married couple
decides how much to consume and how to allocate available time to work activities, leisure, and
children (if present). Husband and wife choose time to devote to children as inputs of a home
production function for child care. This framework departs signi…cantly from our previous work
(Blundell et al., 2016) both because it explicitly takes into account the in‡uence of children on
consumption and time allocation decisions of husband and wife, and because it is based on a fully
2

structural approach rather than on approximations to the …rst order conditions and the lifetime
budget constraints. This allows us to fully account for liquidity constraints and extensive margin
decisions on time use - which are likely extremely important for younger households with children.
The relation between the hours of husband and hours of wife (as well as the relation between their
hours and the spending on goods) can be generated by home production à la Becker (leisure time
of the two spouses, as well as market goods, are inputs in the production of "commodities") or by
formal non-separabilities in the utility function (the marginal utility of leisure of one spouse depends
on the leisure time of the other - i.e., spouses may enjoy leisure more when they are together). The
relationship may also be a¤ected by joint progressive taxation of earnings or correlation of wage
shocks (both of which we model explicitly).
In general, we might expect spouses to want to spend time together. Indeed, it is very likely
that the complementarity of time together provides a key incentive for relationships to form.1 We
do not directly model family formation, but in order to capture the fact that people have preference
for spending time together or with their children (a public good), we consider the possibility that
preferences are non-separable and complementary over leisure times. In Blundell et al. (2016) we
found evidence of Frisch complementarity for time within couples, although we did not relate this
to children or measures of time use. However, we found that family labor supply provides insurance
against persistent wage shocks, and that family leisure times were Marshallian substitutes. When
it comes to the care of children, however, there is potentially more room for specialization. For
example, it is possible that more e¢ cient technologies require people to separate their time between
various activities, especially in the presence of multiple children or children of di¤erent ages. In the
absence of time use data, it is hard to verify whether covariation in the hours of work of husband
and wife descends from explicit non-separability in utility or from the e¤ect of home production.
As Browning, Chiappori and Weiss (2014) write, "the production function... cannot be estimated
independently of the utility function unless the home-produced commodities are independently
observable".
To address these issues we derive structural marginal rate of substitution relations between
leisure time of the two partners, the time they allocate to child care, consumption, and prices
1

Becker (1976) attributed the existence of marriage to "the desire to raise own children" (p. 211), which requires

complementarity of the spouses’ leisure time. As he noticed, "Sexual grati…cation, cleaning, feeding, and other
services can be purchased, but not own children: both the man and the woman are required to produce their own
children and perhaps to raise them" (p. 210), and later, that "complementarity between men and women is the major
source of the gain from marriage" (p. 211).

3

(hourly wages). We estimate a subset of the structural parameters of the model using data from
three data sets: the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the American Time Use Survey
(ATUS), and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We use the latter to impute consumption
to all household units in the ATUS (where no consumption information is available). We then use
numerical simulation of the model to recover the remaining preference parameters.
The PSID and the ATUS are rich in some aspects but have also important drawbacks. The PSID
contains panel data on consumption, assets, hours of work and hourly wages for both earners, but
it does not have consistent information on child care time. During our sample period a special
module (the Child Development Survey, CDS) collects time use data for children (including time
they spend with their parents). Unfortunately, the CDS is available only occasionally, parental
time use has to be inferred from children time use, and the module does not cover all children in
the household (in particular, it does not cover young children in later waves). For this reason, we
use the PSID to recover parameters when child care time is zero by de…nition (as in families with
no young children). From an identi…cation point of view, households with no young children are
important because for them we expect only complementarity of leisure to be important, since no
production of child services occurs. Unlike the PSID, the ATUS contains detailed information on
time use (including child care) and on hourly wages for the main respondent, but lacks information
on time use or hourly wage for the partner, and no information on household consumption. We
then impute this information using cohort-education-year average values of parental time and hourly
wages (from the ATUS male respondents), and household consumption (from the CEX). Time use
data bring very useful additional information that allows us to separately identify key aspects of
the production of ‘childcare services’.
Our structural estimates can be used to provide a comprehensive picture of the ability of households to smooth marginal utility in response to shocks. In addition, information on hours of work
and hours spent on childcare allows to decompose overall Frisch cross-responses into two components, one re‡ecting the potential degree of complementarity between husband’s and wife’s leisure
(demand for "companionship" or "love") and another re‡ecting the degree of substitutability of
their childcare time in the production of childcare services.
Using simulations from our estimated model, we …nd that this decomposition is important.
While overall cross-Frisch responses of hours are small, the responses of the two sub-utility margins
are of opposite signs, highlighting the tension between substitutability and complementarity in
driving the hours response. In particular, the hours of work of young mothers appear to respond

4

little to an increase in the male’s temporary wage (which induces an increase in his hours) because
the force that pushes her to reduce her leisure time (or work longer) due to the lower leisure time
of her companion, is counteracted by the force that pushes her to increase childcare time because
the husband is now allocating fewer hours to child-raising and her time is a substitute for his time
in the household production of childcare services. Similarly, own (especially female) responses are
large because they include both an intertemporal substitution component and a home production
component - when wages are temporarily higher the opportunity cost of an extra hour of leisure and
an extra hour of childcare increases. Ignoring the interaction between children and time use when
modeling family labor supply thus misses important components of the adjustments in consumption
and time use that families undertake in response to shocks to their resources.
The model can be used to simulate behavior in counterfactual scenarios. We compare two
revenue-neutral policies that have direct e¤ects on the welfare of households with children. In one
case we provide households with young children with an unconditional subsidy. In another, we
compensate households with young children for the child-related …xed costs of work they face. We
…nd that both policies relieve households, in the pre-children period, from saving in anticipation
of the decline in family earnings induced by the wife reallocating time from market to childcare
when children arrive. We also …nd that the unconditional subsidy policy has greater welfare value
than the policy that compensates for the …xed costs of work. This is partly due to the "no-stringsattached" nature of the …rst policy, and partly because of the dynamics induced by credit market
frictions.
This paper is related to a large literature that studies family labor supply. Speci…cally, there
are two strands of research: papers that consider the impact of children on female labor supply,
and those that examine the role of labor supply as an insurance against shocks - in particular, wage
shocks. In the …rst line of work there are papers that establish a clear relationship between the
presence of children and female labor supply, such as Angrist and Evans (1998). Attanasio, Low
and Sanchez-Marcos (2008) study the role of decreasing childcare prices in explaining changes in
female participation rates across cohorts. Other papers use time diary data to examine the precise
decomposition of available time between children and other activities (Aguiar and Hurst, 2007;
Aguiar, Hurst and Karabarbounis 2013; Ramey and Ramey, 2010).2 In the second line of work,
Hyslop (2001), Attanasio, Low and Sanchez-Marcos (2005), and Blundell et al. (2016) are some
2

Ramey and Ramey (2010), as well as Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008) also study heterogeneity in childcare

time by parents’skills.

5

representative contributions.3
Our paper makes three key contributions. The …rst contribution is methodological. We incorporate consumption and time use activities of husband and wife in a dynamic life-cycle model with
uncertainty about their underlying wages, liquidity constraints and heterogeneity of preferences.
We then show how to derive marginal rate of substitution relations between leisure of the two partners, and consumption. Controlling for the latter is an implicit way to control for the unobservable
marginal utility of wealth (as done by Altonji, 1986, in a single-earner labor supply context). Similarly, we can derive a structural marginal rate of substitution relation linking child care time of the
two partners and consumption. With appropriate selection corrections and instruments, we show
how to identify the parameters characterizing utility and the child care production function. Model
simulations can then be used to recover the remaining parameters (mostly, preference shifters).
Our second contribution is in the context of the family labor supply literature. We demonstrate,
both theoretically and empirically, how the presence of young children in the household gives rise to
heterogeneity in the (own- and cross-) elasticities of labor supply to wage shocks. Using our data, we
provide new evidence on the decomposition of labor supply elasticities to their leisure and childcare
time sources, especially highlighting the tension between spouses’ leisure complementarity and
childcare time substitutability. Our third contribution is to the consumption smoothing literature.
Using our estimates for the labor supply elasticities, we show that the heterogeneity in labor supply
elasticities which is driven by the presence of young kids translates into heterogeneity in the use of
market hours to smooth wage shocks.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the life cycle problem of the household.
Section 3 discusses the derivation of the moment conditions we use in estimation, as well as the
decomposition of labor supply elasticities. Section 4 describes the PSID, ATUS and CEX data,
while Section 5 discusses estimation and parameterization. The results, the discussion about the
relation between childcare and wages, as well as the implications of the results for the degree of
insurance are in Section 6. In this section we also discuss the role of credit constraints in shaping
responses. In Section 7 we discuss the results of the two policy experiments described above (a
subsidy to child care cost and a compensation for child-related …xed costs of work). Section 8
concludes.
3

The "added worker e¤ect" literature studies in particular how the wife’s employment responds to the husband’s

unemployment events. See for example Lundberg (1985), Stephens, (2002), and Juhn and Potter (2007).

6

2

A Life Cycle Model with Childcare Production Function
In this section we discuss a life cycle problem faced by a couple. We consider a unitary

framework in which the household draws utility from the leisure times of the spouses, from the consumption of non-childcare related goods, and from "child commodities".4 The latter are produced
using as inputs the hours that husband and wife devote to their children (allowing for observable
and unobserved heterogeneity).5 For simplicity, we assume that fertility decision are exogenous.
Thus, the household’s problem is to choose consumption and the allocation of the two members’
total hours to three activities: work, childcare time, and leisure.6
We assume throughout that the hourly wage process is exogenous; we also allow wage shocks
to be potentially correlated across spouses. As we highlight, the model shows that the response
of family labor supply to shocks is rather complex,7 as it depends on the spouses’ elasticities for
(responsiveness of) leisure and childcare time to wage changes, the degree of complementarity of
their leisure times in utility, the degree of substitutability of childcare time inputs in the production
of childcare, and the degree of progressivity of the tax system (which makes the secondary earner’s
marginal tax rate depend on the primary earner choice of hours even in the case in which leisure
times are additively separable).

2.1

Wage Process

Similarly to Blundell et al. (2016), we assume that each earner’s wage process contains both
a permanent and a transitory component. The permanent component evolves as a random walk
process, while the transitory component is serially uncorrelated. The distinction between transitory
shocks and permanent shocks is important, as in a frictionless world with interior solutions one can
interpret transitory shocks as having negligible or no wealth e¤ects on labor choices. Hence in
this special case, the response of hours to transitory wage shocks identi…es Frisch (or -constant)
4
5

See Chiappori and Mazzocco, 2017, for a recent survey of collective models of family labor supply.
Such heterogeneity may capture the in‡uence of other inputs, such as expenditure on toys, books, etc., that we

do not model explicitly.
6
We consider only three possible uses of time (childcare, leisure, work) for the two earners in the household. This
is of course a simplifying assumption, but consistent with our goal to focus and highlight in this paper the interaction
between children and labor supply. In practice, what we call "leisure" may subsume multiple adjustment margins in
response to changes in resources (housework being the most obvious example), besides "pure leisure".
7
As Heckman (1988) notes, in a model with multiple time uses of non-market time, retrictions on the wife’s time
in one activity need not imply wage- and income- inelastic labor supply.

7

elasticities, while the response to permanent wage shocks identi…es Marshallian (or uncompensated)
elasticities. However, since labor supply behavior of individuals (especially women) is characterized
by corner solutions, and since households may face frictions in credit markets, it is important to
focus more generally on labor supply elasticities in response to wage changes of di¤erent nature.
We assume that the log of real wage of earner j = f1; 2g at age t can be written as:
j
W

log Wj;t = x0j;t
Fj;t = Fj;t

1

+ Fj;t + uj;t

(1)

+ vj;t

(2)

where xj;t are observed characteristics a¤ecting wages and known to the household. uj;t and vj;t are
transitory and permanent shocks, respectively. We assume that transitory and permanent innovations are uncorrelated within person. However, they may be potentially correlated across spouses.8
The structure of markets is such that shocks are not formally insurable, household have no advance
information about them, and they are observed (separately) at time t.9 We make the simplifying
assumption that the variances and covariances of the shocks are constant over the life cycle.10
Given the speci…cation of the wage process (1)-(2) the growth in (residual) log wages can be
written as
wj;t =
where

is a …rst di¤erence operator and

uj;t + vj;t

wj;t =

ln Wj;t

(3)
x0j;t

j
W

(the log change in hourly

wages net of observables).

2.2

Household Decisions

Households solve the following problem over the life cycle:
8

This is potentially important since several empirical papers …nd evidence of a correlation between the labor

market outcomes of married couples. See for example Juhn and Potter (2007) and Hyslop (2001).
9
This is a key assumption in the context of empirical analysis on consumption insurance. See Meghir and Pistaferri
(2011) for a discussion about the interpretation of insurance coe¢ cients when this assumption is violated.
10
We assume that both husband and wife’s o¤ered wages change over the life cycle to capture, in a reduced form
fashion, the e¤ect of human capital accumulation. We do not allow, however, for wages to increase with labor market
experience (i.e., cumulated periods of work) or decline with periods out of work - which would induce a feedback
between labor supply decisions and future wages. See Attanasio et al. (2008) for examples with female labor supply.
The assumption of exogenous wages may potentially impact our estimates of added worker e¤ects, since in a world
with endogenous wages secondary earners may have greater incentives to respond, since "waiting" to respond to
shocks reduces future wages and hence the stabilizing power of the added worker’s earnings.

8

maxEt

T t
X

ut+s (Ct+s ; L1;t+s ; L2;t+s ; T1;t+s ; T2;t+s ; zt+s ; "t+s )

(4)

s=0

s.t. At+1 = (1 + r) (At + T (zt ; H1;t W1;t + H2;t Wi;2;t )

Ct )

L1;t + H1;t + T1;t = L
L2;t + H2;t + T2;t = L
At+1

0; H1;t

0; H2;t

0 8t

where C represents consumption, Lj , Tj and Hj are the leisure time, the childcare time and the
hours worked by earner j (j = 1; 2), respectively, L is the maximum time available, and A are assets
that pay a non-stochastic interest rate denoted by r (note that At+1

0 introduces an explicit,

exogenous liquidity constraint). Finally, the notation ut+s (:) assumes discounting of utility at
future dates (i.e., ut+s (:) =

t+s

u (:)).

We introduce two sets of demographic conditioning variables in the utility function. The …rst,
z, contains the number of kids and their age composition. We model childcare time, leisure and
labor supply decisions as explicit functions of z. Since these family composition variables a¤ect
consumption in ways not captured by our model (i.e., not only through childcare), we let the e¤ect
of these variables on consumption to work through an (estimated) adult equivalence scale (see below
for actual functional forms). The second set of conditioning variables, ", includes unobservable taste
shifters.
Households face a progressive tax system that mirrors the US schedule. T (:) is a tax function
that maps before-tax into after-tax household earnings. We extend Blundell et al. (2016) by
allowing for unearned taxable income and model joint taxation as:
T (zt ; H1;t W1;t + H2;t W2;t )

t (b (zt )

+ H1;t W1;t + H2;t W2;t )1

t

:

(5)

The way to interpret b (z) is that it represents a consumption ‡oor that is available to households
even in case in which household earnings fall to zero (e.g., means-tested bene…ts such as SNAP
or TANF in the US). In the policy experiment section, we evaluate the welfare consequences of
subsidizing childcare by changing the value of b (z), i.e., targeting transfers to households with
young children (similar to an increase in the child tax credit).

9

3

The Dynamics of Time use, Hours and Goods

3.1

Restrictions on Preference and Moment Conditions

For our empirical application, we choose a speci…c functional form for the period utility in (4):

e 1 1=
1
1 1='L1
C
1
u (:) = exp ~ C (z; ")
+ exp ~ L2 (z; ") L2
exp ~ L1 (z; ") L1
1 1=
1
L
1 1='T2 1 T
1 1='T1
1
+ exp ~ T2 (z; ") T2
exp ~ T1 (z; ") T1
1
T
e = C
where C

1='L2

expression allows us to capture a simple form of non-separability between consumption and women’s
(z) is as a form of utility

…xed cost of work (although this is equivalent to a monetary …xed cost of work). In the policy
experiment section we discuss the welfare e¤ects of reducing the …xed cost of work for individuals
with young children by changing the value of (z). We assume that the taste shifters depend on
observable and unobserved heterogeneity, ~ x = fx (z; "). Finally, the following restrictions on the
parameters yield a well-behaved utility function: 0 < 'x < 1 (for x = fL1 ; L2 ; T1 ; T2 g),
x

> 0, and

< 1 (for x = fL; T g).
The last term in (6) can be interpreted as a home production function for "child commodities"

(or child services) which uses parental time as inputs. Note also that the sign of
about whether the leisure times of the partners are complements (
in utility. A similar interpretation applies, symmetrically, to

T.

L

L

is informative

> 0) or substitutes (

In particular, if

T

<0(

L

< 0)

T

> 0)

the time that partners devote to the production of child care services are substitute (complement)
inputs.
While this formulation imposes some restrictions on the interactions between goods in the utility
function, it allows for various forms of non-separability that are crucial for our analysis. First, it
allows for nonseparability between leisure times as well as between child care time of the two earners
in the family. Second, it allows for non-separability of female labor supply and consumption through
the introduction of a …xed cost of work (which is typically observed in formal estimation, see Cogan
(1981) for an early contribution).12
11
12

Note that the consumption equivalence scale is captured by ~ C (z; ").
In principle, the model could be identi…ed even with other forms of non-separabilities (for example, non-

separability between consumption and child care time and between leisure and child care time). However, the

10

L

(6)

(z) E2 : Here E2 = 1 fH2 > 0g is a dummy for female employment.11 This

employment, see Heckman (1974). One way to interpret the parameter

1

We assume a loglinear relationship for the preference shifters, allowing them to change with the
age of children z (in practice, we use a dummy for whether the household has a young child - aged
10 or less - which we assume is the age range where production of child care services occurs) and
a preference shock "x;t , which is i.i.d. with mean zero and variance var ("x;t ) =
~ (zt ; "x;t ) =
x

nk
x

+

k
x zt

2 :
"x

+ "x;t

The …rst order conditions of the household’s problem lead to a series of marginal rate of substitution (MRS) relations - in which the ratio of marginal utilities with respect to two "goods" is
equal to the ratio of their prices (at least when solutions are interior). Moreover, there is an Euler
equation linking the evolution of the marginal utility of wealth over time. In the Appendix we
show that, given our functional form assumptions, a manipulation of the MRS equations leads to
the following moment conditions (assuming interior solutions for both partners):

E l2;t
0

B
E@

l2;t

K1 + 'L2 w2;t
+'L2

K0

' L2 y
'L (1
2
L'
L1 (1

'L2 (w1;t
'L

2

ct

w2;t )

'L

2

'L

1

1 ) W2;t L2;t
jIt
'L ) W1;t L1;t
2

'L

L

1

'L2
l1;t jIt
'L1
1
'L1 l1;t
C
A

=

0

(7)

=

0

(8)

where lower-case letters indicate logs of upper-cased variables (i.e., l2;t = log L2;t ) and It is a set
of exogenous variables known at time t (instruments).13 Moment condition (7) is the marginal
rate of substitution between the wife’s and the husband’s leisure. It simply shows that the leisure
time of husband may di¤er from the leisure of time of the wife both because of heterogeneity in
relative preferences for leisure and because of di¤erences in o¤ered wages. Moment condition (8)
is the marginal rate of substitution between wife’s leisure and consumption. The last two terms
in (8) originate from the assumption of non-separability between wife and husband leisure (and
hence they drop out if

L

= 0). Since the error terms include preference heterogeneity shocks (and

measurement errors), the set It cannot include information on leisure, consumption, or wages. We
discuss the choice of instruments we use in the empirical section. The parameters in the moment
conditions (7) and (8) are estimated using the PSID. Since the PSID does not contain information
on child care time, we focus on a sample where this is zero by de…nition (households with no young
fact that we have to impute consumption and we only have time use for one respondent in the ATUS sample limit
the extent to which we can precisely recover more ‡exible forms of nonseparability in the data.
13
Note that y is the log of taxable family income. It appears in the log-linearized MRS because of progressive
taxation ( > 0 in our case).

11

children - aged 10 or less), and hence leisure time is just total time minus hours of work. Since
wages are only observed for workers, we estimate these equations using only working couples and
correct for sample selection using standard Heckman correction terms (Heckman, 1979). From an
identi…cation point of view, the focus on households with older children in estimating (7) and (8) is
useful because for those households we expect only complementarity of leisure to be an important
determinant of (compensated) cross-responses, since by assumption no production of child services
occurs.
How to recover the parameters of the parental time sub-utility? We use the following moment
conditions:

E t2;t
0

B
E@

t2;t

K3 + 'T2 w2;t
+'T2

K2

' T2 y
'T (1
2
T ' (1
T1

'T2 (w1;t
'T
'T
'T

2

ct

w2;t )

'T

2

'T

1

) W2;t T2;t
jI
W1;t T1;t t
2)
1

T

1

' T2
t1;t jIt
' T1
1
'T1 t1;t
C
A

=

0

(9)

=

0

(10)

which are the symmetric equivalents of (7) and (8) for parental time. In particular, (7) is the
marginal rate of substitution between childcare time of the two spouses, while (8) is the marginal
rate of substitution between the childcare time of the wife and household consumption. An increase
in the relative cost of her time would induce a decline in her childcare time, relative to his childcare
time. Since the PSID lacks information on parental time, we estimate these two moment conditions
using the ATUS. However, we face two missing data problems. First, ATUS collects detailed time
use information only for one respondent in the household. Hence, if we focus on female respondents
and observe t2;t , we have no information on the husband’s parental time, t1;t . We hence impute
the latter from the sample of ATUS male respondents (conditioning on the wife’s demographic
characteristics). The second missing data problem is that, unlike the PSID, there is no consumption
information in the ATUS. We thus impute consumption using CEX data.14 Similar to the case
discussed above, the structural estimation of (9) and (10) requires instrumental variables and a
selection correction for working couples.15 We discuss the choice of instruments in the empirical
14

We impute using the CEX instead of the PSID for several reasons. First, the CEX sample is larger; second, it

is conducted at the same annual frequency of ATUS (while the PSID is biannual); …nally, the consumption measure
in the CEX is more comprehensive than the PSID measure. Separately for each year, we impute to each ATUS
household the average level of CEX consumption observed for households with the same wife’s birth cohort and level
of education.
15
The estimation of (10) also requires data on total household taxable income. While in this PSID this measure
is readily available, in the ATUS only a proxy can be constructed. Given that the PSID estimates are very close

12

section.
Note that (8) and (10) use ideas developed by Altonji (1986) in a single-earner labor supply context. In general, in a life-cycle context one obtains Frisch demand functions for consumption, leisure,
time use, etc., where the choice variables are a function of observable prices and the unobservable
marginal utility of wealth. First-di¤erencing the data (i.e., using the Euler equation) eliminates
the unobservable marginal utility of wealth and allows unbiased estimation of intertemporal substitution parameters. A di¤erent estimation strategy is to proxy the unobservable marginal utility
of wealth with consumption. In this case, one is e¤ectively di¤erencing across economic decisions
(given time) instead of di¤erencing across time (given economic choices). Of course, one still needs
to instrument the endogenous consumption level, but this is a more conventional problem than
modeling directly the structure of the marginal utility of wealth (which requires assumptions about
the information set, etc.). This strategy is particularly useful in contexts, like ours in the ATUS
case, in which there is no panel data allowing to follow the dynamics of economic decisions across
periods.
Direct estimation of (7)-(10) gives consistent estimates of a subset of the parameters of interest:
, 'L1 , 'L2 , L , 'T1 , 'T2 , and T . However, the distribution of the preference shift parameters
~ (z; "), as well as the …xed cost ( ) parameters remain unidenti…ed. To complete estimation, we
x
solve the life cycle problem given the parameters estimated in the …rst step (i.e., 'L1 , 'L2 ,
'T2 , and

T ),

L,

'T1 ,

and identify the rest of the parameters by matching data and simulated moments.

The procedure targets the moments for the two earners distribution of hours of work, time spent
with children, employment, and the change in consumption when children are born.

3.2

Labor Supply Elasticities

Labor supply elasticities are an obvious object of interest for policy analysis and the focus of a
vast literature (Keane, 2011). In our context, they are complicated functions of the preference
parameters described above. In this section we discuss how they can be obtained from model-based
responses.
We …rst notice that elasticities for hours of work, leisure, and parental time are linked through
the time budget constraint. In particular:

Hi ;Wj ja

Li ;Wj ja

Li
Hi

Ti ;Wj ja

Ti
Hi

including or omitting the tax related term, we neglect it for the part of the analysis conducted on the ATUS.

13

(11)

for i; j = f1; 2g, with

Xi ;Wj ja

=

@Xi Wj
@Wj Xi ja

(X = fH; L; T g). Here the notation ja refers to the

margin that is kept …xed or the type of wage change considered. For example, one could keep
constant marginal utility (to get Frisch elasticities), or nothing at all (Marshall or uncompensated
elasticities); or consider transitory or permanent wage changes. In practice, the mapping between
our preference parameters and these various elasticities can be obtained by simulating the response
of hours to wage changes of di¤erent nature.
Two special (and policy-relevant) type of elasticities (Frisch and Marshall) obtain when the
spouses are choosing interior hours solution and they face no progressive taxes and no liquidity
constraints; moreover, in this setting one can approximate the Frisch elasticity as the response to
transitory wage changes and the Marshall elasticity as the response to permanent wage changes
(see Blundell et al., 2016). In the analysis below we use our model to simulate the response of
time uses to transitory and permanent shocks - this also o¤ers an alternative to the approximation
approach used by Blundell et al. (2016).16
The intuition underlying (11) is simple. Consider the e¤ect of a temporary wage increase faced
by the wife (j = 2) in a setting with interior hours solution and no credit market frictions. Since the
wage change is temporary and the consumers are unconstrained, wealth e¤ects are (approximately)
zero and there are only intertemporal substitution e¤ects. The e¤ect of a temporary positive shock
on the wife’s labor supply (

H2 ;W2 j W2 =trans:

=

H2 ;W2 j@ =0 ,

with

being the marginal utility of

wealth) can be decomposed into two distinct forces. First, a positive temporary deviation from the
normal wage induces workers to reallocate their work time intertemporally to periods in which the
wage is temporarily higher and their leisure to periods with lower wages. This e¤ect is captured by
the …rst term and its strength is measured by the leisure elasticity

L2 ;W2 j W2 =trans:

< 0 (leisure

L is a "good" that costs W ). When the wage is temporarily high, moreover, it becomes more
costly to devote time to children, and this induces a further increase in hours (or, more correctly, a
decline in childcare hours that is partly reallocated to work), an e¤ect whose strength is measured
by

T2 ;W2 j W2 =trans:

< 0. The two elasticities are weighted by

L2
H2

and

T2
H2 ,

respectively, because

their strength depends on "time allocation shares" (i.e., the second e¤ect is absent for earners who
devote no time to children to start with or for households with no young children).
A somewhat more interesting e¤ect is how the wife responds to temporary changes in the husband’s wage, (

H2 ;W1 j W1 =trans: ),

i.e., the cross-responses. A temporary increase in the husband’s

wage induces him to work longer hours (for reasons explained above). If husband and wife enjoy
16

Blundell, Pistaferri and Saporta-Eksten (2017) compare the two approaches more formally.

14

leisure together,

L2 ;W1 j W1 =trans:

< 0 and, in the absence of childcare time (T2 = 0), we should

see an increase in the wife’s hours as well. When husband and wife hours can be used to produce
childcare, however, the e¤ect is less obvious. If their childcare hours are substitutes in production,
an increase in hours worked by the husband implies he can now allocate fewer hours to childcare
production, and hence the wife will allocate more hours to childcare production (and fewer hours
to market time, i.e., work less). This implies

T2 ;W1 j W1 =trans:

> 0. The magnitude of the e¤ect

will depend on the degree of input substitutability in childcare production. It follows that the two
forces may well counteract each other.

3.3

Added Worker E¤ects

Besides Frisch elasticities, a complete characterization of labor supply behavior requires understanding how Marshallian elasticities vary across households with or without children. Without
taxes, the Frisch responses coincide with the goods responses to transitory price shocks. Permanent
shocks, however, change the marginal utility of wealth as well. The overall response to permanent
shock to prices is captured by the Marshallian elasticities. Generally, Marshallian responses to (permanent) wage shocks are more involved than Frisch responses due to wealth e¤ects acting alongside
substitution e¤ects.17 In the case of cross-responses, for instance, the e¤ect of a permanent decline
in the husband’s wage on the wife’s labor supply in our model mixes three e¤ects: complementarity
of leisure time, substitutability of time inputs in the production of childcare services, and added
worker e¤ects, i.e., the fact that women have an incentive to replace some of the (permanently)
lost earnings of the husband by working more.18 Analytically:

Hi ;Wj

=
|

Li ;Wj j@ =0

The uncompensated elasticity (

Li
Hi

{z

Ti ;Wj j@ =0

Hi ;Wj j@ =0

Hi ;Wj )

Ti
@Hi
+
Hi
@
} |

@ Wj
@Wj
{z
}

added work e¤ect

can be decomposed into the three terms described above.

The last term, the added work e¤ect, leads to a change in wealth which in turn induces a change
in hours (and of child care time and leisure time correspondingly).
17
18

Blundell et. al. (2016) provide an overview of the forces present in the family labor supply model.
Adoption of a collective framework of behavior would introduce a further reason for observing a relationship

between husband and wife leisure. For example, under limited commitment, negative wage shocks (especially permanent ones) faced by the husband reduce his Pareto weight, implying that the partner gains in terms of consumption
of all goods, including the consumption of leisure. This e¤ect runs opposite to the added worker e¤ect that we …nd
dominates empirically. We leave the analysis of this further channel to future work.

15

In the empirical application we demonstrate the di¤erent roles of our parameters both in shaping
the Marshallian labor supply responses, and in shaping the Marshallian consumption response,
which is closely related to the degree of consumption insurance.

4

Data and Estimation Methodology

For our empirical analysis we use three datasets: the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID), the
American Time Use Survey (ATUS), and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX). We describe
their salient features in turn.

4.1

The PSID Interview Data

The PSID started in 1968 collecting information on a sample of about 5,000 households. The
initial sample included a sub-sample that was representative of the US population (roughly 3,000
households, the "core sample") and a sub-sample of low-income households (the Census Bureau’s
"SEO sample", about 2,000 households). From then on, both the original families and their splito¤s (children of the original family forming a family of their own) have been followed. The PSID
interview data were collected annually until 1996 and biennially starting in 1997. Since 1999, in
addition to income data and demographics, the PSID collects data about detailed assets holdings
and consumption expenditures. Since we need both consumption and assets data (the latter to
construct instruments), we focus on interview data from the 1999-2015 sample period. These data
therefore provide us with longitudinal information on all the variables required for estimation of
(7) and (8) with the exception of the time that each earner spends on childcare. We focus on
households with married couples where the wife is aged 25 to 65. For the estimation of (7) and
(8) we further restrict our sample to couples with no young children (de…ned by being 10 or less).
In this sample parental time is zero by assumption, and hence leisure time can be obtained as the
di¤erence between total time available and hours of work. We further focus on households with
non missing data on consumption and education of both earners. Finally, to reduce the impact of
measurement error in the estimation of (7) and (8) we drop observation where one of the earners
is working more than 60 hours a week for the entire year, implying very low leisure values.
The construction of the consumption data is similar to Blundell et al. (2016). We use only consumption categories that were consistently collected starting in 1999. These include food (at home
and away), health expenditures, utilities, gasoline, car maintenance, transportation, education,

16

childcare, home insurance and rent (or rent equivalent for homeowners).19 We treat sub-categories
with missing values as zeros. Finally, we winsorize log of hourly wages, leisure, consumption, nonlabor income and the ratio in (8) at the top and bottom 1 percent to avoid outliers driving the
results.

4.2

The ATUS Data

The American Time Use Survey (ATUS) collects information on time use for a representative sample of the US population. The sample is drawn from those who have completed their eighth and
…nal month of interviews for the Current Population Survey (CPS). One respondent per household
(either the husband or wife in couple households) reports detailed information on how he/she spent
his/her time on the previous day. The matching with the CPS can be used to recover demographic
information for the respondent and the spouse (including his/her hourly wage), although some information is updated at the time of the ATUS interview. In its modern format, the ATUS is available
for the 2003-15 period (older waves are also available, but di¤er substantially in format and content
from the more recent waves - we do not use them). The broad type of time use activities covered
by the ATUS include: Personal care, Eating and drinking, Household activities, Purchasing goods
and services, Caring for and helping household members, Caring for and helping non-household
members, Working and work-related activities, Educational activities, Organizational, civic, and
religious activities, Leisure and sports, Telephone calls, mail, and e-mail. Our de…nition of childcare
time includes: Caring for and helping household children (activity codes 030101-030199), Activities
related to household children’s education (activity codes 030201-030299), and Activities related to
household children’s health (activity codes 030301-030399). Separately for each year, we impute
childcare time of the husbands of wife respondents by computing the average childcare time of
all husband respondents (averaged over their wives’birth cohort and education, which are always
observed).
Our sample selection focuses on households where the youngest child is 10 or younger. Given
that we are interested in the substitution between time spent with the children and hours of work,
we only use the weekday diaries (Monday to Friday) and drop national holidays.
We use ATUS data to estimate equations (9) and (10). Unfortunately, the ATUS does not
19

In 2014, due to an error in the PSID data collection procedure, the data on car maintenance is missing whenever

a car insurance value is reported. We impute these values using a within household projection of the car maintenance
budget share on all other transportation related budget shares as well as the food budget share.

17

contain any information about consumption. We hence impute consumption using data from the
CEX, described next. Separately for each year, we impute to each ATUS household the average
level of consumption observed in the CEX for households with the same wife’s birth cohort and
level of education.

4.3

The CEX Data

The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) is the only US data set that has comprehensive and
detailed information on household expenditure and its various components. Available on a continuous basis since 1980, it is used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) to form weights that go
in the computation of the Consumer Price Index (CPI) (and for other minor matters as well). The
CEX is composed of two distinct surveys, the Interview survey (where spending information is by
three-month recall), and the Diary survey (where spending is collected by …lling a 2-week diary).
Respondents in the Interview survey are sampled every 3 months (for a total of 5 times, although
data for the …rst interview are not released because they are merely preparatory), while those in
the Diary survey are sampled only once. The two surveys cover di¤erent consumption items, with
some overlap. We focus on the Interview sample. We construct a measure of nondurable consumption de…ned as the sum of spending on food at home, food away from home, alcohol and tobacco,
utilities, maintenance and repairs, education, housing services, …nancial services, clothing, health,
entertainment, cash contributions, transportation, and other nondurables. We then de‡ate using
the CPI. Our sample excludes rural households, those with incomplete income responses, and those
with zero consumption.

4.4

Descriptive Statistics

Descriptive statistics on time use from the ATUS (Panel A of Table 1) show that among households
with a child aged 10 or less, about 31% of husbands and 8% of wives report zero hours spent with
their kids.20 Partly, this di¤erence is due to the diary nature of the data. Suppose that on the day
time use data were collected the husband left early in the morning and returned after the child went
to sleep. It would be clearly misleading to assume that the husband spent zero annual childcare
time based on observing zero childcare hours on the diary day. Similarly, it is possible that some of
the zeros may come from the respondent being out of town on the previous day. For these reasons,
estimation of moment conditions (9) and (10) uses actual wife’s childcare time. Given the way time
20

The share of husbands with positive childcare time is calculated from the sample of ATUS male respondents.

18

use data are collected in the ATUS, when childcare time are observed for the wife, they are missing
for the husband. Hence, we impute them as described above.21
The Panel A of Table 1 also shows the distribution of annual childcare hours for husbands and
wives (with and without zeros). Among husbands, median hours are 331 and the mean is very
similar. Among wives who devote some time to their kids, median hours are 542 and the mean is
656. Consistent with estimates from Guryan, Hurst, and Kearney (2008) and Ramey and Ramey
(2010), we thus …nd that wife’s childcare annual hours are almost twice as much as the husband’s
hours.
Descriptive statistics on PSID variables (consumption, leisure, hours, and hourly wages) for
the sample which is used in the estimation of (7) and (8) are reported in Panel B of Table 1. The
survey collects data on annual labor earnings and on annual hours of work. To construct the hourly
wage measure we divide annual earnings by annual hours of work. Hence, we have a measure of
the average hourly wage. As expected, men work longer hours and have higher hourly wages than
women.

5

Identi…cation and Estimation

There are three sets of parameters in the model: wage parameters, preference parameters, and tax
parameters. Some of these parameters are set outside the model (either matching moments in the
data or relying on external estimate), while the rest of the parameters need to be estimated. For the
rest of this section we provide details about how each model parameter is either set or estimated.

5.1

Parameters Set Outside the Model

Table 2 summarizes the model parameters that are set externally without solving the model or
estimating …rst order conditions. First we need to set the wage process parameters. We use the
estimates from Blundell et al. (2016) for the parameterization of the variances and covariances of
transitory and permanent wage shocks. Blundell et al. estimate the stochastic process in (1)-(2),
correcting for measurement error (which is crucial for the estimation of the variance of transitory
shocks). We rely on their speci…cation with age-constant variances over the life-cycle in setting
the variance of permanent (transitory) shocks to 0.0303 (0.0275) for husbands and 0.0382 (0.0125)
21

The ATUS number of observations in Table 1 include also the observations with zero childcare for the wife, and

hence it is not identical to the number of observations in Table 3.

19

for wives. They report very small (and only marginally signi…cant) positive covariances for the
shocks between earners within the family. Unlike them, who only require estimates of the variance
of income shocks, a full solution of our model also requires a characterization of the deterministic
component of the life-cycle pro…le of wages, as well as specifying the variance of the initial draw of
the permanent component of wages. We assume that husband and wife enter the labor market at
25 and that they retire at age 65. We approximate the life-cycle pro…le of wages using a constant
and a quadratic polynomial in age. To avoid confounding cohort and age e¤ects, we also control
for cohort dummies (in 5 birth year categories). Finally, we include controls for education levels.
We use the coe¢ cients from these regressions to generate the average age pro…le of wages over the
life-cycle in the model, separately for husbands and wives.22 To estimate the variance at the time
of entry in the labor market, we use the variance of the regression residuals for husbands and wives
aged 25 to 30. The actual estimates are reported in Table 2. Both age pro…les are concave - and
due perhaps to the incidence of early retirement, the male-female wage di¤erential declines after
age 50. There is more initial wage dispersion for women than men.
To discipline the initial assets distribution, we use the distribution of net worth (including
housing) in the PSID for families where the wife is 25 to 30 years old. In the data, about 23%
of households start with zero or negative assets. We assume that there is a similar share of zero
assets households in the model. For the non-zero assets households, we approximate the initial
distribution of assets with a log-normal distribution, taking the variance of this distribution from
the PSID.
We follow Blundell et al. (2016) when setting the scale and exponent parameters of the tax
function (5). However, we extend their work in two directions. First, we allow for a taxable
income ‡oor (b (z) in equation (5)) of $1,000 per month for families with kids (bk ) and of $367 for
families without kids (bnk ), which is consistent with the TANF and food stamps (SNAP) average
allowances for households with no earnings (as of 2010). Second, when the wife is employed, we
impose a …xed cost of work - equivalent to a ‡at tax conditional on employment. For families with
kids, this …xed cost equals the average childcare cost faced by families with young kids and an
employed wife aged 30 to 35, which we estimate to be around $2,900 (using PSID data on childcare
spending). For families without kids, we estimate the …xed cost parameter structurally to match
wives’participation in the data (see more details in 5.3).
22

The coe¢ cients from these regressions are reported as d0;wj ; d1;wj ; d2;wj in Table 2. To match the mean of log

wages over the life-cycle, we restrict the sum of the cohort e¤ects to equal zero.

20

Finally, we simplify family composition in the model by assuming that families either have a
young child or not. Childbirth occurs when the wife is 28, and the child remains "young" for
the next 10 years.23 The last two parameters that we set externally are the interest rate and
the discount rate - the actual value chosen are in the last two rows of Table 2, and are relatively
uncontroversial.

5.2

Parameters Estimated using MRS Equations

As explained above, we break estimation of preference parameters into two steps. In the …rst step we
identify the parameters , 'L1 , 'L2 ,

L,

'T1 , 'T2 , and

T

using …rst order conditions (the marginal

rate of substitution between husband and wife leisure (7), the marginal rate of substitution between
the wife’s leisure and household consumption (8), the marginal rate of substitution between husband
and wife childcare time (9), and the marginal rate of substitution between the wife’s childcare time
and household consumption (10)). In the second step (detailed in the next sub-section) we estimate
the remaining parameters (preference shifters) using estimation by simulation - in particular, we
minimize the distance between moments in the data and identical moments simulated in our life
cycle model - conditional on the estimates of the wage parameters and the preference parameters
that can be identi…ed from estimation of equations (7)-(10).
Estimation of moment conditions (7) and (8) uses PSID data on married couples with children
older than 10 and impose theoretical restrictions across the two equations. Estimation of moment
conditions (9) and (10) uses ATUS data on married couples with children aged 10 or younger,
and also impose theoretical restrictions across the two equations except for

(the consumption

elasticity of intertemporal substitution), which we take from the estimation of (7)-(8) above.24 In
both cases, we assume interior solutions and hence focus on samples of working couples (adding
Heckman correction terms to account for sample selectivity). Note that we do not need to impose
such selection when estimating preference shifters nor do we need them when evaluating overall
responses of consumption and time use to wage shocks (as we use model-based responses, allowing
for corners in time use or assets).
Identi…cation of parameters in equations (7)-(8) requires …nding instruments for the endogenous
variables (leisure, consumption, and wages).25 Our instruments include: education category dum23

We also experimented by introducing some randomness in the age of child arrival (between 26 and 29), but found

that none of our conclusions were a¤ected.
24
We do so because in ATUS we have only an imputed consumption measure.
25
In the theoretical model wages are exogenous. But the possibility of measurement error implies that they should

21

mies for both earners, the wife’s actual years of schooling, dummies for the wife’s birth cohort and
their interactions with the wife’s education category, unearned income and a dummy for whether
the household has …nancial assets that are less than two months of household annual income (a traditional indicator for liquidity constraints, Zeldes 1989).26 Both equations also include a standard
(inverse Mills ratio) Heckman selection correction from a probit regression for a working couple with the husband’s education and actual years of schooling used as additional exclusion restrictions.
Turning to the identi…cation of equations (9) and (10), we have similar endogeneity problems
and use again a set of instruments for the endogenous variables childcare time, consumption and
wages. However, since the ATUS sample is much smaller and we do not have information on assets
as in the PSID, we use a smaller instrument set, which excludes unearned income, the liquidity
constraints indicator, the dummies for the wife’s birth cohort and their interaction with wife’s
education category dummies. The inverse Mills ratio is obtained from a similar probit regression
that adds the husband’s actual years of schooling as an additional exclusion restriction.

5.3

Parameters Estimated by Matching Moments

The …nal set of parameters to estimate includes the preference shifters, the …xed costs of female
employment for families without children (since we set externally the …xed costs of female employment for families with children), and the equivalence scale for consumption. As explained above,
in the model we allow families to either have a young child or not. This implies that we need to
estimate the mean of the leisure preference shifter for families with kids (
them (

nk
L1 ;

nk
L2 ).

k
L1 ;

k
L2 )

and without

Moreover, for families with kids we also need to estimate the mean of parental

time preference shifters (

k
T1 ;

k
T2 ).

This is of course not relevant for families without kids since

by construction their utility function does not include the parental time sub-aggregate. We allow for unobserved heterogeneity in wife’s leisure preferences, implying that we need to estimate
2
"L2

= var ("L2 ;j;t ) for families with and without kids.27 The last set of parameters to consider

are the preference shifters for consumption

C.

Given that the level of utility is arbitrary, we can

be instrumented too.
26
We assume that these variables shift wages, time use decisions, and consumption choices, but are orthogonal to
preference shocks or measurement error. While these may be strong assumptions, our datasets do not o¤er quasiexperimental variation. When we discuss the results, we show that the results are qualitatively similar if we apply a
dynamic panel instruments approach to PSID data.
27
Unobserved heterogeneity is assumed to be …xed over time. We approximate it with a discrete two state distribution, implying that each family draw either a high or a low value for wife’s leisure preferences.

22

normalize one parameter. In particular, we set the

nk
C

= 1 for families without kids. We then

estimate the level of this shifter for families with children (

k
C ).

Overall this leaves us with 10 parameters to estimate: preference shifts in husband and wife
leisure as a function of having or not young kids (
shifters ( kT1 ; kT2 ),
2;nk
type ( 2;k
"L2 ; "L2 ),

k
L1 ;

nk
L1 ;

k
L2 ;

nk
L2 ),

parental time preference

unobserved heterogeneity in female preferences for leisure, separately by family
the …xed cost of female employment for families with no young kids (

the preference shifter for consumption for families with young kids

k
C.

nk ),

and

We choose eleven moments

in the data that should be informative about these parameters: male and female hours of work for
families with and without young children, male and female parental time hours when young kids
are present, the interquartile range of hours and the employment rates of women with and without
young kids, and the change in household consumption when a child is born. We calculate these
moments when the wife is aged 30-35. To separately match the moments for families with and
without kids at these ages, we solve and simulate the model twice – once for families with young
kids, and once for families without. While there is no one-to-one match between the structural
parameters and the targeted moments, some parameters are naturally linked to some of the chosen
moments. For example, cross-sectional variation in hours (captured by the interquartile range)
should be informative about the variance of unobserved heterogeneity in preferences for leisure;
similarly, the arrival of a child leads to reallocation in consumption across periods that should be
re‡ected in economies of scale; the levels of hours should be informative about preference shifters
in leisure, while the level of time devoted to kids should help pinning down preference shifters for
childcare time among households with young kids. Finally, employment rates of women with kids
(and how they di¤er from those of women without kids) should re‡ect the …xed cost of work.
Our two-step estimation approach delivers consistent estimates of the parameters of interest
under standard regularity conditions. However, the standard errors of the SMM estimates need
to be corrected for the use of …rst-stage estimates. Following Gourinchas and Parker (2002), we
use the gradient of the second stage objective, along with the …rst stage variances, to correct the
second stage covariance matrix of the SMM estimates.

23

6

Results

6.1

Parameter Estimates

Panel A of Table 3 reports the results of the estimation of preference parameters from equations
(7)-(10). Both columns condition on hourly wages for both earners (PSID also conditions on having
at least two weeks of annual work); they also include an inverse Mills ratio to correct for selection.
PSID standard errors are clustered at the household level due to the longitudinal nature of the
dataset (this is not needed in the ATUS since it is a pure cross-section).
The …rst thing to note is that the estimated consumption Frisch elasticity
range. The estimate is

is within a plausible

= 0:903 with a tight standard error of 0.049 - very much in the ballpark of

typical literature estimates. Turning to time use parameters, the estimate of

T

is negative (-0.197

with a standard error of 0.123), implying that, plausibly, husband’s and wife’s childcare time are
substitutes in the home production function for child services. We also …nd sizable estimates of the
utility parameters 'T1 and 'T2 , which are strictly related to the responsiveness of childcare time
to wage changes. The estimate of 'T2 , in particular, implies a relatively large responsiveness of the
wife on the childcare time margin. While this may appear surprising at …rst, note that our sample
includes both mothers of pre-school children, as well as mothers of older children (aged between 5
and 10), where there is much more ‡exibility in shifting time allocated to childcare (and also "more
room to go" given constraints on work schedules higher up in the distribution of hours). Finally, on
the leisure time front, the estimate of

L

is positive and signi…cant, implying complementarity of

leisure time (partners enjoy spending their leisure together). As for leisure responsiveness estimates
('L1 and 'L2 ), they are quite small and not dramatically di¤erent across gender.
Appendix Table 1 reports the estimates for the leisure and consumption elasticities obtained
using di¤erent estimation approaches. In particular, rather than using education, cohort and unearned income as instruments, we apply a dynamic panel instruments approach, instrumenting the
endogenous variables with lagged wages, as well as lagged log-di¤erence of leisure of both earners
and of consumption. While the sample is much smaller (due to the dynamic instruments and the
small number of waves), the estimates are qualitatively very similar to the ones reported in Panel
A of Table 3.
Panel B reports the preference shifters and other parameters recovered by matching moments
via simulation of the structural model.28 We match moments for families with and without kids
28

Standard errors are calculated applying a correction for two step estimation similar to Gourinchas and Parker

24

when the wife is 30-35 (using PSID data). While the magnitudes are not directly interpretable,
there are a few points that are worth noting. First, given the MRS estimates and the …xed cost
of employment for the case with children (which is not estimated but set equal to the average
child care costs observed in the data), the estimation implies smaller variance for the wife’s leisure
preference shifters for families without young children. Second, turning to …xed costs of work, for
women with children …xed cost of work is parametrized to match childcare cost ($2,900, see Table
2), on top of the childcare time cost. The estimated …xed cost of work for families without children
is about $4,800, quite close to the parameterized value of families with young children.
How good is the …t of the model? Table 4 shows the data moments along with the simulated
moments (i.e., the internal …t of the model). Panel A includes the targeted moments (when the
wife’s age is 30 to 35). We estimate 10 parameters targeting 11 moments, and hence we have an
over-identi…ed case where the data moments are not matched mechanically. Nevertheless, for all
moments the model does an excellent job.
Because we keep all parameters constant over the life cycle conditional on family composition, a
tough test of the model consists of evaluating the match of moments at later stages of the life cycle
(which we do not target explicitly). Panel B shows the key labor supply moments when the wife
is 50-55 (while, to reiterate, the moments we target in Panel A refer to women aged 30-35). The
match is qualitatively good. Both in the data and in the model, labor supply of husbands is much
lower compared to the case of men with and without children married to younger women (a 200-300
annual hours di¤erence). For wives, labor supply is higher relative to younger women with kids
and lower relative to younger women without kids (and the opposite for the dispersion of hours).
All labor supply magnitudes at later stages of the life cycle are somewhat higher in the model than
in the data. Some of the level di¤erence are likely attributable to the fact that we ignore changes
in cohort and education composition when calculating the moments at di¤erent ages in the data.

6.2

Model Responses

The most relevant use of the structural model is that we can now use our estimates to simulate
the response of consumption and time use to transitory and permanent wage shocks over the life
cycle. As explained above, response to transitory and permanent shocks will also approximately
coincide with, respectively, policy-relevant Frisch and Marshallian elasticities under some special
circumstances (interior hours solution, no progressive taxation, and no borrowing constraints). The
(2002).

25

literature that has focused on exercises of this type typically neglects family labor supply and ignores
allocation of time use when children are present. In our context, a key dimension of heterogeneity
in the elasticities is indeed the presence and age of children. For this reason, we separately report
responses for households with and without young children (aged 10 or less). We obtain the two
types of responses by solving and simulating the model twice. First, under the assumption that
there are young children in the households and second, under the assumptions that there are no
children.
We focus on consumption and time use responses at age 30, when all households in our simulated
data have a young child (recall that the assumption is that childbirth occurs when the woman is
28). Our exercise consists of simulating the impact of a 10% shock to a given earner’s wage. We
consider transitory and permanent shocks, and look at the impact of shocks received by husband
and wife separately. Table 5 reports the consumption and time use responses (hours of work on
the intensive and extensive margin, leisure, and time devoted to children) corresponding to the
various cases. Temporary shocks can be interpreted as one-time changes in the tax code (e.g. a
temporary increase/reduction in the payroll tax rate), while permanent shocks are more likely to
re‡ect structural tax reforms. Table 5 reports response elasticities "on impact" (we comment below
on longer run responses).
Starting with consumption, we obtain the traditional result that consumption responds much
more to permanent shocks than transitory shocks. The response to male permanent shocks is larger
than to female permanent shocks due to the larger role played by men on family earnings. The
non-zero response to transitory shock is due to non-separability through female employment and
the presence of (for some households) binding liquidity constraints (which we study more in detail
below).
Consider now the e¤ect of a positive transitory shock to the woman’s wage - a wage change that
has mostly substitution e¤ects and very modest wealth e¤ects. A woman without kids increases
her hours of work and reduces time devoted to leisure - the hours elasticity is 0.39 (column 6). The
impact of the same change on the labor supply of a women with kids is larger (an elasticity of 0.7)
because she has another margin of adjustment, childcare time (column 5). For men (columns 3,
4), the response to own transitory shocks in the two cases (with and without children) are similar
because men’s childcare time is small to begin with and because of their lower preferences for
spending time with the kids. This con…rms the typical result in the literature of larger elasticity
for women than men, but highlights a component of heterogeneity (time use in the presence of

26

children) that is often ignored.
The hours cross-responses are also interesting. When the husband’s wage increases temporarily,
so that he works longer hours - wives in households without kids respond very little. This re‡ects
pure leisure non-separability - spouses enjoy spending non-working time together, along with small
wealth e¤ects of the transitory shock, giving rise together to virtually no response of leisure or hours.
However, hours are reduced (-0.08) in households with kids because wives now have to confront
the decline in child care time of the husband, for which her childcare hours are substitutes. While
these e¤ects are small, they are consistent with the idea that the presence of young children can
a¤ect cross labor supply responses.
Our model allows us also to recover the elasticities of each earner’s time use with respect to
permanent shifts in wages. For both husband and wife the own-elasticities with respect to temporary
wage changes are larger than the elasticity with respect to long run wage changes (independently of
children presence), implying a small to moderate wealth e¤ect. The fact that the own permanent
wage elasticities are positive implies that the substitution e¤ect dominates. Hence, permanent
decline in wages induce declines in labor supply for both partners (albeit larger for women, a
traditional result in the labor supply literature).
Also of interest is the fact that the cross Marshallian elasticities are much larger for women than
for men. An important observation about these results is the size of these e¤ects for households
with and without young children. While for men there is little di¤erence in the elasticities, the
responses are much larger in absolute value for women with young kids than for those without.
For women in couples without young kids, a permanent decline in the husband’s wage means he
works less and earns less. She works more due to an added worker e¤ect. In couples with children,
husbands who work less allocate some of their leisure time to children, implying that the woman
can work more due to substitutability e¤ects in home production of child services.
In the last four columns of Table 5 we decompose hours elasticities into extensive and intensive
margin e¤ects. The reason why this is a useful exercise is that while young men display very high
employment rates, employment rates for young women with children are much lower. This suggests
that when analyzing the response of total hours of work to shocks, extensive margin responses are
potentially important. In columns 7-8 of Table 5 we report extensive margin responses, while in
columns 9-10 we report intensive margin responses, conditioning on the wife being employed in
both scenarios (i.e., with and without the shock).29 We …nd that both extensive and intensive
29

The intensive and extensive margin elasticities, as we de…ne them, need not sum up to the total hours elasticity.

27

margin responses are important, although extensive margin responses appear somewhat larger in
most cases.
So far we have focused on the responses upon impact of the shock. While for transitory shocks
responses have no long run e¤ects by design, for permanent shocks this is not the case. In fact,
for permanent shocks the "on impact" and "long run" responses coincide in the case of stationary
preferences, but not when preferences depend on the presence of kids - as in our context. Figures 1
and 2 show the impulse responses to a 10% negative permanent shock to the husband’s and wife’s
wages, respectively. We assume that the shock hits at age 30 (the blue, dashed line is drawn to
the left of the shock). The four plots show the impulse responses of consumption, labor supply,
leisure and time devoted to kids. Younger children are present in the household only to the left of
the red, solid line. The changes in the variables of interest at age 30 reproduce the "on impact"
elasticities reported in Tables 5 and 6. As is clear from these …gures, the long run labor supply
responses to the permanent shocks are attenuated when children no longer require parental time,
consistent with the …nding of smaller elasticities for the case without young children reported in
Table 5. An important implication of these …ndings is that life-cycle labor supply elasticities can be
dramatically di¤erent than short-term labor supply elasticities and either overstate or understate
them depending on the presence of young children in the household - a …nding consistent with the
Ghez and Becker’s quote in the Introduction.

6.3

Decomposition of Hours Responses

We now use equation (11), reproduced here for convenience, to decompose the labor supply elasticities into leisure and parental time responses:

Hi ;Wj ja

Li ;Wj ja

Li
Hi

Ti ;Wj ja

Ti
Hi

(12)

for i; j = f1; 2g and for two types of wage changes, transitory and permanent.
Table 5 reports labor supply responses (the left-hand side of (12)), while Table 6 decomposes
these responses into leisure and childcare time responses, separately for households with and without
young children.
This is because the total hours elasticity includes another component, the choice of how many hours to work when
employment changes due to the impact of the shock. For example, if the shock implies an increase in employment,
it is typically the case that newly employed workers tend to work fewer hours on average than those employed both
before and after the shock (pushing down the total hours elasticity).

28

From Table 5, husbands have low transitory wage elasticities (

H1 ;W1 j W1 =trans

is between 0.18

and 0.22) which are essentially independent of the presence of children. For households with no
kids, husband’s leisure-to-hours of work ratio is close to 1, and hence leisure elasticity is about the
same as the negative of the hours elasticity. For households with children, the dominant force is
leisure, as husband’s Frisch elasticity for childcare time is small and the childcare time-to-hours
of work ratio is small to begin with. In any case, his reduction in childcare time is compensated
by an increase in childcare time of his wife. In contrast, labor supply elasticities in response to
transitory shocks for women when young children are present are much larger (0.7). Here, however,
childcare time responses are a dominant force - she reduces both her leisure and her time with
kids. He consumes less leisure (because of leisure complementarity) and devote more time to kids
(because of substitutability). Her response to transitory shocks to his wages re‡ects the exact same
mechanisms, only ampli…ed. When he receives a positive transitory wage shock, she consumes less
leisure (complementarity again), and more childcare time (substitutability again).
An increase in the husband’s permanent wage increases his hours and reduces both leisure and
childcare time - the wife steps up by spending less time working in the market and more time
working at home (with children). In contrast, if her permanent wage increases, he reduces hours,
increases leisure and (only by a small amount) childcare time, while her childcare time declines
considerably. Hence, total time allocated to child services production declines signi…cantly.
The lower two plots in Figures 1 and 2 show that the increase in labor supply in response to
permanent negative shocks when the children no longer require parental time is driven by the latter.
For example in Figure 2, even though wife’s leisure response is more positive after the children is
no longer in need of care (to the right of the red, solid line), total hours response is less negative,
due to the fact that most of the hours response was driven by the response of childcare time.

6.4

Consumption Insurance

In Blundell et al. (2016) the focus is to understand the e¤ect of permanent wage shocks on the
household’s ability to smooth consumption through family labor supply, the tax/transfer system,
and savings. In our model, the labor supply response of the partners depends on three margins:
leisure complementarity, specialization in childcare production, and wealth (added worker) e¤ect.
We illustrate these channels by decomposing the average response to a permanent shock faced
by the primary earner (the male - who earns on average about 66% of household pre-tax labor
earnings) at age 30.

29

From Table 7, a 10% permanent decline in the male’s hourly wage results in a 3.9% decline
in consumption. Savings and taxes attenuate the response of consumption relative to after-tax
household earnings (a 5% decline) and relative to before-tax household earnings (a 5.6% decline),
respectively.30
In the rest of Table 7 we decompose the earnings response of the husband (a -10.7% decline in
before-tax earnings) and the earnings response of the wife (a 2.0% rise in before-tax earnings) into
the three time use margins.
On the husband’s side, hours decline 1.0% (as the substitution e¤ect dominates the wealth e¤ect
of a permanent decline in wages), while leisure and childcare time increase by about 1.3% and 0.7%
respectively. On the wife’s side, while total pre-tax earnings increase is 2%, the total hours increase
is 3%. This discrepancy, absent changes in her wages, may seem puzzling at …rst. The issue is that
this is an aggregate response. If assortative mating in wages relatively small (as it is in the data),
low-wage women need to work more to make up for a similar decline (in levels) in the husband’s
earnings. This induces a post-shock decline in the cross-sectional hour-wage covariance which, in
turn, generates a smaller aggregate response in earnings than in hours.
Looking at female time use responses, the bulk of the adjustment in hours is at the expense of
childcare time (a 2.6% decline, over three times larger than the decline in leisure hours). A natural
next step would be to study the implications for children outcomes of such shock - do children’s
test score or other indicators of school performance decline when the mother is pushed into work
by shocks faced by the primary earner? The CDS, a module available in the PSID for some years,
contains information on such outcomes and it is a natural source for questions of this sort.

6.5

Borrowing constraints

In our model, households are subject to an exogenous borrowing constraint, requiring assets to be
non-negative in each period. We discuss two questions here. First, are there dramatic di¤erences
of behavior between households for whom the constraint is binding and those for whom it is not?
Second, are there alternative ways of modeling borrowing restrictions in our context?
To evaluate the sensitivity to liquidity constraints in our model, we use model simulations to
study the extent of response heterogeneity in two groups of households (both with young children):
those in the bottom quintile of the wealth distribution (and hence more likely to experience binding
30

Note that the overall consumption response is somewhat larger than the one estimated in Blundell et al. (2016).

This is not surprising given that we are focusing on young households in the early stage of their life-cycle.

30

liquidity constraints) and those in the top quintile (and hence much less likely to be subject to
constraints). We report consumption, labor supply and time use goods responses to transitory and
permanent shocks in Tables 8 and 9 (comparable to Tables 5 and 6, which instead refer to the whole
sample). All responses are measured at age 30.31 As expected, consumption response to transitory
shocks is much larger for the low assets households, with very small responses for high assets
households. Consumption response to permanent shocks is slightly larger for low assets households
as well, but given that assets are not key in insuring against permanent shocks, the di¤erences are
much smaller compared to transitory shocks. For time use and labor supply responses to transitory
shocks the wealth e¤ect kicks in stronger in o¤setting the typical substitution e¤ect. The time use
and labor supply responses to transitory shocks of the liquidity constrained households therefore
tend to be similar to their responses to permanent shocks. For example, when a household with
young kids is hit by a positive transitory shocks to the husband’s wage, complementarity between
leisures of the two earners implies a decline of leisure for the wife, and substitution of time use
with kids implies an increase in her time with kids. However, the wealth e¤ect associated with the
transitory shock implies that low assets wives now want to increase their leisure, as well as increase
even further their childcare time. The overall impact is a reduction in wife’s labor supply which is
stronger than what we see on average, and is in contrast with the positive labor supply response
for the high assets households.
While our assumption of an exogenous borrowing constraint is a frequent characterization of
borrowing limits in life cycle models of consumption and labor supply, it is not uncontroversial.
Several papers consider instead "natural borrowing constraints" à la Aiyagari (1994), in which
(due to an Inada condition on preferences) households never choose to have a level of assets that
could induce, with positive probability, a future state of the world in which consumption is exactly
zero. In this sense, the borrowing limit is the maximum amount that an individual can repay with
certainty. As shown by Hai and Heckman (2017), this notion of "natural borrowing constraint"
needs rethinking in a context with endogenous labor supply or human capital investments, since
lenders cannot force individuals to work or to invest in human capital to repay their debt. As a
consequence, the borrowing limits imposed by lenders must take into account the incentive compatibility constraints of the borrowers. While these are important theoretically-based versions of
borrowing limits, endogenizing the nature of liquidity constraints is beyond the scope of our paper.
31

Splitting the sample on the basis of assets early on in the life cycle is better than doing it at a later stage, since

the distribution of initial period assets (at age 25) is a random draw from a realistic asset distribution.

31

6.6

Approximation vs. Simulation

Both Blundell et al. (2008) and Blundell et al. (2016) consider a life cycle framework similar to
ours but make two key simpli…cations. In Blundell et al. (2008) there is no hours margin and no
secondary earner. In Blundell et al. (2016) there is no time use choice and hence no childcare
services to produce. Both papers obtain analytical expressions for the response of consumption
(and hours) to income and wage shocks by considering approximations of the …rst order conditions
of the problem and approximations of the lifetime budget constraint. An important limitation of
approximation-based approaches is that they cannot handle corner solutions in hours or assets.
Moreover, the procedure generates approximation errors that are complex to characterize and
di¢ cult to quantify.
Kaplan and Violante (2010) implicitly evaluate the importance of these approximation errors, in
a model similar to Blundell et al. (2008), by comparing moments obtained from the approximationbased solution (i.e., the estimation of partial insurance coe¢ cients, which use covariance terms for
consumption and income dynamics) against the same moments obtained from simulating the actual
life cycle model (where no errors are present). They show that the discrepancies are quite small,
and are only important for the estimation of the partial insurance coe¢ cient for permanent shocks
in a scenario with exogenously imposed liquidity constraints (but not when liquidity constrained
are of the "natural", Ayiagari-type), and only early on in the life cycle. This shows the importance
of corner solutions in assets.
In a companion paper (Blundell et al., 2017), we consider the approximation error bias in the
more general case with two earners and endogenous labor supply, similar to the setting considered
by Blundell et al. (2016). This allows us to consider the role of corner solutions in hours. We
conduct Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate the performance of approximation-based estimators
on these simulated data. We show that for most Frisch elasticities the bias is small, and that
liquidity constraint have relatively small e¤ects on the parameter estimates. We further evaluate the
sensitivity of the bias to the choice of functional form, and the possibility of using approximations to
guide the choice of moments for indirect inference in a formal structural estimation setting. While
these Monte Carlo exercises do not explicitly take into account time use, in a previous version
of our paper (Blundell et al., 2015) we extended the approximation-based estimation strategy and
estimated Frisch elasticities for the model with time use (applying somewhat di¤erent identi…cation
approach and data). Reassuringly, the results were broadly similar to those we report here.

32

7

Counterfactual Policy Experiments

In this section we discuss the results of two policy experiments. In the …rst experiment we provide
households with young children with an unconditional subsidy. This is achieved by changing the
value of the function b (z) in the tax function:

T (z; H1 W1 + H2 W2 )

(b (z) + H1 W1 + H2 W2 )1

t

In the second experiment we provide households with young children with some compensation
for child-related …xed costs of work. This is achieved by changing the value of the parameter
e
in the adjusted consumption value C:
e=C
C

(z)

(z) E2
a (z)

To make the two policies comparable (in a revenue-neutral sense), we set the experiments such
that they give rise to the same de…cit, expressed in dollar terms relative to the status quo. Speci…cally, both subsidies change average discounted after-tax income by 2%.32 We evaluate the welfare
impact of the program using the equivalent proportional increase in consumption over the life-cycle
("willingness to pay"), i.e., the level of consumption that would make an average household indifferent between the pre- and post-policy regimes. We report changes in consumption and time use
over three segments of the life cycle: the years before the birth of children, the period where the
household has young children (below the age of 10), and the period that follows it.
As the results in Table 10 show, the two policy changes produce very di¤erent behavioral and
welfare responses. The unconditional subsidy boosts consumption especially in periods where the
household has young children –these are the periods in which the subsidy is received, and are also
the periods where the price of consumption is higher. Interestingly, while there is little increase
in consumption in the post-young children period, there is a signi…cant increase in consumption in
the pre-children period. This is a period when households tend to be liquidity constrained, at least
partly accumulating savings for the period when they will have young children. Increasing income
in the period when children are present (through the subsidy) allows them to reduce savings and
32

The value of the subsidy is calculated for the period where the household have young children. Since changes to

policy parameters generate behavioral responses, we use an iterative procedure to …nd the changes in policy parameter
that generate the required 2% change in after-tax income.

33

increase consumption in the pre-children period. Consistent with the direct wealth e¤ect of the
unconditional subsidy, households also increase leisure and time spent with kids at the expenses of
hours of work.
Unlike the unconditional subsidy, the employment subsidy has a large impact on labor supply,
especially of women. Due to the large decline in the …xed cost of employment, the subsidy increases
participation for women with young children by 13% (from a status quo value of 0.75) and increases
hours worked by 6.5%. The employment subsidy also reduces leisure and especially time spent with
kids for the wife, along with a slight reduction in labor supply and a slight increase in time spent
with the kids for the husband. The latter is far too small to o¤set the decline in childcare hours
of the wife, resulting in an overall decline in family childcare hours. Note that our model does
not explicitly account for how changes in parental employment a¤ects the welfare of children (see
Del Boca et al., 2014, for some evidence). Like in the …rst policy, consumption increases in the
pre-children period for similar reasons (the large decline in the …xed cost of work reduces the need
to save in anticipation of the arrival of children); unlike the …rst policy, however, the change in
consumption during the period where households have younger children is slightly negative due to
the fact that the policy reduces consumption expenditure on the …xed cost of work.
We also report, separately for each policy experiment, the "willingness to pay" (expressed in
terms of lifetime consumption). Households appear to gain much more from the unconditional
subsidy than from receiving compensation for the …xed cost of work induced by the presence of
children. This result is partly intuitive - households have greater leverage in deciding how to
allocate the unconditional subsidy to the various margins of behavior. However, this does not
necessarily mean that the two policies would be equivalent if all households worked. In fact,
borrowing constraints make an extra unconditional dollar much more valuable, in welfare terms,
than a conditional subsidy even conditioning on work.

8

Conclusions
In this paper, we have considered a life cycle model in which households enjoy utility from

the leisure times of husband and wife and from consuming both non-childcare goods and childcare
services. The latter, in the spirit of one of Becker’s seminal contributions, is home produced using
as inputs the time allocated by parents to the care of their children, and childcare related goods.
The wage rate is the opportunity cost of time use alternative to the market (leisure or childcare).

34

We argue that in an environment with uncertainty, hours devoted to the various activities
(work, leisure, childcare) serve two roles. First, they can be used to produce "commodities", such
as childcare (as substitute inputs of a production function) or companionship (as complements in
utility). Second, they can be changed to provide insurance against wage shocks (either in response
to own shocks if wealth e¤ects dominate substitution e¤ects, or as added worker e¤ects in response
to shocks faced by the other earner).
We …nd that the response of a mother’s labor supply to a transitory wage shock faced by her
spouse (cross-Frisch elasticity) is negative. This is because the large complementarity desire to
spend time together is more than counteracted by the input substitutability in the production
function of childcare. Similarly, we …nd that own-Frisch elasticity are large because usual intertemporal substitution e¤ects are compounded by reducing time spent with children due to the higher
opportunity cost induced by the wage change.
Our results suggest that, although some of the female labor supply responses are derived from
an adjustment in female leisure hours, there is a large response in the time she spends with her
children. For an adverse permanent shock to the husband’s wage this implies a signi…cant reduction
in her time with her children. The estimates suggest this is not made up with a similar increase in
his time with the child. Calculating the resulting impact on the child well-being is beyond the scope
of this paper but the results suggest that the reduction of the mother’s childcare time should be an
important part of any analysis of the consequences of policies or external shocks that incentivize
mothers with young children into work.
While the particular values we have estimated for these trade-o¤s will depend on our assumption
which separates utility into two aggregates, one comprising consumption and leisure times of the
parents, and the other comprising the production of childcare services, they are present also under
less restrictive assumptions. We have also assumed that households are not subject to hours
constraints and that they are not subject to employment shocks (such as job destruction or slow
arrival rate of o¤ers while out of work). We plan to explore the consequences of more general utility
and home production speci…cations and of labor demand issues in future work.

35

References
[1] Aguiar, Mark and Erik Hurst. (2007). "Measuring Trends in Leisure: The Allocation of Time
Over Five Decades", The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (3)
[2] Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis. (2013). "Time use during the Great
Recession." The American Economic Review 103, no. 5: 1664-1696.
[3] Aiyagari, S.Rao, (1994). "Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving". The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109 (3), 659–684.
[4] Altonji, Joseph G. (1986). "Intertemporal substitution in labor supply: Evidence from micro
data." Journal of Political Economy 94.3, Part 2.
[5] Angrist, Joshua D., and William N. Evans. (1998). "Children and Their Parents’Labor Supply:
Evidence from Exogenous Variation in Family Size." The American Economic Review 88, no.
3: 450-477.
[6] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos. (2005). "Female labor supply
as insurance against idiosyncratic risk." Journal of the European Economic Association 3, no.
2-3: 755-764.
[7] Attanasio, Orazio, Hamish Low, and Virginia Sanchez-Marcos. (2008). "Explaining changes
in female labor supply in a life-cycle model." The American Economic Review. 98, no. 4:
1517-1552.
[8] Becker, Gary S. (1965). "A Theory of the Allocation of Time". The Economic Journal, Vol.
75, No. 299: 493-517
[9] Becker, Gary S. (1976), The Economic Approach to Human Behavior, University of Chicago
Press.
[10] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Ian Preston (2008), “Consumption inequality and partial insurance.”American Economic Review, 98(5), 1887-1921.
[11] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten. (2015). "Children, Time Allocation and Consumption Insurance". IFS Working Paper W15/13.

36

[12] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten. (2016). "Consumption Inequality
and Family Labor Supply", The American Economic Review 106, no. 2: 387-435.
[13] Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri and Itay Saporta-Eksten. (2017). "Comparing estimated
life cycle responses using approximation and full scale solution approaches", mimeo.
[14] Browning, Martin, Pierre-Andrè Chiappori, and Yoram Weiss (2014), Economics of the Family,
Cambridge University Press.
[15] Chiappori, Pierre Andre and Maurizio Mazzocco (2017), "Static and Intertemporal Household
Decisions". Journal of Economic Literature, 55(3): 985-1045.
[16] Cogan, John (1981), "Fixed costs and labor supply", Econometrica, vol. 49, pp. 945–64.
[17] Del Boca, Daniela, Christopher Flinn and Matthew Wiswall (2014), "Household Choices and
Child Development", Review of Economic Studies 81: 137-185.
[18] Ghez, Gilbert, and Gary S. Becker. (1975). "The allocation of time and goods over the life
cycle." NBER Books.
[19] Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier, and Jonathan A. Parker. (2002). "Consumption over the life cycle."
Econometrica 70, no. 1: 47-89.
[20] Guryan, Jonathan, Erik Hurst, and Melissa Kearney. (2008). "Parental Education and Parental
Time with Children." Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(3): 23-46.
[21] Hai, Rong, and James J. Heckman (2017). "Inequality in human capital and endogenous credit
constraints." Review of Economic Dynamics 25: 4-36.
[22] Heckman, James J. (1974) “Life Cycle Consumption and Labor Supply: An Explanation of
the Relationship Between Income and Consumption Over the Life Cycle.”American Economic
Review 64(1): 188–94.
[23] Heckman, James J. (1979) "Sample Selection Bias as a Speci…cation Error", Econometrica
47(1): 153-161
[24] Heckman, James J. (1988) “Time Constraints and Household Demand Functions", in T. Paul
Schultz (ed.) Research in Population Economics, JAI Press Inc.

37

[25] Hyslop, Dean R. (2001). “Rising U.S. Earnings Inequality and Family Labor Supply: The
Covariance Structure of Intrafamily Earnings.”American Economic Review, 91(4), 755-77.
[26] Juhn, Chinhui and Simon Potter (2007). "Is There Still an Added Worker E¤ect?". Federal
Reserve Bank of New York. Sta¤ Report no. 310.
[27] Kaplan, Greg, and Giovanni L. Violante (2010), "How Much Consumption Insurance beyond
Self-Insurance?", American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4): 53-87.
[28] Keane, Michael P. (2011) "Labor supply and taxes: A survey." Journal of Economic Literature
49(4): 961-1075.
[29] Lundberg, Shelly (1985), “The Added Worker E¤ect”, Journal of Labor Economics, 3(1),
11-37.
[30] Meghir, Costas and Luigi Pistaferri. (2011). “Earnings, consumption and lifecycle choices”,
Handbook of Labor Economics , 4( B), 773-854.
[31] Ramey, Garey, and Valerie A. Ramey. (2010). "The Rug Rat Race." Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 2010, no. 1: 129-176.
[32] Stephens, Mel (2002), "Worker Displacement and the Added Worker E¤ect", Journal of Labor
Economics, 20(3), 504-537.
[33] Zeldes, Stephen P. (1989), "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investigation," Journal of Political Economy 97(2): 305-346.

38

Table 1: Descriptive Statistics - PSID and ATUS Data
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

mean

p25

median

p75

A. ATUS descriptive statistics
Non-zero childcare time (head)

0.69

Non-zero childcare time (wife)

0.92

(Imputed) childcare annual hours (head)

330

299

331

360

Childcare annual hours (wife) inc. 0s

605

251

503

841

Childcare annual hours (wife) exc. 0s

656

303

542

867

Observations

3,151

B. PSID descriptive statistics
Total Consumption (exc. durables)

42,716

27,608

37,217

51,076

Leisure of husband

2,086

1,730

2,080

2,240

Leisure of wife

2,410

2,080

2,240

2,672

Hours of husband

2,074

1,920

2,080

2,430

Hours of wife

1,750

1,488

1,920

2,080

Hourly wage of husband

30.09

15.89

23.66

36.13

Hourly wage of wife

21.65

12.15

17.89

26.52

Observations

11,195

Notes: ATUS data are from 2003-2014 (sample of married couples, where the wife is
aged 25-65 and the youngest child is aged 10 or less). PSID data are from the 1999-2015
(biannual) waves. The sample includes married couples where the wife is aged 25-65
and there are no children aged 10 or less. Consumption and wages are in 2010 prices.
Leisure is calculated assuming total annual hours are 4160 (5*16*52) (see text for details
on further sample restrictions).

39

Table 2: Parameters Set Outside the Model
Wage Process
2
v1

0.0303

Variance of perm. shocks to husband’s wages (Blundell et al. 2016)

2
v2

0.0382

Variance of perm. shocks to wife’s wages (Blundell et al. 2016)

2
u1

0.0275

Variance of trans. shocks to husband’s wages (Blundell et al. 2016)

2
u2

0.0125

Variance of trans. shocks to wife’s wages (Blundell et al. 2016)

v1 v 2

0.0058

Covariance of perm. shocks between spouses (Blundell et al. 2016)

u1 u2

0.0027

Covariance of trans. shocks between spouses (Blundell et al. 2016)

2
0;w1

0.256

Variance of log(wage) at time 0, husband (PSID)

2
0;w2

0.285

Variance of log(wage) at time 0, wife (PSID)

d0;w1 ; d1;w1 ; d2;w1

[1.54,0.069,-0.0007]

Deterministic age pro…le parameters, husband (PSID)

d0;w2 ; d1;w2 ; d2;w2

[1.77,0.045,-0.0004]

Deterministic age pro…le parameters, wife (PSID)

Initial Assets
2
log A0 jA0 >0

P (A0 > 0)

2.58

Variance of log A0 when initial assets are positive (PSID)

0.23

Proportion with zero initial assets (PSID)

2.2

Scale of tax function (Blundell et al. 2016)

0.1

Exponent of tax function (Blundell et al. 2016)

Tax Function

bk

1,000

bnk

367

Monthly taxable inc. ‡oor, households w/ kids, $ (TANF and SNAP, 2010)
Monthly taxable inc. ‡oor, households w/out kids, $ (SNAP, 2010)

Other Parameters
k

r

2,900

Fixed costs of work for women with young children, $ (PSID)

0.05

Annual return, risk-free assets

1/(1.05)

Discount factor

Notes: See text for details on parameter choices.

40

Table 3: Parameter Estimates
A. MRS Estimates

'L1
'L2
L

(1)

(2)

Leisure and consumption

Parental time

0:211

'T1

0:162

'T2

0:535

T

(0:037)
(0:025)
(0:099)

0:115

(0:081)

0:503

(0:201)

0:197
(0:123)

0:903

(0:049)

Observations:

11,195

2,901

B. Preference shifters
With children
L1
L2
T1
T2
2
"L2

Without children

8:925

7:680

(1:128)

(1:013)

9:397

8:816

(1:053)

(1:024)

23:993

N/A

(10:245)

3:957

N/A

(1:201)

1:476

0:700

(0:170)

(0:085)

(see Table 2)

4; 794
(435)

C

0:132

Normalized to 0

(0:019)

Notes: In Panel A the parameters are estimated by GMM. Standard errors clustered by household in parenthesis. Parameter estimates reported in Column 1 use
PSID data; those reported in Column 2 use ATUS and CEX data. In Panel B we
report parameters estimated by the simulated method of moments (see Table 4,
Panel A for the list of targeted moments, and the main text for data description).
All parameters in this panel are for the utility where all quantities are scaled by
total available hours of 4,160. Standard errors are calculated applying a correction
for two step estimation as in Gourinchas and Parker (2002).

41

Table 4: List of Moments Used in Estimation
Data

Model

Hours of work: wife with young kids

1,251

1,248

Hours of work: wife without young kids

1,814

1,816

Hours of work: husband with young kids

2,218

2,225

Hours of work: husband without young kids

2,126

2,121

Hours of parental time: wife with young kids

784

778

Hours of parental time: husband with young kids

346

337

p75-p50 hours: wife with young kids

504

434

p75-p50 hours: wife without young kids

212

230

Employment probability of wife with young kids

0.77

0.76

Employment probability of wife without young kids

0.90

0.90

Change in consumption when kid is born

0.075

0.073

Hours of work: wife

1,411

1,665

Hours of work: husband

1,900

2,038

Employment probability of wife

0.78

0.83

p75-p50 hours: wife

283

434

A. Targeted Moment (Wife 30-35)

B. Non-targeted Moment (Wife 50-55, no kids)

Notes: All targeted moments (Panel A) are calculated in the data and in the model
for households where the wife is aged 30 to 35 (with or without young children).
All non-targeted moments (Panel B) are calculated for households where the wife
is 50 to 55. All data moments are from the PSID.

42

Table 5: Consumption and Labor Supply Responses to Transitory and Permanent Shocks
Total Response
C

Trans.

Perm.

Extensive vs. Intensive Margin

H1

H2

E2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

With

W/out

With

W/out

With

W/out

With

W/out

With

W/out

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

Husband

0.119

0.123

0.180

0.222

-0.076

0.001

-0.051

0.005

-0.041

0.006

Wife

0.130

0.135

0.000

-0.006

0.703

0.394

0.574

0.280

0.329

0.167

Husband

0.393

0.410

0.105

0.116

-0.296

-0.140

-0.193

-0.065

-0.170

-0.088

Wife

0.353

0.375

-0.070

-0.106

0.531

0.304

0.491

0.266

0.208

0.086

Notes: Model-simulated responses for transitory and permanent shocks.

Table 6: Leisure and Parental Time Responses to Transitory and
Permanent Shocks
L1

Trans.

Perm.

H2 jemployed

L2

T1

T2

(5)

(6)

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

With

W/out

With

W/out

With

kids

kids

kids

kids

kids

Husband

-0.230

-0.221

-0.003

-0.001

-0.095

0.131

Wife

-0.007

0.006

-0.217

-0.309

0.033

-0.538

Husband

-0.131

-0.120

0.078

0.110

-0.067

0.261

Wife

0.085

0.110

-0.151

-0.238

0.058

-0.443

Notes: Model-simulated responses for transitory and permanent shocks.

43

Table 7: Insurance E¤ects
Consumption:

-3.9%

After-tax household earnings:

-5.0%

Before-tax household earnings:

-5.6%

Earner’s average share of before-tax earnings:
Earner’s before-tax earnings response:

Husband

Wife

0.66

0.34

-10.7%

+2.0%

Hours

-1.0%

+3.0%

Leisure

+1.3%

-0.8%

Parental time

+0.7%

-2.6%

Notes: Insurance decomposition calculations based on model-simulated responses to a 10 percent permanent decline in the husband’s wage.

44

Table 8: Consumption and Labor Supply Responses: Lowest vs. highest quintile of assets
at the beginning of the life-cycle
Total Response
C

Trans.

Perm.

Extensive vs. Intensive Margin

H1

H2

E2

H2 jemployed

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Husband

0.175

0.030

0.152

0.251

-0.120

0.024

-0.074

0.006

-0.070

0.022

Wife

0.190

0.036

-0.020

0.041

0.606

0.975

0.493

0.803

0.282

0.452

Husband

0.415

0.344

0.092

0.144

-0.297

-0.299

-0.188

-0.210

-0.173

-0.161

Wife

0.361

0.322

-0.070

-0.070

0.493

0.671

0.445

0.649

0.198

0.248

Notes: Model-simulated responses for transitory and permanent shocks. Asset quintile de…ned according to
simulated initial assets.

Table 9: Leisure and Parental Time Responses: Lowest vs. highest quintile of
assets at the beginning of the life-cycle
L1

Trans.

Perm.

L2

T1

T2

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Low

High

Husband

-0.205

-0.272

0.017

-0.038

-0.088

-0.106

0.165

0.073

Wife

-0.020

0.051

-0.203

-0.230

0.04

-0.020

-0.528

-0.536

Husband

-0.121

-0.154

0.090

0.051

-0.065

-0.073

0.284

0.211

Wife

0.090

0.071

-0.153

-0.144

0.059

-0.054

-0.454

-0.406

Notes: Model-simulated responses for transitory and permanent shocks. Asset quintile de…ned
according to simulated initial assets.

45

Table 10: Policy Experiments
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

C

H1

H2

E2

L1

L2

T1

T2

Panel A: Experiment 1: Unconditional Subsidy for Families with Young Children
Total

0.6%

-0.4%

-0.7%

-0.4%

0.4%

0.3%

Before young children

0.9%

-0.4%

-0.5%

-0.2%

0.4%

0.4%

With young children

1.3%

-0.6%

-1.8%

-1.0%

0.8%

0.7%

After young children

0.1%

-0.1%

-0.1%

-0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

0.2%

1.0%

Consumption equivalent utility value: 0.95%
Panel B: Experiment 2: Employment Subsidy for Wives with Young Children
Total

0.1%

-0.2%

1.9%

4.6%

0.2%

-0.5%

Before young children

0.9%

-0.4%

-0.5%

-0.2%

0.4%

0.4%

With young children

-0.3%

-0.3%

6.5%

13.0%

0.3%

-1.7%

After young children

0.1%

-0.1%

-0.1%

-0.1%

0.1%

0.1%

Consumption equivalent utility value: 0.17%
Notes: See text for detailed description.

46

0.3%

-5.7%

Consumption

Hours and employment

0.01

0.06

0

0.04
0.02

-0.01

0
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04

-0.06

-0.05
-0.06
26

Husband
Extensive wife
Intensive wife

-0.08

28

30

32

34

36

38

-0.1
26

40

28

30

Leisure

32

34

36

38

40

Time with children

0.06

0.08
0.06

0.04

0.04
0.02
0.02
0
0
-0.02
-0.02
-0.04

-0.06
26

Wife
Husband

28

30

32

34

36

38

Wife
Husband

-0.04
-0.06
26

40

28

30

32

34

36

38

Figure 1: Impulse Responses to a Permanent 10% Decline to Husband’s Wages

47

40

Consumption

Hours and employment

0.01

0.06

0

0.04
0.02

-0.01

0
-0.02
-0.02
-0.03
-0.04
-0.04

-0.06

-0.05
-0.06
26

Husband
Extensive wife
Intensive wife

-0.08

28

30

32

34

36

38

-0.1
26

40

28

30

Leisure

32

34

36

38

40

Time with children

0.06

0.08
0.06

0.04

0.04
0.02
0.02
0
0
-0.02
-0.02
-0.04

-0.06
26

Wife
Husband

28

30

32

34

36

38

Wife
Husband

-0.04
-0.06
26

40

28

30

32

34

36

Figure 2: Impulse Responses to a Permanent 10% Decline to Wife’s Wages

48

38

40

