NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PREMIUM OR PENALTY? LABOR MARKET RETURNS TO NOVICE PUBLIC
SECTOR TEACHERS
Juan Saavedra
Dario Maldonado
Lucrecia Santibanez
Luis Omar Herrera Prada
Working Paper 24012
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24012

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We acknowledge funding from the Inter American Development Bank (IADB). We thank
Mariana Alfonso, Ivan Enríquez, Carlos Hipólito García, Abhijit Singh, Nadmy Valbuena, and
participants at AEFP Conference 2017, NBER, the CESIfo Economics of Education Conference
2016, LACEA-LAMES Conference 2016 and in the Colombian Ministry of Education, UCLA,
USC, MSU Universidad EAFIT and Universidad de la Salle’s seminars for helpful comments and
suggestions. Olga Victoria Dulce at Universidad de los Andes provided excellent research
assistance in Colombia. We thank Dolly Ovalle and Luz Emilse Rincón at Colombia’s Ministry
of Social Protection for providing access to social security employment and earnings data.
Colombia’s Ministry of Education provided access to teacher rosters. All remaining errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Juan Saavedra, Dario Maldonado, Lucrecia Santibanez, and Luis Omar Herrera Prada.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Premium or Penalty? Labor Market Returns to Novice Public Sector Teachers
Juan Saavedra, Dario Maldonado, Lucrecia Santibanez, and Luis Omar Herrera Prada
NBER Working Paper No. 24012
November 2017
JEL No. I26,J22,J24,O15,O38
ABSTRACT
It is unclear whether public sector teachers are under or overpaid relative to other occupations due
to lack of knowledge about teachers’ outside labor market options and other unobserved attributes
related to compensation. We estimate causal labor market returns to novice public teachers in
Colombia. Our approach takes advantage of a national, standardized, teacher-screening exam,
scores on which determine eligibility for public teaching jobs. We use four nationwide
administrative data sources in a regression discontinuity approach to show that applicants who
marginally pass the teacher screening test have greater annual earnings during the first three years
of tenure than applicants below the passing cutoff. The total earnings effect is a combination of
higher daily wages and greater labor supply, part of which is in outside, predominantly nonteaching jobs for a substantial fraction of public teachers. For infra-marginal high-scoring
applicants, we show that being a public teacher in Colombia is as attractive, if not more, as for
those at the margin. On the whole, rather than a penalty, public teachers in Colombia across all
ability levels earn a substantial labor market premium early in their careers.

Juan Saavedra
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
juansaav@usc.edu
Dario Maldonado
Cr 1 No 19-27
Bloque AU, piso 2 Ofc: 220
Bogota, Colombia
dmaldonadoc@uniandes.edu.co

Lucrecia Santibanez
School of Educational Studies
Claremont Graduate University
Harper Hall 205 150 East Tenth St.,
Claremont California 91711
Lucrecia.Santibanez@cgu.edu
Luis Omar Herrera Prada
The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
luis.o.herrera@me.com

1

Introduction

In an effort to raise educational quality, countries around the world grapple
with the question of how to attract top talent into the teaching profession.
Initiatives often target teacher compensation, arguing that public teachers
are underpaid relative to similarly qualified professionals in other occupations
(e.g. Auguste, Kim and Miller, 2010; Mizala and Ñopo, 2016). It is unclear,
however, whether public sector teachers are under or overpaid, because we
generally lack knowledge on teachers’ outside labor market options, cognitive
ability, and other unobserved attributes related to compensation.
In this paper we estimate causal labor market returns to novice public
sector teachers in Colombia. For mainly two reasons, Colombia provides
an exceptional setting to address this question. First, for recent applicants,
the Colombian government allocates public teaching jobs using scores on a
national, standardized, teacher-screening exam, which provides exogenous
variation in the probability of becoming a public sector teacher among applicants with marginal scores. Second, rich Colombian administrative data
sources enable us to create a new individual-level longitudinal dataset containing information for all prospective teachers on their secondary graduation
exam and collegiate records, performance on the teacher screening test, and
labor market history two years prior and three years after they take the
screening test. These data, in particular, enable us to observe labor market
outcomes for public teachers in their public sector teaching job as well as in
any additional jobs they hold.
Theoretically, if the test has screening value and is costly, it creates

3

an entry-barrier effect that unambiguously results in higher average teacher
wages (Angrist and Guryan, 2007). It is theoretically ambiguous, however,
the extent to which the labor market returns to marginal applicants are
positive or negative and the extent to which we can extrapolate such causal
returns to infra-marginal applicants who score high on the screening test.
Empirically we find that public sector teachers in Colombia earn a substantial earnings premium early in their careers. Applicants who marginally
pass the teacher screening test have annual earnings that are about 65 percent greater during the first three years of tenure than earnings of applicants
just below the cutoff. Part of the premium is due to the fact that a significant
fraction of public sector teachers hold outside, predominantly non-teaching
jobs in the formal sector. As a result, relative to applicants who fail, applicants who pass the teacher screening test work more days per year and
have higher daily earnings. However, the earnings advantage from the second
job wanes after two years and by the third year of potential teacher tenure,
most of the earnings premium for marginal applicants is due entirely to their
primary public teaching job.
To address the question of whether public teaching jobs are as attractive
for infra-marginal high scoring applicants as they are for marginal applicants
near the cutoff, we take advantage of the fact that conditioning on the large
set of baseline predictors in our data effectively eliminates the relationship
between teacher screening test scores as the running variable and applicants’
potential labor market earnings, thereby eliminating the only source of omitted variables bias in discontinuity-based estimates (Angrist and Rokkanen,
2015). A propensity score stratification strategy based on this ignorability
4

result suggests that, in both the main occupation and for all occupations,
the labor market premium for infra-marginal high-scoring public teachers is
greater than for teachers with marginal scores.
While it is difficult to conclude with our available data whether the substantial premium earned by Colombian public teachers early in their careers
results in a better pool of teachers, some evidence suggests that it may not.
First, to the extent that the test is costly, some applicants will be discouraged from taking it. Therefore, applicants on the margin between public
teaching and an alternative occupation should be the highest-quality teachers (Angrist and Guryan, 2007). Consistent with this theoretical prediction,
we find that relative to recent college graduates who take the teacher screening test, those who choose not to take it have higher college admission exam
scores and come from more socio-economically advantageous backgrounds,
both of which are strong predictors of student achievement and of teacher
value-added in the US (Clotfelter, Ladd and Vigdor, 2010).
Second, economic theory highlights how effort depends on marginal incentives (e.g. Holmstrom and Milgrom 1991; Holmstrom 1999). After a short
probationary period, usually 6 months, most novice teachers in Colombia
receive tenure and are rarely dismissed. Teacher salaries are set using a seniority and education-based salary schedule, and are untied to performance.
The work conditions of public teachers make it plausible that, on the margin,
they will devote more effort to their outside, less secure, non-teaching job,
possibly at the expense of teaching.
Third, evidence from other developing countries indicates considerable
misallocation of pay and productivity among public workers in general and
5

teachers in particular. In Mexico, for instance, recent evidence shows that
raising public sector salaries improved applicant pool quality and motivation
but not necessarily job performance (Dal Bo et al, 2013). In Pakistan, reducing teacher pay by 35 percent had no adverse effect on teacher productivity,
as measured by test-score value added (Bau and Das, 2016). In Indonesia,
doubling teacher pay reduced the fraction of teachers holding outside jobs,
but did not affect teacher effort or student performance (de Ree et al., 2015).1
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the structure of public teacher hiring in Colombia and the teacher screening test
reform introduced in 2004. Sections 3 and 4 describe the data and research
design. Section 5 presents our main findings. Section 6 discusses findings
from an analysis that extrapolates our results to candidates away from the
cutoff. Section 7 concludes.

2

Public teacher hiring in Colombia

Evidence suggests that it is difficult to identify effective teachers at the point
of hire: observable characteristics such as educational background are poor
predictors of performance on the job (Rockoff, Jacob, Kane, and Staiger,
2011).
To improve the quality of the teaching force, countries around the world
have introduced licensure requirements for prospective teachers. In England,
for example, prospective teachers must pass the Teacher Training Agency
1

In England, on the other hand, recent evidence suggests that regions in which teachers
earn poorly relative to other occupations have lower student achievement than regions in
which teachers earn on par with other occupations (Britton and Propper, 2016).

6

skills test to become public sector teachers (Wang et al., 2003). In the US,
more than 40 states require teachers to pass some sort of standardized certification test (Angrist and Guryan, 2007). Mexico and Peru use a national
test to screen all potential new teachers, similar to the one we use in this
study (Estrada, 2013).
In 2002, the Colombian government modified the conditions that determine entry into the public teaching profession. This reform was undertaken
with the goal of raising entry standards for public sector teaching and making
the selection process more transparent and meritocratic. The new selection
rules went into effect in 2004 and only apply to applicants who wish to
become public teachers.
Colombia’s Civil Service Commission manages the new recruitment process.2 The new recruitment process consists of three stages. In the first
stage, aspiring teachers take a screening test; eligibility depends on the result of the test. To take the test applicants must pay a fee; in 2009, it was
25,000 Colombian pesos, or about US $13. Only applicants with scores on
the screening test at or above 60 points are eligible for public sector teaching
jobs. The 60-point cutoff is fixed ex-ante by the Ministry of Education.
The teacher screening test assesses applicants’ cognitive ability (mathematics, language and pedagogy), content knowledge (specific to the subject
matter the person wants to teach), and personality traits. The test has substantial power as a quality screen. In 2009—the test cohort we study—only
42 percent of applicants passed the test. Moreover, the probability of pass2

The Commission also manages recruitment and promotions for most other civil servants with the exception of military and police forces.

7

ing the test is correlated with applicants’ outside options. Among recent
education college graduates who take the 2009 screening test, scores on the
test are positively correlated with earnings in the prior year.
In the second stage of the teacher selection process, officials from the National Public Service Commission interview applicants with scores above the
eligibility cutoff to verify applicant qualifications and degrees. At this second stage the government disqualifies applicants who lack any pre-requisites,
such as having a Bachelor’s degree. Once the commission has determined
the pool of all eligible applicants, it generates a list ranking candidates by
test results. These rankings are generated one for each "Departamento" or
state in Colombia and for all large cities.3
In the third stage, applicants choose their preferred vacancy. Selection
follows rank order: applicants with higher scores can choose vacancies first,
until all public sector teacher vacancies are assigned. Since the reform was
enacted there have been five teacher screening test administrations: 2004,
2005, 2006, 2009, 2013, 2015, and 2017. Owing data restrictions that are
explained in detail below, we focus on graduates who took the 2009 test.
The teacher screening test, as we show later in the paper, creates plausibly
exogenous variation in the probability of obtaining a permanent public sector
teaching position around the eligibility threshold.
3
Teachers apply to take the test in their preferred state or geographic location. Colombia is divided into 32 "Departamentos" or states plus the capital city of Bogotá. The
Ministry of Education constructs local ranking lists by state and one for the capital district, so that teachers can be assigned locally within these regions.

8

3

Data and Methods

3.1

Data

Our dataset combines information from four administrative sources. These
sources are merged using national identification information on names, dates
of birth and adult identification (ID) numbers:
1. Teacher screening test data for the 2009 application cohort. These
data contain individual-results for all applicants who took the test in
2009. We obtained these data from Colombia’s National Educational
Assessment Agency (ICFES). Because available earnings data begin
in 2008 (see below), we limit our sample to applicants who took the
teacher screening test in 2009 so that we can observe at least one year
of pre-test labor market outcomes.
2. Colombian Tertiary Education Database (SPADIES) for college graduating cohorts 2007-2009. This dataset contains individual-level information on key baseline covariates such as secondary graduation exam
scores, demographics, freshman and graduation year, whether the individual received financial aid during college, and the university and
program from which each individual graduated, which allows to construct measures of college quality based on mean entry scores of graduates. Our main sample consist of all graduates from all knowledge
areas from 2007 to 2009 (313,066 graduates). In our main analytic
sample, we restric to those who took the screening test in 2009 (31,699
applicants).

9

3. Public sector teacher payroll data, 2008-2012. Using these data we
can identify which graduates hold permanent positions as public sector
teachers, the region in which they work and their public teacher pay
schedule.
4. National Social Security earnings records for all college’s graduates
from 2008 to 2012. Includes data on all formal sector employees in the
country, including monthly wages, employment intensity (days worked
in the formal sector per year) and occupational codes. Importantly,
the social security earnings records do not cover public sector teachers
(or military officers) since these sectors have separate pension regimes.
Therefore, to the extent that public sector teachers appear in the national social security records it implies that they hold another formal
sector job outside public teaching. This is something we investigate in
detail in our empirical analyses. Because our teacher payroll and social
security data span until 2012, we can observe labor market outcomes
for up to three years after an individual took the 2009 teacher-screening
test.
Table 1 shows mean comparisons of college graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 test and of those who did not. Note that
in Colombia, any college graduate can take the teacher entry exam, not just
education majors. Moreover, not all education graduates choose to take the
public teacher screening test and among education graduates in graduating
cohorts 2007-2009 about 60 percent take the screening test. In our empirical analyses we take advantage of this fact to investigate differences in the
10

labor market returns for for education and non-education majors who wish
to become public teachers.
[Table 1 about here.]
Consistent with the “discouragement” hypothesis of a costly screening
test (e.g. Angrist and Guryan 2007) non-test takers are potentially more
effective teachers to the extent that they are more likely to come from socioeconomically advantaged households (as measured by income and the probability of having a mother with a college degree), have higher secondary
graduation exam scores—in Colombia these scores are the main college admission criterion,—and graduate from better colleges (as measured by the
proportion who graduate from an accredited higher education institution).
Relative to non-test takers, test takers are also more likely to be female.
Among those who took the test, we have complete covariate and outcome
information for 88 percent (31,699 graduates).4 Teachers can take the test
several times, and exam repetition may raise concerns for test-score manipulation. While we show balance just above and just below the cutoff in
covariates and density, we repeat all estimations without exam repeaters;
our main findings remain unchanged.
Formal labor force attachment is high in the study’s population (Table
2). In the two years of pre-exam labor market data we have (2008 and 2009)
over 45 percent of 2009 test takers–many of whom are still enrolled in tertiary
education– worked in the formal sector, as measured by being matched to
social security records. Over time, the fraction of test-takers with formal
4

Of these, about 31 percent (9,874 graduates) also took the exam in at least one of the
prior administrations (2004, 2005 or 2006).

11

sector attachment diminishes as a higher fraction of eligible test-takers enter
public sector teaching (column 2, Table 2). Combining public teacher payroll
data and social security data allows us to have a broader perspective on
the labor market outcomes of applicants, among whom close to 73 percent
appear in either teacher payroll or social security records (column 4, Table
2). A non-trivial percent of the sample—ranging from 4 to 8 percent in the
years after the test (2010-2012)—appears in both teacher payroll and social
security data–implying that in addition to being public sector teachers, these
applicants also hold another formal sector job (column 5, Table 2). As a
fraction of public sector teachers with permanent positions (column 2, Table
2), those who also hold outside formal jobs range between 21 in 2012, to 69
percent in 2010.
[Table 2 about here.]

3.2

Empirical Strategy

For the 2009 teacher screening test administration, only applicants with
scores at or above 60 points were eligible for a public sector teaching position, as determined ex-ante by Ministry of Education officials. Figure 1 shows
that the rule generates a highly non-linear relationship between score points
and the probability of obtaining a public sector teacher position around the
60-point cutoff, which has been normalized to be zero throughout.
Three aspects of Figure 1 are worth highlighting. First, very few applicants below the test-score obtains public sector teaching positions. This
confirms that the cutoff rule was generally binding. Second, there is a dis-

12

13

Notes: Figure shows the probability of working as a public sector teacher in 2010, 2011, and 2012 as a function of applicant’s score in
the 2009 teacher screening test. Sample of applicants includes 31,699 tertiary education graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009
who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Each dot is the conditional probability of
public sector employment for applicants in a given integer score. Whiskers are 95 percent confidence intervals. Separate fits at each
side of the cutoff are non-parametric (lowess) regressions. Coefficient and standard error in each panel are from a linear regression of
the probability of being a public sector teacher on normalized score, normalized score squared, an interaction of normalized score and
normalized scored squared with above cutoff dummy and control variables in Table 1 with robust standard errors.

Figure 1: First stage: probability of working as a public sector teacher as a function of 2009 teacher screening test
scores

continuity around zero (normalized score) in the probability of obtaining a
public sector position. Third, the discontinuity at the cutoff grows in magnitude over time.
The discontinuity grows over time because public sector teaching positions are filled in a descending priority order beginning with the highest
scores. Many applicants who meet the admission cutoff do not obtain a
public sector position immediately, because in any given year there are more
eligible applicants than vacancies. As more vacancies open up over time,
these applicants are offered positions. This assignment rule also explains
why the slope to the right of zero flattens over time: applicants with lower
scores gain access to new vacancies. The first stage ranges from 23 percent
in 2010 to close to 50 percent in 2012.
The reduced-form regression equation we estimate is:
0

Yi = α0 + α1 Eligibily i + F (Scorei ) + Xi δ + εi

(1)

where Eligibilyi is a dummy variable that takes value of one if individual
i had a score of 60 or more points in the screening test, Scorei represents the
score in the screening test normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff and Xi
a vector of covariates that we include in some specifications as a robustness
check. We impose F() to be a quadratic function of the normalized score.
As Figure 1 shows, not all individuals with a qualifying score necessarily
end up working as public sector teachers. To estimate the effect of obtaining
a public sector position on labor market outcomes, we instrument obtaining
a position with the Eligibility variable, which as Figure 1 shows, produces

14

a very strong first stage. The regression equations that we estimate in this
Fuzzy Regression Discontinuity research design are:
First Stage:
0

P (Ti ) = π0 + τ1 Eligibility i + F (Scorei ) + Xi δ + εi

(2)

Second stage:

0

Yi = π0 + τ1 P (Ti ) + F (Scorei ) + Xi δ + εi

(3)

Without the vector X of controls, τ 1 is identical to the IV-Wald estimator,
equivalent to the ratio of the reduced form in the outcome of interest at the
cutoff to the first stage of the probability of obtaining a public sector position
at the cutoff.

4

Validation of the Regression Discontinuity Research Design

The plausibility of the regression discontinuity approach rests on the assumption of continuity of potential outcomes at the eligibility cutoff. We
show three pieces of evidence in support for this assumption: the density
of screening test scores at the cutoff, covariate continuity at the cutoff and
continuity of pre-test labor market outcomes.
The density of scores around the admission cutoff does not evidence any
discontinuous jump that would indicate manipulation (Figure 2). Therefore,
15

we feel confident that manipulation of applicants’ position relative to the
cutoff is not a concern in our setting, even despite the possibility of test
retake.
Figures 3 and 4 show evidence of covariate continuity around the eligibility cutoff. On Figure 3, we examine the smoothness of gender (female),
proportion of graduates from a public university, proportion of graduates
that received financial aid, and proportion of graduates that graduate on
time. Figure 4 shows graduation year, proportion of graduates from a certified higher education institution and college reputation measured by average
college entry test scores of graduates. As these figures show, there is no
evidence of discontinuities at the eligibility cutoff in the characteristics of
education graduates taking the 2009 teacher-screening test.
The most compelling evidence in support for the validity of the RD design strategy in this settings come from an examination of continuity in pretest labor market outcomes. Figure 5 shows annual earnings, labor supply
(payroll days/year), and daily wage in 2008, the year prior to the test administration. Results show continuity of these different labor market outcomes
before the teacher test, further substantiating the validity of the regression
discontinuity research design.

5

Results: Public Teacher Applicants at the Margin

In this section we report regression discontinuity-based results on total annual earnings, labor supply and daily earnings in the first three years after
16

17

Notes: Sample includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized
to be zero at the 60-point cut-off.

Figure 2: Density of scores in the 2009 teacher-screening test

18

Notes: Sample includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cut-off. Each dot is the conditional probability of public sector employment for a given integer score.
Whiskers are 95 percent confidence intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cutoff are non-parametric (lowess) regressions. Covariates
are measured before the screening test and reported in the Tertiary Education database.

Figure 3: Covariate continuity (2009 teacher screening test)

19

Notes: Figure shows covariates as a function of applicant’s score in the 2009 teacher screening test. Covariates are from SPADIES
data. Sample of applicants includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are
normalized to be zero at the 60-point cut-off. Each dot is the conditional probability of public sector employment for a given integer
score. Whiskers are 95 percent confidence intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cutoff are non-parametric (lowess) regressions.
Covariates are measured before the screening test and reported in the Tertiary Education database.

Figure 4: Covariate continuity (2009 teacher screening test)

20

Notes: Figure shows labor market outcomes (probability of formal employment, annual formal earnings and payroll days per year) in
2008 as a function of applicant’s score in the 2009 teacher-screening test. Sample of applicants includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cut-off. Dots are conditional
means. Whiskers are 95 percent confidence intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cutoff are non-parametric (lowess) regressions.

Figure 5: Placebo test: labor market outcomes 2008 (pre-2009 screening test)

applicants took the 2009 screening test (subsections 5.1, 5.2, and 5.3, respectively).5 We then present evidence on the distribution of outside occupations
(subsection 5.4) and the relevance of the LATE treatment parameter in this
context (subsection 5.5). We conclude the section with a theoretical explanation of findings (subsection 5.6).

5.1

Annual Earnings

We use two annual earnings measures: annual earnings from the main occupation and total annual earnings (from all occupations). In a given year,
annual earnings from the main occupation are annual earnings (including
zeros) from the teacher payroll from test-takers who work as teachers; and
annual earnings from the occupation with the highest number of payroll
days/year for test-takers who do not work as teachers--these earnings would
show up in social security records. Total earnings for all occupations are the
sum of public teacher payroll earnings and social security earnings, including
zeros. Recall that these two data sources measure earnings from mutually
exclusive jobs.
Figure 6 shows total annual earnings around the screening test eligibility
cutoff. The blue, lighter labels refer to earnings from the main occupation
and the black, darker labels refer to earnings from all occupations. Dots are
conditional means with corresponding 95 percent confidence intervals. The
fit is a non-parametric (lowess) fitted separately to each side of the cutoff.
Earnings are an increasing function of scores on the teacher screening test.
Analogous fuzzy RD results are shown in Table 3.
5

Monetary figures are in 2013 US dollars throughout.

21

22

Notes: Figure shows total annual earnings (in 2013 US dollars) as a function of applicant’s score in the 2009 teacher-screening test.
Black labels are total annual earnings from all occupations, including teacher payroll and other formal occupations. Blue labels are
annual earnings from the main occupation, which is public sector teaching for those in the public teacher payroll and the occupation
with the greatest number of payroll days per year for those who are not in the teacher payroll, including zeros. Sample of applicants
includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to be zero at
the 60-point cut-off. Each dot is the conditional mean of total earnings for a given integer score. Whiskers are 95 percent confidence
intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cut-off are non-parametric (lowess) regressions.

Figure 6: Annual earnings in the first three years after the 2009 screening test (USD ’000)

The first result we highlight from Figure 6 is the jump at the cutoff in
annual earnings for all test takers. Recall that because in Colombia any
college graduate can take the teacher screening exam, the full sample includes education graduates and graduates of other majors. Scaling up these
differences at the cutoff by the corresponding probability of being a public
sector teacher implies an annual earnings premium of $2,400 relative to those
below the cutoff in 2010 and $3,900 more in 2012 (see Table 3). Relative to
the control group mean, test-takers above the cutoff earn 48 percent more
in 2010 and 65 percent more in 2012, after three years of potential teacher
tenure.
The second key result from Figure 6 is that the annual earnings jump at
the cutoff is larger when we look at earnings from all occupations (see darker
black line vs. lighter blue line). Adjusting for the probability of becoming
a public school teacher, the annual earnings premium in all three years is
about 65 percent over control group earnings. This total earnings advantage
is initially driven by the outside option or second job. In the first year as
public sector teachers, 38 percent of the total annual earnings premium (from
all occupations) is the result of earnings from outside jobs. In the second
year this decreases to about 10 percent, and by the third year almost the
whole premium is driven only by the main teaching job (see Table 3).
[Table 3 about here.]
The third key result is shown in Table 3, where the analyses are disaggregated by education and non-education college graduates. Table 3 shows that
education and non-education majors have slightly different premia, although
23

these differences are not statistically significant (Column 7, Table 3). The
impact of being a public sector teacher is positive for education graduates,
whose initial premium is 38 percent over the control group and rises to 78
percent after three years. Non-education graduates who become teachers
earn 65 percent more than the non-education majors control group in the
first year from teaching, and 67 percent by the third year (2012).
The earnings premium from all occupations in the first year for education
graduates is 53 percent, and for non-education majors it is 88 percent. By
the third year, however, the all-occupations premium is almost equivalent
for these two groups at around 62 percent. In other words, after a couple
of years as teachers, both education and non-education majors derive little
earnings advantage from their second job. Most of their earnings advantage
relative to the control group stems from their teaching position.

5.2

Labor supply

Labor supply is the number of payroll days per year in formal employment.
Labor supply is an increasing function of scores on the teacher screening test
(Figure 7). The corresponding regression results are on Table 4. Relative
to graduates just below the eligibility cutoff, individuals who are just above
the screening test cutoff work more payroll days per year, both in the main
occupation (lighter line, blue) and in all occupations combined (darker line,
black). The difference at the cutoff is larger when we account for all occupations, suggesting that increased labor supply of marginal test-takers is the
result of more workdays per year in the main occupation as well as additional

24

work effort in other occupations.6
When instrumenting being a public sector teacher with Eligible, we find
that in the first year after taking the teacher screening test, public sector
teachers work 78.5 additional days the first year in their main occupation
over the control group, and 135 days in all occupations over the control group
in 2012 (Table 4, Column 2). In the first year after taking the test (2010),
additional days in other jobs accounts for 42 percent of the premium from
all occupations in the full sample.
[Table 4 about here.]
The number of additional payroll days worked by public sector teachers
over the control group decreases over time to 127 days over the control group
in 2012 in their main occupation, and 132 for all occupations. After three
years of potential teacher tenure almost all of the difference in additional labor supply relative to the control group is coming from the main occupation.
The pattern is similar for education and non-education graduates, with the
exception of the first year after taking the test. In this initial year, education
graduates split their additional labor supply in the first year almost evenly
between their main job and other jobs. Non-education graduates exert most
of their additional labor supply in their other jobs (presumably, non-teaching
jobs).
6

Our data do not have hours worked, only days worked per year in each occupation.
We do not know the number of hours worked each day for each individual.

25

26

Notes: Figure shows total annual earnings (in 2013 US dollars) as a function of applicant’s score in the 2009 teacher-screening test.
Black labels are total annual earnings from all occupations, including teacher payroll and other formal occupations. Blue labels are
annual earnings from the main occupation, which is public sector teaching for those in the public teacher payroll and the occupation
with the greatest number of payroll days per year for those who are not in the teacher payroll, including zeros. Sample of applicants
includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to be zero at
the 60-point cut-off. Each dot is the conditional mean of total earnings for a given integer score. Whiskers are 95 percent confidence
intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cut-off are non-parametric (lowess) regressions.

Figure 7: Labor supply in the first three years after the 2009 screening test

5.3

Daily Earnings

Daily earnings per year are total annual earnings divided by total payroll
days per year. We compute daily earnings for the main occupation and for
all occupations. Just as it was the case with total annual earnings and labor
supply, daily earnings are also an increasing function of scores on the teacher
screening test (see Figure 8).
Relative to all college graduates that take the teacher screening test and
place just below the cutoff, those about the cutoff have greater daily earnings
in the main occupation (blue), as evidenced by the discontinuous jump at
the cutoff (see Figure 8).
When we instrument being a public sector teacher with Eligible, we find
that in the first year after taking the test, public-school-teachers earn a daily
earnings premium of $1.8 per day in their main occupation (teaching). This
daily premium is not statistically significant (see Table 5, Column 2). The
daily earnings in the main occupation increases with potential experience to
$6.1 per day in 2011, and $7.0 per day in 2012. Results are similar—even
though point estimates are slightly smaller—when we estimate the daily
earnings premium from all occupations (Table 5, Column 2, bottom panel).
There are small differences in the daily earnings premium for education
and non-education majors, although these differences are not statistically
significant (Table 5, Column 7). In addition, several estimates of the daily
earnings premium are not statistically significant for non-education graduates (Table 5, Column 6).
[Table 5 about here.]
27

28

Notes: Figure shows average daily earnings in the year as a function of applicant’s score in the 2009 teacher-screening test. Daily earnings for all occupations (black) are total annual earnings divided by total days worked from any source, including zeros. Daily earnings
for main occupation (blue) are total earnings from main occupation divided by total payroll days in the main occupation. Sample of
applicants includes 31,699 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Scores are normalized to
be zero at the 60-point cut-off. Each dot is the conditional mean of number of days worked for a given integer score. Whiskers are 95
percent confidence intervals. Separate fits at each side of the cut-off are non-parametric (lowess) regressions.

Figure 8: Daily wages in the first three years after the 2009 screening test (USD)

The daily earnings results suggest that the total annual earnings premium for public sector teachers in the main occupation (teaching) is—at the
margin—a combination of a labor supply and a wage effect. The daily earnings premium from all occupations for public sector teachers at the margin
is, however, mainly a labor supply effect.

5.4

Outside Occupations

The social security database contains 4-digit ISIC occupation codes.

7

These

codes are available for 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2013. In these years, however,
there are changes to the ISIC revision (Rev 3 or Rev 4) codes reported in
the data. For education-related occupations, the codes are mostly consistent across revisions, but not entirely.8 Due to this inconsistency, we code
occupations as being education related in two ways. First, we only code as
education-related occupations for which the occupation classification is unambiguously related to education in both revisions. This method captures
the majority of education related occupations. This first approach provides
a lower bound estimate of the probability of working in a private, education7

ISIC stands for International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic.
Education codes in CIIU Rev. 3 are numbers: 8011 (preschool), 8012 (primary),
8021 (middle school), 8022 (high school), 8030 (higher education) and 8090 (other types
of education). Of this only 8030 is used in Rev. 4 for a different activity (detectives
and private investigators). Education codes in CIIU Rev. 4 are 8511 (early childhood),
8512 (preschool), 8513 (primary), 8521 (middle school), 8522 (academic high school), 8523
(technical high school and job training), 8530 (institutions that combine different levels
of education), 8541 to 8544 (technical and professional), 8551 to 8553, 8559 (other types
of education), 8560 (other activities related to education). Among these three codes are
used in CIIU Rev. 4 for different activities: 8511 (health services institutions), 8512
(medical practice activities), 8513 (dentistry activities). When assuming that all codes
that refer to education in Rev. 3 or 4 correctly identify a worker of the education sector
we will assume that codes 8030, 8511, 8512 and 8513 effectively identify workers from the
education sector. In the second case we will assume that these four codes identify workers
in other sectors.
8

29

related job.9
The second approach assumes that occupations in codes that in one revision are education-related and in the other revision are not, are all educationrelated. This approach produces an upper bound of the proportion of workers
in education related occupations. The bounds are quite tight. In Figure 9 we
show outside occupation distributions based on the lower bound codification.
The occupational distributions for test screening test takers below the
cutoff and for those above the cutoff who do not work as public sector teachers are similar, in 2010 (one year after the test, Figure 9). As can be seen
in Figure 9, about 8 and 5 percent, respectively, of test takers below the
cutoff or above the cutoff but not working as a public sector teacher work
in an education related occupation outside of their main job. The two important occupational categories in terms of holding a second job after the
test application for these two groups of applicants are real estate, business,
and finance, and other services. Among public sector teachers, only about 3
percent work in a formal education related outside occupation.10 The majority of public sector teachers with a second occupation work in real estate,
business, and finance, and other services.11
To the extent that the skills required in those outside occupations differ
from those skills mostly needed and honed through teaching, it seems plausible that there may be little skill complementarity between public sector
teaching and outside jobs. There is however, a scheduling complementarity
9

Recall that the social security database does not cover public sector teaching.
This excludes private student tutoring when this activity takes place under an informal
contract between teachers and parents.
11
Results are similar for 2012 and shown in the Appendix.
10

30

31

Notes: Figure shows the occupational distribution of outside jobs in 2010 for various groups of 2009 teacher screening test-takers. Occupational codes are aggregated to one digit, with the exception of education related codes.

Figure 9: Distribution of outside occupations in 2010

in public sector teaching. Schools in Colombia, as in much of the developing
world, operate in two-shifts: a morning and an afternoon shift.
Each shift is about 4 hours long, and constitutes a half-day school day
relative to the length of the school day in the United States. These double
shifts facilitate lumpy time allocations of public school teachers to outside
occupations.

5.5

LATE and the Distribution of Earnings for All College
Graduates

Most of the discussion about raising the quality of public sector teachers
centers on how to attract top college graduates into the teaching profession
(e.g. Garcia et al 2014; Bruns and Luque 2014). It could be argued that the
earnings premia and labor supply effects documented in this paper are only
local to the teacher screening test cutoff, in other words, for the potentially
least desirable eligible candidate. Two pieces of evidence suggest that—at
least in the Colombian context—this LATE causal parameter is relevant for
the larger population of teacher candidates. First, it is worth considering
that over one third of public sector teachers in Colombia are not college
graduates. Thus, even the most marginal eligible applicant on the teacher
test will have a college degree, something which has been found to predict
higher student test scores in developing countries, particularly in secondary
schools and in rural areas (Glewwe et al., 2011; Santibañez, 2006).
Second, even compared to college graduates from all majors, those at
the cutoff do not look disproportionally negatively selected in the overall
earnings distribution (Figure 10). Two years after the screening test, for
32

33

Notes: Figure shows the (log) distribution of total annual earnings in 2012 of all college graduates 2007-2009, and different relevant
centiles, including those at the 60 point cut-off for eligibility for a public position, the 95th percentile of the 2009 teacher screening
test score distribution, median for education graduates who do not take the screening test, medians for health science, social science
and engineer graduates and the 95th percentile of college entry exam scores.

Figure 10: LATE and the earnings distributions of all college graduates in 2012

example, education college graduates who take the teacher screening test
and score at the eligibility cutoff rank at about the 45th percentile in the
earnings distribution of all graduates. Education college graduates who score
at the 95th percentile in the screening test ("top test taker") have annual
earnings above those at the cutoff in 2012. Median graduates from health
sciences, social sciences, engineering, those education graduates who do not
take the screening test, as well as the top college applicant are well above
the cut test taker. In sum, these figures suggest that, even though public
teaching in Colombia is not attracting the top college graduates, education
graduates who score at the margin of the screening cut off earn near the
middle of the earnings distributions for all college graduates.

5.6

Theoretical Explanation of Findings

Our analyses thus far suggest that public sector teachers earn a significant
labor market earnings premium over applicants at the margin who did not
obtain a public teaching position. Initially, a significant portion of this premium is the result of additional labor supplied in an outside job, many of
which are non-teaching jobs. Teachers who have more outside options (i.e.
graduates from non-education majors) tend to hold these outside jobs in
higher proportion than teachers from education majors.
Conceptually, we can explain these findings in a simple labor supply and
demand model in which there are two types of jobs that differ along three
dimensions. In the teaching job, workers have stability but face restrictions
on the number of hours worked and have a pay schedule that is determined by
a central planner with no regional variation. In the non-teaching job, there is
34

no stability but workers can work as many hours as they wish to and workers
are paid marginal product of labor, determined by local market clearing
conditions. Workers differ in their intrinsic motivation to hold an additional
job, which may stem from differences in reservation wages (e.g. Shishko and
Rostker, 1976) or tastes (e.g. Conway and Kimmel, 1998; Dickey, Watson
and Zangelidis, 2011). The existence of local labor markets and moving costs
create regional variation in the equilibrium wage gap between teaching and
non-teaching jobs (e.g. rural vs. urban). Differences in reservation wages
(e.g. education graduates vs. graduates from other majors) or tastes help
explain why within regions we see some public teachers holding outside jobs
and others not.

6

Earnings Premium for Infra-marginal High-Scoring
Applicants

Most of the discussion about teacher pay concerns ways to attract top talent
into the teaching profession. One potential shortcoming of our RD framework is that we identify impacts that are local to the teacher screening test
cutoff. Even though prospective novice teachers who take the screening test
have earnings that are typical of all college graduates nationwide (Figure
10), it is unclear whether we can extrapolate labor market premia for novice
public teachers at the margin to inframarginal top teachers.
In this section, we apply the methods of Angrist and Rokannen (2015)
to estimate labor market premia for inframarginal teachers. The approach
exploits our availability of a large set of baseline predictors other than the
35

teacher screening test score running variable. Identification away from the
cutoff requires an additional conditional independence assumption (CIA),
namely, that the teacher screening test score is ignorable conditional on these
additional predictors. Regressions of outcomes on the screening test score
and the additional predictors on either side of the cutoff provide a simple
test for the CIA. Table 6 shows results of these conditional independence
tests.
[Table 6 about here.]
As the top panel of Table 6 shows, conditioning on the test score effectively eliminates the relationship between the running variable and potential
labor market earnings, from the main and all occupations. The coefficients
are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. Panel B of Table 6
shows that, among eligible applicants (i.e. those above the scoring threshold), conditioning also eliminates the relationship between the running variable and the probability of being a public sector teacher for 2011 and 2012,
that is two and three years after taking the teacher screening test.
We use the conditional independence results from Table 6 to estimate
labor market premia for inframarginal public sector teachers who obtained
a high score in the screening test. We use a propensity score stratification
approach based on a propensity score (logit) model that includes as predictors all variables in the conditional independence test regression models (see
notes to Table 6 for details).
The distributions of estimated propensity scores for eligible and ineligible public teacher applicants exhibit substantial overlap across the entire
36

support (Figure 11). This guarantees that we can construct valid earnings
counterfactuals for eligible applicants over the entire support of the predicted
probability of being an eligible public sector teacher.
We estimate and interpret the causal impacts on earnings of being a
public sector teachers in an instrumental variable framework, similar to the
one employed earlier in the paper. In particular, the first stage is a linear
regression of the probability of being a public sector teacher as a function of
being eligible, controlling for propensity score strata fixed effects (10 strata,
9 fixed effects plus an omitted category). In the second stage we regress
labor market earnings on the predicted probability of being a public sector
teacher, also controlling for propensity score strata fixed effects.
Table 7 shows results of this instrumental variables estimation approach.
For comparison, columns (1), (3) and (5) of Table 7 reproduce local effects
on earnings on earnings of being a public sector teacher in the first three
years after the screening test. These estimates correspond to estimates we
presented earlier in Table 3. Columns (2), (4) and (6) show impacts on earnings for inframarginal public sector teachers based on the CIA instrumental
variables approach. In both the main occupation and for all occupations,
labor market premia for inframarginal public sector teachers are statistically
significant and larger than the premia for marginal applicants at the cutoff.
When looking at all occupations, teachers away from the cutoff earn 5.04
more in thousands of 2013 US$, than teachers in the control group in 2010.
Teachers at the cutoff earn 3.80 more than those in the control group. The
difference this initial year after taking the test is 1.24, or about 32 percent
more for teachers away from the cutoff, than teachers at the cutoff. This
37

38

Notes: Figure shows the occupational distribution of outside jobs in 2012 for various groups of 2009 teacher screening test-takers. Occupational codes are aggregated to one digit, with the exception of education related codes.

Figure 11: Histogram of estimated propensity score for beaing a public sector teacher in the window [-10,10] for
2009 screening test takers

difference decreases to 5 percent in the third year.
[Table 7 about here.]
These results suggest that—relative to their labor market outside options—being a public sector teacher in Colombia is as attractive, if not more,
for inframarginal high-scoring applicants as it is for applicants who obtain
marginal scores on the teacher screening test. On the whole, results suggest
that, at least in the Colombian context, rather than a penalty, novice public sector teachers across all ability levels earn a substantial labor market
premium early in their careers.

7

Conclusions

In an effort to improve teaching screening, in 2002 Colombia underwent a
major education reform changing the way teachers were selected for public
school teaching positions. The central piece of the reform was a national,
centralized teacher-screening exam. At the heart of these policy efforts is
a determination to make the teaching profession more attractive to highly
qualified and motivated individuals.
We take advantage of the fact that the screening exam creates exogenous
variation on the probability of obtaining a permanent public sector teaching
position to examine earnings and labor supply differentials or those graduates that work as public sector teachers against those that work in alternative
occupations. In addition, we use a unique dataset that merges four administrative national data sources to observe teacher candidates’ labor market
outcomes in their teaching job as well as other occupations.
39

Applicants who marginally pass the teacher screening test have earnings during the first three years of tenure that substantially greater than
earnings of applicants below the test passing cutoff. Part of the initial year
earnings premium stems from the fact that a significant portion of public
sector teachers hold a second non-teaching job in the formal sector. For
less that one-third of teachers this outside job is education-related. By the
third year of teaching, the earnings advantage coming from the second job
wanes, and almost the entirety of the premium is driven only by the main
(teaching) occupation. There are slight differences in the point estimates of
these premia for education and non-education majors, although none reach
statistical significance at conventional levels.
Relative to applicants below the cutoff, public teachers work harder, both
in their teaching job as well as in their second job, as measured by payroll
days/year in the first three years of potential teacher tenure.
The total annual earnings premium in the main occupation in the first
three years of potential tenure for public sector teachers in the main occupation is—at the margin—a combination of a labor supply and a wage effect.
The total earnings premium from all occupations for public sector teachers
at the margin is, however, a labor supply effect.
Estimates of the earnings premium for high-scoring infra-marginal applicants suggest that being a public sector teacher in Colombia is as attractive,
if not more, for inframarginal high-scoring applicants as it is for applicants
who obtain marginal scores on the teacher screening test. On the whole,
our evidence suggests that, at least in the Colombian context, rather than
a penalty, novice public sector teachers across all ability levels earn a sub40

stantial labor market premium early in their careers. Our results, therefore,
may call into question initiatives that seek to increase teacher compensation
under the presumption that novice public teachers are underpaid relative to
similarly qualified professionals in other occupations.

41

References
Angrist, Joshua D. and Jonathan Guryan, “Does teacher testing raise
teacher quality? Evidence from state certification requirements,” Economics of Education Review, 2008, 27 (5), 483–503.
and Miikka Rokkanen, “Wanna Get Away? Regression Discontinuity
Estimation of Exam School Effects Away From the Cutoff,” Journal of the
American Statistical Association, 2015, 110 (512), 1331–1344.
Auguste, Byron, Paul Kihn, and Matt Miller, “Closing the talent gap:
Attracting and retaining top-third graduates to careers in teaching,” 2010,
p. 46 p.
Bau, Natalie and Jishnu Das, “The Misallocation of Pay and Productivity in the Public Sector: Evidence from the Labor Market for Teachers,”
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, 2017, (8050).
Britton, Jack and Carol Propper, “Teacher pay and school productivity:
Exploiting wage regulation,” Journal of Public Economics, 2016, 133, 75–
89.
Bruns, Barbara and Javier Luque, Great Teachers: How to Raise Student Learning in Latin America and the Caribbean, Washington: Ther
World Bank Group, 2015.
Clotfelter, Charles T., Helen F. Ladd, and Jacob L. Vigdor, “Teacher
Credentials and Student Achievement in High School: A Cross-Subject

42

Analysis with Student Fixed Effects,” Journal of Human Resources, 2010,
45 (3), 655–681.
Dal Bo, Ernesto, Frederico Finan, and Martin Rossi, “Strengthening
State Capabilities : The Role Of Financial Incentives In The Call To
Public Service,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, pp. 1169–1218.
de Ree, Joppe, Karthik Muralidharan, Menno Pradhan, and
Halsey Rogers, “Double for Nothing? Experimental Evidence on the
Impact of an Unconditional Teacher Salary Increase on Student Performance in Indonesia,” NBER Working Paper Series, 2015, p. 66.
Estrada, Ricardo, “Rules Rather Than Discretion: Yeacher Hiring and
Rent,” 2013, pp. 1–30.
Garcia, Sandra, Dario Maldonado, Guillermo E Perry, Catherine
Rodriguez, and Juan Saavedra, Tras la excelencia docente, Fundación
Compartir, 2014.
Glewwe, Paul W., Eric A Hanushek, Sarah D Humpage, and Renato Ravina, “School resources and educational outcomes in developing
countries: A review of the literature from 1990 to 2010,” 2011.
Holmstrom, B., “Managerial Incentive Problems: A Dynamic Perspective,” The Review of Economic Studies, 1999, 66 (1), 169–182.
and P. Milgrom, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts, Asset Ownership, and Job Design,” Journal of Law, Economics,
and Organization, 1991, 7 (special), 24–52.
43

Kane, Thomas J and Douglas O Staiger, “Estimating Teacher Impacts
on Student Achievement: An Experimental Evaluation,” National Bureau
of Economic Research, 2008, (14607), 51.
Liang, Xiaoyan, “Teacher Pay in 12 Latin American Countries: How Does
Teacher Pay Compare to Other Professions, What Determines Teacher
Pay, and Who Are the Teachers?,” LCSHD Paper Series, 2000, 49 (21493),
59–64.
Mizala, Alejandra and Hugo Ñopo, “Measuring the relative pay of
school teachers in Latin America 1997-2007,” International Journal of Educational Development, 2016, 47, 20–32.
Rockoff, Jonah E., “The impact of individual teachers on student achievement: Evidence from panel data,” American Economic Review, 2004, 94
(2), 247–252.
Santibañez, Lucrecia, “Why we should care if teachers get A’s: Teacher
test scores and student achievement in Mexico,” Economics of Education
Review, 2006, 25 (5), 510–520.
Wang, Aubrey, Ashaki Coleman, Richard Coley, and Richard
Phelps, “Preparing Teachers Around the World,” Educational Testing
Service, 2003, pp. 1–50.

44

45

Notes: Table shows mean characteristics (and standard deviation in parentheses) of graduates 2007-2009 who did not take the 2009
teacher screening test and of those who took the test, whether once or more than once. The sample is 313,066 university graduates
(31,699 test takers) 2007-2009. Graduate characteristics shown in the table come from the SPADIES dataset. Public University
and certified college are characteristics taken from a Ministry’s directory. Graduation on time is a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 if the graduate spent 10 semesters or less to get the degree. F-test is for difference across the three groups.

Table 1: Descriptive statistics and “discouragement” effect of the test
Took teacher test
Ftest
Never
took teacher test
once
times > once (P value)
0.56
0.61
0.71
Female
433.03
(0.49)
(0.46)
(0.50)
( 0.00)
Household income above median
0.65
0.47
0.43
1805.67
(0.50)
(0.50)
( 0.00)
(0.48)
Score in secondary graduation test
72.98
67.87
60.31
1121.56
(25.14)
(27.10)
( 0.00)
(24.47)
Graduated from a public college
0.39
0.68
0.66
5417.61
(0.49)
(0.46)
(0.48)
( 0.00)
Mother has college degree
0.24
0.14
0.11
858.66
(0.43)
(0.34)
(0.32)
( 0.00)
Received financial aid in college
0.13
0.15
0.13
29.82
(0.34)
(0.35)
(0.33)
( 0.00)
Graduated from college on time
0.17
0.16
0.38
1078.42
(0.38)
(0.37)
(0.49)
( 0.00)
Graduated from a certified college
0.21
0.12
0.09
840.72
(0.41)
(0.33)
(0.29)
( 0.00)
College Reputation
69.57
68.74
63.61
894.54
(11.41)
(11.06)
(12.16)
( 0.00)
Year of Graduation
2008.10
2008.07
2007.98
87.92
(0.82)
(0.80)
(0.82)
( 0.00)

46

Notes: Sample of applicants includes 31,631 graduates from graduating cohorts 2007-2009 who took the 2009 screening test. Rows
do not sum up to 100 percent.

Table 2: Match rates of education graduates that presented the 2009 teacher-screening exam to teacher payroll
and social security records by year
Matched to Social
Matched to Public
Matched to Public
Matched to Social
Matched to Social
Year Security Records Teacher Payroll Data Teacher Payroll Data Security or Teacher Security and Teacher
(Permanent)
(Temporary)
Payroll Data
Payroll Data
2008
45.2
2.1
4.9
50.8
1.3
2009
56.7
2.6
7.9
64.8
2.4
2010
64.3
11.4
7.2
75.1
7.9
2011
54.6
15.6
7.5
72.9
4.8
2012
50.6
19.5
6.6
72.6
4.0

47

Notes: Table shows fuzzy RD estimates for being a public sector teacher on total annual earnings (in USD 2013 thousands). Main
occupation is being a public sector teacher for those who are permanent public sector teacher or is the occupation with the greatest
number of payroll days for all others. All occupations includes all income sources reported. Sample contains 31,699 graduates from
Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive) divided in two groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cut-off. Being a public sector teacher is instrumented with a dummy for being
above the cutoff point. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the table are normalized score, normalized score squared, an
interaction of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above cut-off dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution, whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated on time, whether graduated from certified institution,
college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Control mean is the mean of the outcome in (-5,5) normalized screening
test score. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 3: Impact of being a novice public sector teacher on total annual earnings (US$ ’000), main and all occupations
Education Graduates
Graduates Other Majors
Pvalue
Full Sample
Year Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Edu-Other
Teacher
Teacher
Teacher
Mean
Mean
Mean
difference
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
(7)
Annual earnings in main occupation
2.4∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
3.9∗
2010
5
5
6
0.37
( 0.7)
( 0.6)
(2.20)
( 5)
( 5)
( 6)
3.5∗∗∗
3.2∗∗∗
4.2∗∗∗
2011
6
5
6
0.46
( 0.4)
( 0.4)
(1.30)
( 6)
( 5)
( 7)
3.9∗∗∗
3.9∗∗∗
4.0∗∗∗
2012
6
5
6
0.87
( 6)
( 0.3)
( 5)
( 0.3)
( 7)
(0.97)
Annual earnings in all occupations
2010
6
3.9∗∗∗
6
3.2∗∗∗
6
5.3∗∗
0.39
( 6)
( 0.8)
( 5)
( 0.7)
( 7)
(2.39)
3.9∗∗∗
3.5∗∗∗
4.6∗∗∗
2011
6
6
6
0.40
( 6)
( 0.5)
( 5)
( 0.4)
( 7)
(1.39)
2012
6
4.0∗∗∗
6
3.8∗∗∗
7
4.2∗∗∗
0.68
( 6)
( 0.4)
( 5)
( 0.3)
( 8)
(1.03)

48

Notes: Table shows fuzzy RD estimates for being a public sector teacher on total annual labor supply (payroll days). Main occupation is being a public sector teacher for those who are permanent public sector teacher or is the occupation with the greatest
number of payroll days for all others. All occupations includes all income sources reported. Sample contains 31,699 graduates from
Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive) divided in two groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Being a public sector teacher is instrumented with a dummy for being
above the cutoff point. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the table are normalized score, normalized score squared, an
interaction of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above cutoff dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution, whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated on time, whether graduated from certified institution,
college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Control mean is the mean of the outcome in (-5,5) normalized screening
test score. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 4: Impact of being a novice public sector teacher on labor supply (payroll days), main and all occupations
Education Graduates
Graduates Other Majors
Pvalue
Full Sample
Year Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Edu-Other
Teacher
Teacher
Teacher
Mean
Mean
Mean
difference
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
(7)
Days worked in main occupation
78.5∗∗∗
53.4∗∗∗
135.0∗∗∗
2010
201
207
192
0.12
(19.1)
(20.2)
(49.80)
( 153)
( 152)
( 154)
113.0∗∗∗
104.0∗∗∗
132.0∗∗∗
2011
199
205
191
0.34
(11.3)
(12.1)
(27.60)
( 153)
( 153)
( 153)
127.0∗∗∗
122.0∗∗∗
137.0∗∗∗
2012
199
205
191
0.46
( 154)
( 7.7)
( 153)
( 8.1)
( 155)
(18.80)
Days worked in all occupations
2010
221
135.0∗∗∗
224
110.0∗∗∗
215
180.0∗∗∗
0.24
( 168)
(21.9)
( 167)
(23.4)
( 170)
(56.40)
127.0∗∗∗
116.0∗∗∗
151.0∗∗∗
2011
217
220
212
0.29
( 167)
(12.7)
( 166)
(13.6)
( 169)
(31.20)
2012
217
132.0∗∗∗
220
126.0∗∗∗
212
141.0∗∗∗
0.50
( 169)
( 8.7)
( 167)
( 9.2)
( 172)
(21.30)

49

Notes: Table shows fuzzy RD estimates for being a public sector teacher on total annual daily earnings. Main occupation is being
a public sector teacher for those who are permanent public sector teacher or is the occupation with the greatest number of payroll
days for all others. All occupations includes all income sources reported. Sample contains 31,699 graduates from Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive) divided in two groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Scores
are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Being a public sector teacher is instrumented with a dummy for being above the
cutoff point. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the table are normalized score, normalized score squared, an interaction
of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above cutoff dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution,
whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated on time, whether graduated from certified institution, college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Control mean is the mean of the outcome in (-5,5) normalized screening test score.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 5: Impact of being a novice public sector teacher on total daily wages (US$), main and all occupations
Education Graduates
Graduates Other Majors
Pvalue
Full Sample
Year Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Control Public Sector Edu-Other
Teacher
Teacher
Teacher
Mean
Mean
Mean
difference
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
(7)
Daily earnings in main occupation
1.8
2.0
1.7
2010
19
18
20
0.98
( 2.1)
( 1.8)
(6.57)
( 16)
( 13)
( 19)
6.1∗∗∗
5.4∗∗∗
7.5∗
2011
19
18
20
0.59
( 1.4)
( 1.2)
(3.98)
( 17)
( 14)
( 21)
7.0∗∗∗
6.7∗∗∗
7.1∗∗
2012
20
18
22
0.87
( 18)
( 1.0)
( 15)
( 0.8)
( 23)
(3.01)
Daily earnings in all occupations
2010
19
1.6
18
1.4
20
2.4
0.86
( 16)
( 2.1)
( 13)
( 1.8)
( 19)
(6.38)
5.4∗∗∗
4.9∗∗∗
6.0
2011
19
18
20
0.76
( 17)
( 1.3)
( 14)
( 1.1)
( 20)
(3.90)
2012
20
6.7∗∗∗
18
6.4∗∗∗
22
7.0∗∗
0.83
( 18)
( 1.0)
( 14)
( 0.8)
( 22)
(2.95)

50

Notes: The Table reports regression based test of the conditional independance assumption described in the text. Each entry shows
the coefficient on the 2009 screening test score in logit models of the outcome that control for annual earnings and the probabillity
of being a public teacher in 2008 and 2009 interacted with the Secondary graduation test’s score and its square; and fixed effects
with dummys for haven more than one job, mother graduated from Higher Education, teacher’s year of graduation from Higher
Education, Education studies, on time graduation from Higher Education, gender, financial or academic aid and urban area. Estimates only use observations to the left or the right of the cut-off as indicated by column heading. Clustered standard errors by
college in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Table 6: Conditional independence test of teacher screening test score in 2009
Elegible
Non-Elegible
2011
2012
2011
2012
2010
2010
(2)
(3)
(5)
(6)
(1)
(4)
A. Outcome Variables
Annual Earnings Main Occupation ‡
-0.00
0.02
-0.01
-0.02
-0.01
0.02
( 0.01) ( 0.01) ( 0.02) ( 0.02) ( 0.03) ( 0.02)
0.00
0.02
-0.01
Annual Earnings All Occupation
-0.00
0.04∗
-0.01
( 0.01) ( 0.01) ( 0.02) ( 0.03) ( 0.02) ( 0.03)
B. Treatment Variable
Public Sector Teacher
0.00
0.00∗∗ 0.00∗∗
0.01∗
0.00
-0.00
( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00) ( 0.00)
Obs.
15,615 15,615 15,615 10,592 10,592 10,592

51

2012
RD
CIA
cutoff
away
(5)
(6)
∗∗∗
3.93
4.14∗∗∗
( 0.33) ( 0.26)
3.96∗∗∗ 4.18∗∗∗
( 0.35) ( 0.28)
31,699 26,207

away from the screening test cutoff

Notes: The table reports RD estimates at the cut-off and CIA estimates away from the cut-off for the effects of being a public
sector teacher on total annual earnings in the first three year after the 2009 screening test. Estimates are based on linear regression
models that includes ten propensity score strata fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

Table 7: Fuzzy CIA estimates of being a public sector teacher for applicants
Fuzzy
2010
2011
RD
CIA
RD
CIA
Annual Earnings in... cutoff
away
cutoff
away
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
Main Occupation ‡
2.35
3.34
3.54
3.67∗∗∗
( 0.72) ( 0.46) ( 0.44) ( 0.32)
All Occupation
3.80∗∗∗ 5.04∗∗∗ 3.83∗∗∗ 3.95∗∗∗
( 0.79) ( 0.50) ( 0.48) ( 0.34)
Obs.
31,699 26,207 31,699 26,207

A

Data Appendix
[Table A1 about here.]
[Table A2 about here.]
[Table A3 about here.]
[Table A4 about here.]

52

53

Notes: Figure shows the (log) distribution of total annual earnings in 2010 of all college graduates 2007-2009, and different relevant
centiles, including those at the 60 point cutoff for eligibility for a public position, the 95th percentile of the 2009 teacher screening test
score distribution, median for education graduates who do not take the screening test, medians for health science, social science and
engineer graduates and the 95th percentile of college entry exam scores.

Figure A1: LATE and the earnings distributions of all college graduates in 2010

54

0.022

0.259

0.661

0.006

0.226

0.992

Pvalue
Edu-Other
difference
(7)

Notes: Table shows the results for annual earnings (2013 USD) of a Sharp Model for payroll years of 2010 to 2012 in terms of
Observations, Control Mean, Elegibility for been a public sector teacher for Full Sample, Education Graduates and Other Majors
Graduates and the P value of its difference. Table has two panels: All Occupation accounts all the income registered by graduated,
Main Occupation is be a Teacher for those who are Public Sector Teachers or It is the occupation where each worker receives his
major proportion of income in other case. Sample contains all the graduates from Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive)
divided in two groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the
table are normalized score, normalized score squared, an interaction of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above
cutoff dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution, whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated
on time, whether graduated from certified institution, college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Elegibility Test
Scores are normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Obs.

2012

2011

2010

2012

2011

2010

Year

Table A1: Earnings - Annual Earnings - Sharp Model
Education Graduates Graduates Other Majors
Full Sample
Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s
Cut-Off
Cut-Off
Cut-Off
Mean
Mean
Mean
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
Annual earnings in main occupation
0.4∗∗∗
0.4∗∗∗
0.4∗
5
5
6
(0.13)
(0.15)
(0.24)
( 5)
( 5)
( 6)
1.0∗∗∗
1.1∗∗∗
0.8∗∗∗
6
5
6
(0.13)
(0.14)
(0.25)
( 6)
( 5)
( 7)
6
1.6∗∗∗
5
1.9∗∗∗
6
1.1∗∗∗
(0.14)
(0.15)
(0.27)
( 6)
( 5)
( 7)
Annual earnings in all occupations
6
0.7∗∗∗
6
0.7∗∗∗
6
0.6∗∗
( 6)
(0.15)
( 5)
(0.17)
( 7)
(0.26)
6
1.1∗∗∗
6
1.2∗∗∗
6
0.9∗∗∗
( 6)
(0.14)
( 5)
(0.16)
( 7)
(0.27)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
6
1.6
6
1.9
7
1.1∗∗∗
( 6)
(0.15)
( 5)
(0.16)
( 8)
(0.29)
31631
17726
13905

55

Table A2: Labor Supply - Days Worked - Sharp Model
Education Graduates Graduates Other Majors
Full Sample
Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s
Mean
Cut-Off
Mean
Cut-Off
Mean
Cut-Off
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
Days worked in main occupation
14.0∗∗∗
11.5∗∗
14.4∗∗∗
201
207
192
(3.59)
(4.68)
(5.55)
( 153)
( 152)
( 154)
33.1∗∗∗
36.8∗∗∗
25.2∗∗∗
199
205
191
(3.58)
(4.67)
(5.59)
( 153)
( 153)
( 153)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
53.4
61.6
37.8∗∗∗
199
205
191
( 154)
(3.56)
( 153)
(4.56)
( 155)
(5.62)
Days worked in all occupations
221
224
215
24.1∗∗∗
24.0∗∗∗
19.4∗∗∗
( 168)
(4.23)
( 167)
(5.61)
( 170)
(6.38)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
217
37.1
220
40.9
212
28.8∗∗∗
(4.01)
(5.21)
(6.28)
( 167)
( 166)
( 169)
217
54.9∗∗∗
220
63.1∗∗∗
212
38.9∗∗∗
(3.98)
(5.10)
(6.29)
( 169)
( 167)
( 172)
31631
17726
13905
0.003

0.140

0.587

0.001

0.113

0.691

Pvalue
Edu-Other
difference
(7)

Notes: Table shows the results for days worked of a Sharp Model for payroll years of 2010 to 2012 in terms of Observations, Control
Mean, Elegibility for been a public sector teacher for Full Sample, Education Graduates and Other Majors Graduates and the P
value of its difference. Table has two panels: All Occupation accounts all the income registered by graduated, Main Occupation
is be a Teacher for those who are Public Sector Teachers or It is the occupation where each worker receives his major proportion
of income in other case. Sample contains all the graduates from Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive) divided in two
groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the table are
normalized score, normalized score squared, an interaction of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above cutoff
dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution, whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated on time,
whether graduated from certified institution, college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Elegibility Test Scores are
normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Control mean is estimated to population with a normalized score between -5 and 0.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Obs.

2012

2011

2010

2012

2011

2010

Year

56

Table A3: Earnings - Daily Earnings - Sharp Model
Education Graduates Graduates Other Majors
Full Sample
Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s Control Above Test’s
Mean
Cut-Off
Mean
Cut-Off
Mean
Cut-Off
(2)
(4)
(6)
(1)
(3)
(5)
Daily earnings in main occupation
0.3
0.4
0.1
19
18
20
(0.38)
(0.41)
(0.70)
( 16)
( 13)
( 19)
1.7∗∗∗
1.9∗∗∗
1.4∗
19
18
20
(0.41)
(0.45)
(0.75)
( 17)
( 14)
( 21)
∗∗∗
∗∗∗
2.9
3.4
1.9∗∗
20
18
22
( 18)
(0.43)
( 15)
(0.43)
( 23)
(0.83)
Daily earnings in all occupations
19
18
20
0.2
0.3
0.2
( 16)
(0.37)
( 13)
(0.40)
( 19)
(0.68)
19
1.5∗∗∗
18
1.7∗∗∗
20
1.1
(0.39)
(0.42)
(0.73)
( 17)
( 14)
( 20)
20
2.8∗∗∗
18
3.2∗∗∗
22
1.9∗∗
(0.42)
(0.42)
(0.81)
( 18)
( 14)
( 22)
31631
17726
13905
0.150

0.486

0.964

0.127

0.577

0.762

Pvalue
Edu-Other
difference
(7)

Notes: Table shows the results for daily earnings of a Sharp Model for payroll years of 2010 to 2012 in terms of Observations, Control Mean, Elegibility for been a public sector teacher for Full Sample, Education Graduates and Other Majors Graduates and the
P value of its difference. Table has two panels: All Occupation accounts all the income registered by graduated, Main Occupation
is be a Teacher for those who are Public Sector Teachers or It is the occupation where each worker receives his major proportion
of income in other case. Sample contains all the graduates from Higher Education from 2007 to 2009 (inclusive) divided in two
groups, Graduates from Education and Graduates from Other Majors. Covariates in the regressions not shown in the table are
normalized score, normalized score squared, an interaction of normalized score and normalized scored squared with above cutoff
dummy, female, whether graduated from a public institution, whether received financial aid in college, whether graduated on time,
whether graduated from certified institution, college reputation and year of graduation and a constant. Elegibility Test Scores are
normalized to be zero at the 60-point cutoff. Control mean is estimated to population with a normalized score between -5 and 0.
Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Obs.

2012

2011

2010

2012

2011

2010

Year

57

Notes: The table reports RD estimates at the cut-off and CIA estimates away from the cut-off for the effects of being a public
sector teacher on total annual earnings in the first three year after the 2009 screening test. Estimates are based on linear regression
models that includes ten propensity score strata fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1

Table A4: Fuzzy CIA estimates of being a public sector teacher for applicants away from the screening test cut-off.
Sharp model.
Sharp
2011
2012
2010
CIA
RD
CIA
RD
CIA
RD
Annual Earnings in... cutoff
away
cutoff
away
cutoff
away
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(1)
Main Occupation ‡
0.42∗∗∗ 0.58∗∗∗ 1.03∗∗∗ 0.97∗∗∗ 1.63∗∗∗ 1.42∗∗∗
( 0.13) ( 0.08) ( 0.13) ( 0.09) ( 0.14) ( 0.09)
All Occupation
0.67∗∗∗ 0.87∗∗∗ 1.11∗∗∗ 1.04∗∗∗ 1.64∗∗∗ 1.43∗∗∗
( 0.15) ( 0.09) ( 0.14) ( 0.09) ( 0.15) ( 0.10)
Obs.
31,631 26,207 31,631 26,207 31,631 26,207

