                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            DAILY PRICE LIMITS AND DESTRUCTIVE MARKET BEHAVIOR

                                            Ting Chen
                                           Zhenyu Gao
                                             Jibao He
                                           Wenxi Jiang
                                           Wei Xiong

                                       Working Paper 24014
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24014


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We are grateful to seminar participants at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Columbia University,
the Shenzhen Stock Exchange, Tsinghua University, the University of Hong Kong, and the University
of Maryland for helpful comments and suggestions. We especially thank Zhengjun Zhang and two
anonymous referees for constructive comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ting Chen, Zhenyu Gao, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Daily Price Limits and Destructive Market Behavior
Ting Chen, Zhenyu Gao, Jibao He, Wenxi Jiang, and Wei Xiong
NBER Working Paper No. 24014
November 2017
JEL No. G12,G28

                                          ABSTRACT

We use account-level data from the Shenzhen Stock Exchange to show that daily price limits, a
widely adopted market stabilization mechanism, may lead to unintended, destructive market
behavior: large investors tend to buy on the day when a stock hits the 10% upper price limit and
then sell on the next day; and their net buying on the limit-hitting day predicts stronger long-run
price reversal. We also analyze a sample of special treatment (ST) stocks, which face tighter 5%
daily price limits, and provide a causal validation from comparing market dynamics before and
after they are assigned the ST status.

Ting Chen                                        Wenxi Jiang
Princeton University and                         Chinese University of Hong Kong
The Hong Kong University of Science              Room 1250, 12/F.,
and Technology                                   Cheng Yu Tung Building
colonct@gmail.com                                12 Chak Cheung Street
                                                 Shatin, N.T.
Zhenyu Gao                                       Hong Kong
Chinese University of Hong Kong                  jiangwenxi@gmail.com
Hong Kong
gaozhenyu@baf.cuhk.edu.hk                        Wei Xiong
                                                 Princeton University
Jibao He                                         Department of Economics
Shenzhen Stock Exchange                          Bendheim Center for Finance
Shenzhen, China                                  Princeton, NJ 08450
jbhe@szse.cn                                     and NBER
                                                 wxiong@princeton.edu
      Daily price limit rules are widely used by stock markets across the globe.1 These rules

are particularly popular in emerging markets with a large fraction of inexperienced

investors, as they give a time-out period during large price fluctuations and thus serve as a

market stabilization mechanism. China’s equity market (the second largest in the world by

capitalization) imposes daily price limits of 10% on regular stocks and 5% on special

treatment (ST) stocks. However, there is a growing concern that this rule might induce

destructive trading behavior by some speculators to take advantage of other investors.

      Of particular concern is a popular strategy, which is often discussed in the news media

and also observed in some market enforcement cases, of certain speculators pushing up

stock prices to the upper price limit and then taking profits by selling on the next day. This

upper-price-limit strategy is reminiscent of the classic pump-and-dump strategy of market

manipulation (e.g., De Long et al., 1990), yet with several important differences. First, after

observing a stock hitting the daily upper price limit, it is natural for otherwise uninformed

investors to infer that the stock’s price has not fully incorporated all fundamental

information and thus be willing to offer a higher price on the following day. This inference

does not require any particular behavioral bias such as positive feedback trading and

extrapolation; it requires only the naivety of failing to recognize the speculators’ incentives

to profit by pushing up the prices to the upper price limit. Second, the events of stock prices

hitting the upper daily price limit often attracts the attention of new investors (e.g., Barber

and Odean, 2008; Seasholes and Wu, 2007), which further exacerbates the price increase

after the upper price limit is hit. Third, the publicly observed large price increase during a

trading day also serves as a convenient device for unrelated speculators to coordinate to


1
  According to Deb, Kaley, and Marisetty (2010), out of 58 major countries, 41 countries have applied certain
types of price limit rules in their equity exchanges.


                                                                                                           1
push up the price together. In other words, the speculators do not need to plan a

manipulation scheme as they can simply follow large price increases induced by

fundamental news. The possibility of the daily price limit rule inducing these unintended

effects motivates a systematic study of the impact of the daily price limit rule.

     In this paper, we take advantage of account-level data from the Shenzhen Stock

Exchange to analyze how daily price limit rules affect market dynamics and in particular

whether the daily price limits may induce destructive trading behavior by a group of

speculators against other investors. Specifically, we examine accounts pooled into six

groups—one institution group, which includes all institutions, and five individual investor

groups classified by the average stock balance in the previous year. We are particularly

interested in the group of large investors, who have an average stock balance of over 10

million RMB. This group is particularly interesting because large investors tend to be more

sophisticated and because the speculators involved in the news media coverage of the

upper-price-limit strategy tend to be large investors.

     We divide our study into two parts, one based on the sample of regular stocks and the

other on ST stocks. In the first part, we analyze price dynamics and the trading of different

investor groups subsequent to days when regular stocks hit the daily 10% upper price limit

and when they experience large daily returns less than the 10% limit. We organize our

analysis to test a central hypothesis that large investors push stocks that experience large

price increases during a trading day to close at the upper price limit and then profit from

selling at higher prices on the next day and, furthermore, their destructive trading behavior

causes stock prices to overreact to the initial price shocks.




                                                                                           2
     We find several results supporting this hypothesis. First, after a stock hits the 10%

upper price limit, its price continues to rise on the next day and the price increase eventually

reverses in the long run. Interestingly, the price increase occurs only after hitting the 10%

price limit, mostly at the open price of the next day, but not after having a large daily return

just below 10%. This pattern of continued price increase followed by long-run reversal

indicates price overreactions around the events of hitting the upper price limit. Second,

large investors tend to buy on the days when the upper price limit is hit and then sell on the

next day. This finding suggests that large investors as a group indeed follow the

hypothesized trading strategy. Interestingly, we also find that small and medium investors

tend to trade on the opposite side by selling on the day of hitting the upper price limit and

buying on the next day. Third, the net buying of large investors on the limit-hitting day

predicts stronger long-run price reversal. Overall, these findings paint a clear picture that

large investors as a group pursue a destructive strategy around the upper-price-limit-hitting

days and their trading has significant market impacts.

     To further separate the effect of the daily price limit rule from an alternative

mechanism of the large investors simply front-running feedback traders on days of large

price fluctuations, we also explore a sample of 119 ST stocks, which face tighter 5% daily

price limits. In general, the ST status is given to a publicly listed firm if it reports negative

profits for two consecutive years or a net asset value below the par value. While the ST

status is announced by the exchange only after a firm formally releases its annual financial

report, the market can well anticipate the ST assignment immediately after the firm reports

its eighth consecutive negative quarterly earnings or a low net asset value, which is usually

two or three months ahead of its annual report. During this interim period, the market




                                                                                               3
anticipate that the firm will be eventually labeled as ST but its stock is still trading under

the regular 10% price limits.

     By taking advantage of this period, we find several results induced by the more

restrictive 5% price limits after the ST status is officially assigned: First, after the ST

assignment, the long-run price reversal subsequent to days of hitting the 5% price limit

becomes more pronounced relative to that subsequent to having large daily returns above

5% in the pre-ST period. Second, the trading of large investors displays the pattern of

buying on the day of hitting the upper price limit and selling on the next after the ST

assignment, but not before. Third, after the ST assignment, the net buying of large investors

on the days of hitting the price limit has a stronger predictive power of the subsequent long-

run price reversal. These findings thus specifically demonstrate that the tighter price limits

of ST stocks exacerbate the destructive trading behavior of large investors around days

with returns above 5%, and their trading is associated with price overreactions on these

days. Finally, we also find that after the ST assignment, trading days with large positive

returns above 4% become substantially more frequent, again confirming that by inducing

the destructive behavior of large investors, the tighter price limits might amplify rather than

mitigate extreme price fluctuations.

     Overall, our analysis provides a set of empirical findings to show that the widely

adopted daily price limit rules may induce large investors as a group to pursue a destructive

trading strategy of pushing prices to the upper price limit and then profiting from selling

on the next day. This unintended effect highlights the challenge in designing a trading

system for emerging equity markets, which tend to have a mix of experienced and




                                                                                             4
inexperienced investors. Their different trading behaviors may render a market

stabilization scheme, such as the daily price limits, counterproductive.

     Some critics have pointed out that the price limit rules may impede the price discovery

process, interfere with trading, and induce order imbalance and volatility spillover (e.g.,

Kim and Rhee, 1997; Chan, Kim, and Rhee, 2005). The prior studies have also documented

the so-called "magnet effect"—a curious tendency for stock prices to accelerate toward the

upper price limit and a similar, albeit weaker tendency, toward the lower limit as prices

approach these limits (e.g., Cho et al., 2003; Hsieh et al., 2009). By identifying the

destructive behavior of large investors, our analysis offers a sharp mechanism to

understand these adverse effects. In particular, the active trading of large investors with the

intent to push prices to the upper price limit explains the curious magnet effect.

     Our study is closely related to Seasholes and Wu (2007), who examine the effect of

daily price limits in the Chinese stock market and emphasize that by attracting the attention

of inexperienced new investors, the price-limit hitting events induce some smart traders to

accumulate shares on the limit-hitting days and sell on the next. Our analysis provides

stronger evidence to specifically relate the net buying of a group of large investors, which

are classified by account size rather than any trading information, on the upper-price-limit-

hitting days to the subsequent price reversal. More important, by comparing the price

dynamics and the trading of large investors before and after the assignment of ST stocks,

our analysis is able to isolate the effect of the price limits from effects induced simply by

large daily returns.

     The paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the institutional background

and data, and Section II introduces empirical hypotheses. We then report the empirical




                                                                                             5
results from studying the sample of regular stocks in Section III, and report further evidence

from analyzing the sample of ST stocks in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the

paper. An online appendix also reports results from additional robustness analyses.

                        I.      Institutional Background and Data

     Daily price limit rules have been imposed on the two Chinese stock exchanges, the

Shanghai Stock Exchange and the Shenzhen Stock Exchange (SZSE hereafter), since

December 16, 1996. Within a single trading day, the price of an individual stock can only

increase or decrease by a maximum percentage relative to the closing price on the previous

trading day. This limit is set as 10% for regular stocks and 5% for ST stocks. After a stock

hits the daily price limit, trading is still allowed as long as the transaction prices are within

the upper and lower limits. As a result, it is possible for a stock to hit the upper or lower

price limit during a trading day and then to close the day within the limits.

     Our analysis cover all A-share stocks (shares issued to domestic investors) traded in

the SZSE during the sample period of 2012 to 2015. As of January 31, 2015, the exchange

lists 1,628 firms with a total market capitalization of 2,285 billion U.S. dollars, which ranks

it as the eighth-largest stock exchange in the world.

     We collect daily stock price data from the China Stock Market and Accounting

Research (CSMAR) database. We consider capital distribution, such as dividends and stock

splits, to adjust stock prices and use closing prices of each stock to identify price-limit-

hitting events (as done by the exchange). We calculate returns of all stocks in our sample

on the limit-hitting dates and their subsequent returns over different horizons from

overnight up to 120 days. Other stock-level data include number of shares outstanding,




                                                                                               6
trading volume, and floating capitalization. We also collect firm-level accounting

information such as the book equity, earnings, and ST status.

     Price-limit-hitting events frequently occur in the Chinese stock markets. Table 1

shows that in 2012-2015, there were 21,005 (13,569) cases of regular stocks in the SZSE

closing at the upper (lower) 10% price limits. On average, 2.05% (1.33%) of regular stocks

close at the upper (lower) price limit per trading day. The fraction of ST stocks closing at

the limits is higher due to their lower price limits: 7.9% (5.7%) for the upper (lower) limit.

In addition, this ratio varies substantially over this period. The standard deviation of this

fraction for regular (ST) stocks hitting the upper limit is 14.2% (27.0%).

     We obtain account-level transaction data from the SZSE, which classifies all

individual accounts into five categories every year based on the average stock balance

during the previous year: 1) less than 100 thousand RMB; 2) between 100 thousand and

500 thousand RMB; 3) between 500 thousand and 5 million RMB; 4) between 5 million

and 10 million RMB; and 5) larger than 10 million RMB. We are especially interested in

the behavior of the last group. We also include institution accounts as a separate group in

our study. This group includes mutual funds, insurance companies, security firms, and

pension funds. We track the transactions by each group at the stock level. The key variable

of interest is NetBuy, defined as the net purchase of shares of a stock by a specific group

within a trading day scaled by the number of the stock’s total tradable shares.

     Table 2 reports the contributions of these groups to daily turnover of regular and ST

stocks listed in the SZSE. For regular stocks, the average daily turnover (measured by the

amount of purchases and sales divided by twice the floating capitalization of a stock during

a day) is 3.1%, among which the five investor groups from small to large contribute to




                                                                                            7
7.7%, 23.5%, 38.0%, 7.5%, and 14.0%, respectively, and the institution group 9.4%. The

number of accounts involved in trading a regular stock on a given day across the five

investor groups is 1592, 1516, 767, 52, 44, respectively, and 40 for the institution group.

For ST stocks, the average daily turnover is lower at 2.2%, with a small contribution of the

institution group while the contributions of the five investor groups remain similar.

                                II.     Empirical Hypotheses

     Suppose that a piece of positive news hits a stock on one day and causes its price to

hit the upper price limit. In the absence of other reasons, this event simply implies that the

price impact of the news is larger than 10% and the stock price could have gone even higher

without the price limit. Consequently, the price would continue to rise on the next day.

However, this otherwise natural price pattern gives an incentive for speculators to push up

the price to the upper limit even when the initial news does not necessarily justify a price

increase of 10%. Suppose that the news justifies only an 8% price increase and its exact

effect is not known by the market participants. Some speculators, who may or may not be

informed of the exact news effect, may figure that as long as they can push up the stock

price to close at the 10% price limit, then other uninformed investors would be willing to

buy the stock at an even higher price on the next day and thus provide an exit for the

speculators to sell at a profit. For this strategy to be profitable, it is necessary for the stock

to close at the upper price limit. For this reason, we focus on studying the events of hitting

the upper price limit at the close rather than at any time during the trading day.

     This strategy can be profitable as long as some investors do not fully recognize that

the stock price hitting the upper price limit might be partially caused by the speculators’

destructive behavior rather than fully driven by the fundamental news. The literature has



                                                                                                8
pointed out the wide presence of this sort of naivety by some agents in failing to fully

appreciate the incentives and strategic behavior of other agents.2 This sort of naivety is

different from the positive feedback bias that motivates the pump-and-dump strategy.

      The price limit may also affect the market dynamics through several other channels.

Seasholes and Wu (2007) show that as the price-limit-hitting events are widely covered by

financial news media, they tend to attract the attention of new buyers on subsequent days.

This attention effect further exacerbates the price increase on the next day.

      Different from an outright price manipulation scheme, pursuing this strategy of

pushing up stock prices to close at the upper price limit does not require a plot among a

group of speculators. Instead, a large price movement during a day could already serve as

a publicly observed signal sufficient to coordinate potential speculators to gather forces

and further push up the price. Thus, another unintended effect of the price limit is that it

serves as a coordination device for speculators.3

      The objective of this study is not to identify manipulators, but rather to study the

trading behavior of different investor groups around the upper-price-limit-hitting events.

We classify the investor groups based on ex ante information—the average stock balance

in the previous year. As large investors tend to be more sophisticated and the speculators

involved in the news media coverage of the upper-price-limit strategy tend to be large

investors, we examine the following hypothesis:




2
  For example, Malmendier and Shantikumar (2007) provide evidence to show that investors do not recognize
the incentives of financial analysts to provide overly optimistic stock recommendations due to their incentives
related to selling stocks. Hong, Scheinkman and Xiong (2008) develop a theoretical model to argue that this
behavior can play an important role leading to price bubbles in new technology stocks.
3 Constrained by data availability, we do not aim to separately identify the different channels, such as investor

naivety, the attention effect of limit-hitting events, and the coordination effect of large price increases, for
the daily price limit rule to affect market dynamics. Instead, we design the analysis to study the overall effect.


                                                                                                                9
     Hypothesis 1: Large investors tend to buy on the day when a stock hits the upper

price limit and sell on the next day. Furthermore, while the stock price continues to rise on

the next day after hitting the upper price limit, the price increase eventually reverses over

the longer run, and the long-run price reversal is more pronounced when the net buying by

large investors on the limit-hitting day is greater.

     If the stock prices are efficiently determined, we do not expect any reversal relative

to either the price level after trading resumes on the next day or the price level when the

upper price limit is initially hit. Thus, any evidence of price reversal subsequent to the

price-limit-hitting days would indicate price overreactions when the price limit is hit. Thus,

by linking the subsequent price reversal to the trading of large investors on limit-hitting

days, we can associate the price overreactions to the destructive behavior of large investors.

     Large investors face uncertainty regarding whether they can successfully push the

price to the upper limit, such as uncertainty in the market’s interpretation of the initial

news, aggregate strength of the large investors involved in pushing up the price, and the

number of other investors in the market who are eager to sell their shares. In other words,

an initial price increase during the day may motivate some large investors to buy the shares,

but they may not always succeed in pushing the price to close at the upper price limit. Thus,

we also expect large investors to buy shares on days with large price increases even without

closing at the upper price limit, albeit less than on upper-price-limit-hitting days.

     While short sales of stocks are legally permitted after 2010 for a list of stocks

designated by the China Securities Regulatory Commission (CSRC), short-selling is still

difficult and costly. 4 As a result, we do not expect large investors to pursue a similar


4
 Short-selling was not allowed in the Chinese stock market until February 23, 2010, when the CSRC allowed
40 stocks on the SZSE and 50 stocks on the Shanghai Stock Exchange (SHSE) to be eligible for shorting. The


                                                                                                      10
strategy around the days of hitting the lower price limit by short-selling stocks and then

buying them back on the next day.

      Examining Hypothesis 1 does not provide a forceful identification of the role served

by the daily price limit in inducing the destructive behavior of large investors, as this

hypothesis is also consistent with large investors trading to take advantage of feedback

traders on days with large positive returns. To further isolate the effect of the daily price

limit, we develop an additional identification strategy building on the fact that ST stocks

face tighter daily price limits (5%) relative to the daily price limits of regular stocks (10%).

      In general, the ST status is given to a publicly listed firm if it reports negative profits

for two consecutive years or a net asset value below the par value (usually one yuan per

share). This status is formally assigned by the stock exchange after firms release their

annual financial reports, which is usually in March or April. As a result, the market can

precisely anticipate whether a firm will obtain the ST status at the end of January after its

fourth quarter earnings are announced. That is, if in January a firm reports negative

earnings for the eighth consecutive quarter or a low net asset value, it will almost surely be

assigned the ST status in March or April, and then be subject to the more restrictive 5%

daily price limits. Thus, there is a period of 2 to 3 months during which market participants

anticipate a stock to be labeled as ST, but the stock is still trading under the regular 10%

price limits. This period allows us to identify the effects induced by the more restrictive

5% price limits after the ST status is officially assigned.5



list has been expanded several times and now includes 400 stocks on the SZSE and 500 stocks on the
SHSE. The total short interest, however, has stayed at a very low level. For example, at the end of 2015, the
short interest on the SZSE was less than 0.005% of tradable shares.
5
  We illustrate the timeline using the example of Leshan Power (600644), which was assigned the ST status
in 2014: 1) In December 2013, market news warned investors that Leshan Power might become a ST stock
since it had reported negative profits for seven consecutive quarters. 2) On January 27, 2014, Leshan Power


                                                                                                         11
      Specifically, we examine the following hypothesis by comparing the price dynamics

and large investors’ trading behavior during the post-ST period right after a stock is

officially assigned the ST status and during the pre-ST period when its ST status is

anticipated but not yet officially assigned:

      Hypothesis 2: Large investors pursue the destructive strategy of buying on the days

of hitting the 5% upper price limit and selling on the next day in the post-ST period,

although not around days with large daily returns above 5% in the pre-ST period; their

aggressive buying on the days of hitting the 5% upper price limit predicts a more

pronounced price reversal in the post-ST period; and as a result, the stock price reversal

subsequent to hitting the 5% upper price limit in the post-ST period is more pronounced

than its reversal subsequent to days with large returns above 5% in the pre-ST period.

                                III.     Analysis of Regular Stocks

      In this section, we report empirical results from using the sample of all regular stocks

in the SZSE from 2012 to 2015 to analyze Hypothesis 1. We first examine stock price

dynamics after hitting the upper price limit and having large daily returns below 10%. Then,

we conduct a descriptive analysis of the trading behavior of different types of investors

around these events. Finally, we verify whether the trading of large investors on the days

when the upper price limit is hit has predictive power for the subsequent price reversal.

A. Continued Price Increase and Long-run Reversal




released its earnings for the fourth quarter of 2013, which were negative. 3) On March 6, 2014, after Leshan
Power released its annual financial report, market news warned investors again of the firm’s upcoming ST
status. 4) On March 31, 2014, Leshan Power was officially assigned the ST status, and its daily price limits
were reduced to 5%. In this example, market participants could anticipate Leshan Power’s ST assignment
well in advance of the official assignment, the ST assignment reduces the daily price limits but does not
provide any additional information to the market.


                                                                                                        12
      We first document the price pattern subsequent to hitting the 10% upper and lower

price limits. We compare the days when the closing price hits the upper or lower 10% limit

with the days when the closing return falls into different inner ranges, such as 9% to 10%,

8% to 9%, …, -10% to -9%. To make it comparable with our account-level analyses, we

restrict the sample period to 2012 to 2015.6

      Upon a stock’s closing price hitting one of the limits, we track the stock’s post-hit

returns up to six months. To control risk characteristics that may drive a stock’s returns,

we use the characteristic-based adjustment method developed by Daniel, Grinblatt, Titman,

and Wermers (DGTW, 1997). Specifically, we sort all stocks independently based on their

float capitalization and market-to-book ratio at the end of each year into 5x5 groups. Then,

in the following year, a stock’s (daily) risk-adjusted return equals its raw return minus the

average return of stocks in the stock’s benchmark group. Through this adjustment, we

obtain the abnormal returns of each individual stock, which have already removed market

returns and other common return components related to size and market-to-book

characteristics. We also calculate cumulative abnormal returns over longer windows. We

use log returns in our main analysis, while the results from using percentage returns are

similar and reported in the Online Appendix.7

      Table 3 reports the abnormal returns subsequent to hitting the daily upper and lower

price limits and other inner price ranges. We group all stock-day observations into 13

categories based on the magnitude of day-0 returns. For post-event returns, we adopt


6
  The result using a longer sample from 1997 to 2015 is similar and reported in the Online Appendix.
7
  We use stocks from both the Shenzhen and Shanghai Stock Exchanges to compute abnormal returns. The
Shenzhen Stock Exchange lists mostly innovative private firms, which tend to be small, as opposed to the
large state-owned enterprises listed in the Shanghai Stock Exchange. To ensure a balanced representation of
stocks in the characteristics benchmark portfolios, we pool all stocks listed in both exchanges. The abnormal
returns computed from this exercise are also used as the dependent variables in our later regression analysis.


                                                                                                          13
different time windows up to 120 trading days. We decompose the first day return into

close-to-open (i.e., overnight) and open-to-close returns, and report returns of day 2 to day

5 separately. We also report the cumulative returns over days 6 to 10, 11 to 20, 21 to 60,

and 61 to 120. Standard errors are clustered by calendar date and the corresponding t-

statistics are reported in parentheses with *, **, *** representing statistical significance at

the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels, respectively.

     The first row documents the abnormal returns subsequent to hitting the upper 10%

price limit. On the first day, the close-to-open return on average is 2.44% (t-statistic of

20.3), and the price is reversed by a small amount during the trading hours with an average

return of -0.30% and a t-statistic of 4.0. The price continues to rise on day 2 with an average

return of 0.45% and a t-statistic of 4.1, but does not show any significant pattern on day 3

and day 4. The price pattern is significantly reversed starting from day 5, on which the

average return equals -0.15% with a t-statistic of 3.6. Then, the price keeps decreasing: the

average return from day 6 to 10 is -0.59% with a t-statistic of 6.4, -0.87% from day 11 to

20 with a t-statistic of 5.3, -1.31% from day 21 to 60 with a t-statistic of 4.7, and finally -

0.97% from day 61 to 120 with a t-statistic of 7.1.

     In other words, after hitting the 10% upper price limit at the close, the stock price

continues to increase for another two days and eventually reverses afterward. It reaches the

highest point on day 2 with a cumulative return of 2.59%. Summing up all the returns in

the row provides the post-event accumulative abnormal return up to 120 days, which is

negative and equals -1.21%. This number shows a long-term reversal pattern subsequent

to hitting the 10% upper limit.




                                                                                            14
     The middle row in the table shows that subsequent to days with modest closing returns

in (-5%, 5%), the average abnormal returns across all time windows up to 120 days are

almost zero. This row thus provides a benchmark for the returns subsequent to other days

with large closing returns.

     We do not find a similar pattern of continued price increases subsequent to days with

large returns but without hitting the price limit. Looking at the days with closing returns in

(9%, 10%), for example, the price drops by -0.51% at the open price of day 1, and then

continues to drop on day 2. The long-term returns are also negative. Furthermore, the

patterns subsequent to days with large returns in (8%, 9%) and (7%, 8%) appear to be

similar—there is long-run price reversal but not any continued price increase right after the

initial large return.

     The bottom row of Table 3 presents the price pattern following lower-limit hits.

Similar to upper-limit hits, the price significantly drops at the open of day 1 with an average

return of -1.13% and a t-statistic of 8.7. The open-to-close return is moderately negative,

and the price continues to drop significantly on day 2 and day 3. Nevertheless, the

cumulative returns over days 6 to 10, days 11 to 20, and days 21 to 60 indicate a reversal

pattern, with average returns of 0.34% (t-statistic of 2.2), 1.33% (t-statistic of 6.0), and

1.68% (t-statistic of 7.1), respectively. By comparison, this continuation-followed-by-

reversal pattern does not appear subsequent to days with other large, interior negative

returns, such as returns of (-10%, -9%) and (-9%, -8%).

     In sum, Table 3 shows a pattern of stock prices continuing to increase for a couple of

days subsequent to hitting the upper 10% price limit, but eventually reversing over a longer

period. While this pattern is consistent with Hypothesis 1, it may be also consistent with




                                                                                            15
some traders pursuing positive feedback strategies and their price impact leading to

subsequent price reversal. To sort out this possibility, we specifically examine the trading

of large investors in the following subsections.

B. Trading around Upper-Price-Limit Hits

     We now examine the behavior of different types of investors on the upper-price-limit-

hitting day (day 0) and the following day (day 1). The first part of Hypothesis 1 posits that

large investors tend to buy stocks on day 0 and then sell on day 1. To test this hypothesis,

we compare the daily NetBuy by the six groups of investors on day 0 and day 1 in Panel A

of Figure 1. For comparison, we also plot NetBuy by different investor groups on trading

days with large closing returns in (8%, 9%) and (9%, 10%), which we hereafter refer simply

to as having 8% and 9% returns, respectively.

     Figure 1 shows a clear and distinctive strategy used by large investors (with stock

balances above 10 million). Consistent with Hypothesis 1, large investors purchase these

upper-price-limit-hitting stocks on day 0 and sell them on day 1—as a group they acquire

0.69% of the stock’s floating shares on day 0 and sell 0.51% on day 1. These quantities are

comparable to the average daily turnover rate of 3.1%, as reported in Table 2, and are

particularly large relative to the group’s average turnover of 0.44%. While the group trades

in the same manner on days with large, interior closing returns of 8% or 9%, their NetBuy

on day 0 and day 1 is substantially lower than around the upper-price-limit hits. The pattern

of large traders quickly reversing their buying positions on the next day also shows that

they are not simply following a positive-feedback strategy.

     In contrast, small and median investors in the three groups with average stock

balances lower than 5 million RMB all exhibit the opposite trading pattern—their NetBuy



                                                                                          16
is negative on day 0 while positive on day 1 of the upper-price-limit hits.8 The intermediate

investor group with stock balances between 5 and 10 million RMB does not buy or sell any

notable amount around the upper-price-limit-hitting days and large return days. 9 The

institution group acquires stocks on both day 0 and day 1 around these events.

      Panel B of Figure 1 depicts the NetBuy of different investor groups on day 0 and day

1 of hitting the lower price limit and having large negative returns in (-9.99%, -9%) and (-

8.99%, -8%). This plot clearly indicates that the large-investor group does not pursue any

destructive strategy around either the lower-price-limit hitting events or the large negative

return days—they tend to sell a large quantity on day 0 and then continue to sell another

smaller quantity on day 1. This observation is consistent with our earlier argument that the

difficulty of short-selling stocks makes pursuing a destructive strategy around the lower-

price-limit-hitting events undesirable. For this reason, we focus our analysis on the upper

price limit. The institution group has the same pattern with even stronger selling on these

days. The three investor groups with stock balances less than 5 million RMB trade again

in the exact opposite direction, buying large quantities on these days.

      Finally, to further verify whether all accounts in one group trade similarly around the

upper price limit hits, Panel C of Figure 1 plots the percentage of accounts in each group

which bought shares on day 0 and then sold on day 1. Interestingly, 83.6% of large

investors bought shares on day 0 and then sold on the next day, indicating homogeneous

behavior among this group. In contrast, only a small fraction of small and median investors


8 This pattern is consistent with the disposition effect, i.e., current shareholders realize their gains on days
when prices hit the upper limit, and the attention effect, i.e., new investors are attracted by the upper-price-
limit-hitting events to buy the stocks on the following day.
9
  The lack of notable buying and selling by this group might be caused by heterogeneity of investor behavior
within this group, i.e., some behaving like the large investors in the group with stock balances larger than 10
million while some others behaving like those in the groups with balances less than 5 million.


                                                                                                            17
adopted this type of strategy as the large investors. The pertinent percentage for investors

with stock balances between 5 and 10 million RMB is larger than that of the small and

median investors but it is still less than 20%. The institution group shows a more mixed

picture, with 52.3% of them buying on day 0 and selling one day after.

C. Large Investors’ Trading and Price Reversal

          In this subsection, we proceed to examine whether the net buy of large investors on

the upper-price-limit-hitting day has predictive power for the subsequent price reversal

(i.e., the second part of Hypothesis 1). We pool all stock-day observations in our sample

and run the following predictive regression:

Ret   ,     →        α    β               ,   β NetBuy , ,       β              ,   ∗ NetBuy , ,

                   +∑                         ,       ∑                   ,   ∗ NetBuy , ,

                      ψ   ,     , ,   ,           ,   ∈ 1, 2,3,4,5,10,20,60,120 ,                    (1)

where the dependent variable Ret          ,   →        denotes the characteristics-adjusted abnormal

returns on day 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and cumulative abnormal returns over days 10 to 20, 21 to 60,

and 61 to 120 for stock i after the upper-price-limit-hitting day t.                      ,   is a dummy

variable that equals 1 if stock i hits the upper price limit on day t. NetBuy , , denotes

NetBuy of stock i on day t by investor group j. The variable of interest is the interaction

term of LimitHit and NetBuy. Hypothesis 1 posits that this interaction term has a negative

coefficient, indicating stronger price reversal after upper-price-limit hits with greater net

buy by the large investors.

          To compare market dynamics after the upper-price-limit hits and after days with large

daily price movements, we include a series of dummies                   1,2,3, denoting the three 2%

intervals from 4% to 10% of daily closing returns. We also include the interaction terms of


                                                                                                     18
these dummies with NetBuy. We further control several covariates                     ,   , such as market-to-

book ratio, float capitalization, and past 30-trading-day return. Finally, we use robust

standard errors throughout and cluster by calendar date, which controls for the clustering

of price-limit hits on certain dates.10

      Table 4 reports the regression results. Panel A reports the results using the NetBuy for

large investors with stock balances above 10 million. Consistent with Hypothesis 1, the

coefficients of the key interaction term of LimitHit and NetBuy indicate that the net buying

of large investors on day 0 of upper-price-limit hits consistently predicts significantly

negative returns throughout different time windows subsequent to the upper-price-limit-

hitting events, except that the coefficient of the day-1 return is insignificant. In other words,

when large investors acquire more shares on the day of hitting the upper price limits, the

subsequent stock returns are lower throughout the period from day 1 up to day 120.11 These

lower returns indicate stronger reversal of the price increase immediately after hitting the

upper price limit. Summing up the coefficient of the interaction term LimitHit*NetBuy

across the return intervals gives a total of -3.296, which, after multiplying by the average

NetBuy of 0.69% by large investors on day 0 of hitting the upper price limit, further implies

a total price reversal of -2.27% from day 1 to day 120. This magnitude is comparable to

the total price increase of 2.59% during the first two days after the price limit is hit.

      Also note several other observations from Panel A. First, the coefficient of NetBuy of

large investors is significantly positive across all return intervals, suggesting that on a


10
   In Table A6 of the Online Appendix, we also report results from including calendar-day fixed effects to
further control for the clustering of price-limit hitting events. The results remain robust.
11 We also estimate the same regressions replacing net buying of large investors on day 0 with either the net

selling of large investors or the net buying of small investors on day 1 after the event. This estimation yields
a similarly significant effect on long-term stock returns up to day 120, which gives further support to
Hypothesis 1. The results are reported in Table A7 of the Online Appendix.


                                                                                                            19
normal day with daily returns below 4%, the trading of large investors consistently and

positively predicts subsequent returns. This finding strongly supports a key premise of our

hypotheses that large investors are the "smart money" in the market. The sharp contrast of

their trading negatively predicting returns subsequent to hitting the upper price limit makes

their destructive behavior around these events even more striking.

      Second, NetBuy of large investors also has a similar effect on the price reversal

subsequent to large daily returns within the price limit, albeit with smaller significance and

magnitude. The coefficients of the interaction term of NetBuy with the dummy of daily

returns in (8%, 9.99%) are all negative, especially for the short-term returns within 10 days.

The interaction terms with the dummies of daily returns in (6%, 7.99%) and (4%, 5.99%)

are mostly insignificant. The negative predictive power of the trading of large investors

subsequent to the days of large positive returns is consistent with their possibly failed

attempt to push up prices to the upper limit on these days.12

      Panel B of Table 4 also reports the results from using the NetBuy by each of the five

other groups to predict the subsequent returns. This panel reports only the coefficients of

the key interaction term of NetBuy with the dummy of hitting the upper price limit.

Consistent with our earlier observation of the institution group and the group with

intermediate stock balances between 5 and 10 million RMB behaving differently from the

large-investor group, the trading of these two groups on the days of hitting the upper price

limit has no predictive power for the subsequent returns.




12
   As our dependent variable in these regressions is abnormal return that already has been adjusted for market-
to-book and stock float characteristics, the coefficients of the control variables, market-to-book ratio, and
float capitalization are insignificant. The coefficient of return in the past 30 days is negative and is significant
except for returns in two intervals AR Day 5 and CAR[6,10]. The R-squared from these predictive regressions
of (un-grouped) individual stock returns is low, as is well known from the empirical asset pricing literature.


                                                                                                                20
      In contrast to large investors, trading of the three small and medium investor groups

with stock balances below 5 million on the days of hitting the upper price limit has a

positive predictive power for the subsequent returns throughout the various return intervals

between day 2 and 120. This finding again confirms our earlier discussion that small and

medium investors tend to trade exactly on the opposite side of large investors around the

days of hitting the upper price limit.

      In sum, consistent with Hypothesis 1, Table 4 provides strong and robust evidence

confirming that the net buy of large investors on the days of hitting the upper price limit is

associated with more pronounced price reversal over the subsequent periods.13

                                   IV.      Analysis of ST Stocks

      The results reported in the previous section show a significant relationship between

the net buying of large investors on days of hitting the upper price limit and the subsequent

price reversal. To further identify the role played by the daily price limit, as opposed to

simply large daily returns, in inducing the destructive behavior of large investors, we now

turn to testing Hypothesis 2 by exploiting ST assignments in an event study of a sample of

ST stocks as these stocks face tighter 5% daily price limits than the 10% limits imposed on

regular stocks. There are 119 stocks, which were assigned the ST status on the Shenzhen

Stock Exchange in our sample period of 2012 to 2015.14

      As discussed in Section II, market participants can anticipate the ST assignment two

or three months in advance. Thus, the official assignment offers no new information about



13 As a robustness check, we also examine whether the net buy by large investors on the days of hitting the
lower price limit has the same negative effect on subsequent stock returns. The results reported in Table A8
of the Online Appendix confirm that there is no such effect for the lower price limit hits.
14
   There is only a very small sample of firms whose ST status was removed during this period, which prevents
us from studying the effects of ST removal.


                                                                                                        21
the firm’s fundamental. The key change around the ST assignment is the tightened daily

price limit from 10% to 5%, which offers a suitable setting to identify the effect of the

tighter 5% price limits on large investors’ trading behavior and market dynamics.

A. Price Reversal Before and After ST Assignment

     We first compare the stock returns subsequent to hitting the 5% upper price limit in

the post-ST period relative to having large daily returns above 5% in the pre-ST period in

the sample of 119 ST stocks. Specifically, we run the following regression:

      Ret   ,   →         α          ST ,         Five ,      ST , ∗ Five ,    ψ    ,               , , ,


                                            ,     ∈ 1, 2,3,4,5,10,20,60,120 ,               2

where ∈         60, 60 is a date before or after the ST assignment of a stock, measured by

the number of days to the ST assignment, and the dependent variable is the abnormal return

subsequent to each stock-day in the sample.15 Like before, the abnormal return is adjusted

for the stock’s float capitalization and market-to-book ratio.16                ,   is a dummy variable

that equals one if stock i has the ST status on date t and zero otherwise.                      ,   is also a

dummy variable that equals one if stock i hits the 5% limit on date t in the post-ST period

or has daily return larger than 5% in the pre-ST period. The key variable of interest is the

interaction term of        ,   and          ,   , which gives an estimate of the effect of the reduced

price limit after the ST assignment on the stock return. As posited by Hypothesis 2, we

expect a stronger price increase right after hitting the 5% upper price limit in the post-ST


15
   As a robustness check reported in the Online Appendix, instead of using the time window of [-60, 60], we
define the pre-ST period as the exact period between the announcement of a stock’s fourth quarter earnings
and the official assignment of its ST status and the post-ST period as an equally long period after the ST
assignment. The results are similar.
16
   Again, we follow DGTW (1997) to control risk characteristics: abnormal returns are calculated using a
stock’s daily return minus the average return of the stock’s ST benchmark group, which is formed at every
year’s end based on stocks’ float capitalization and market-to-book ratio using the sample of all ST stocks.
Due to the small sample size of 119 ST stocks, we sort them into 2x2 ST benchmark groups.


                                                                                                            22
period than after having daily returns above 5% in the pre-ST period, as well as a more

pronounced price reversal afterward. In other words, we expect the coefficient of this

interaction term to be positive for return periods right after the upper-price-limit hits and

negative for return periods long after the hits.

     We further control several covariates            ,   , such as market-to-book ratio, float

capitalization, and past 30-trading-day return. We also incorporate a set of fixed effects

for each date around the ST assignment to capture any potential deterministic effect

associated with the ST assignments. For example, certain institutions may not hold ST

stocks and need to unload their holdings around the ST assignment events, while some

investors might prefer to invest in ST stocks and may gradually enter the market. As the

ST assignments are well anticipated, these effects can be captured by including a set of

fixed effects based on the number of days to the ST assignments. Finally, we use robust

standard errors throughout and cluster them by calendar date, which controls for the

clustering of price-limit hits on certain dates.

     Table 5 reports the coefficient estimate of the key interaction term of          ,   and      ,


in regression (2). Panel A does not include the fixed effects associated with the number of

days to the ST assignment, while Panel B includes these fixed effects. In column (1) of

Panel A, the coefficient of the interaction term of        ,   and    ,   indicates that in the post-

ST period, the stock open price on the next day of hitting the 5% upper price limit tends to

rise 1.6% more relative to the open price after having a large daily return above 5% in the

pre-ST period. In addition, column (2) shows that the open to close return on the next day

is lower by 0.4% in the post-ST period than in the pre-ST period, while column (3) shows

that the return on day 2 is significantly higher by 1.1%. Overall, the returns in the two days



                                                                                                 23
right after hitting the 5% upper price limit in the post-ST period are significantly higher

than right after having large daily returns above 5% in the pre-ST period.

     More important, there is also more pronounced price reversal in the post-ST period.

Columns (8), (9), and (10) show that the price reversal in days [11, 20], [21, 60], and [61,

120] subsequent to hitting the 5% upper price limit in the post-ST period is significantly

stronger by 4.5%, 7.7%, and 5.2%, respectively, than subsequent to having large returns

above 5% in the pre-ST period. Adding these numbers gives a total of 17.4% in the

strengthened price reversal from day 11 to day 120. Panel B reports very similar results

after including the fixed effects associated with the number of days to the ST assignment

as Panel A. Overall, Table 5 shows a more pronounced price pattern of continued price

increases and subsequent reversal after having large daily returns above 5% in the post-ST

period than in the pre-ST period, consistent with Hypothesis 2.

B. Large Investors’ Trading of ST Stocks

     We now compare the large investors’ trading behavior around the days with large

returns in the pre-ST and post-ST periods. Figure 2 depicts the net buy of the 119 ST stocks

in our sample by different investor groups around the days with large positive returns in

(3%, 3.99%), (4%, 4.99%), and above 5% with Panel A representing the pre-ST period and

Panel B representing the post-ST period. Panel A shows that in the pre-ST period, large

investors (with stock balance above 10 million RMB) tend to buy on both day 0 and day 1

of having these large daily returns, just like institutions. Specifically, on average, large

investors buy 0.11% of the tradable shares on day 0 of having returns above 5% and buy

another small amount on day 1. The three groups of small and medium investors with stock

balances less than 5 million RMB tend to sell on these days.



                                                                                         24
     Interestingly, Panel B presents a sharp change in the net buy of large investors in the

post-ST period around hitting the 5% upper price limit—instead of buying on both day 0

and day 1, large investors buy on day 0 and then sell on day 1, the same way they trade

regular stocks upon hitting the 10% upper price limit. Specifically, on average, they buy

0.15% of the tradable shares on day 0 and then sell 0.05% on day 1. Not only do they buy

more aggressively on day 0, but also, more curiously, they switch the direction of their

trading from buy to sell on day 1.

     Around days that have returns in (4%, 4.99%), the net buy of large investors also

displays a similar pattern of buying on day 0 and then selling on day 1, again in contrast to

the pattern in the pre-ST period. As we discussed in the previous section, large investors

face uncertainty in pushing the stock prices to the upper price limit. Thus, this pattern might

reflect their failed attempt to push up the stock prices.

     Institutions tend to sell a small quantity on both day 0 and day 1 after hitting the 5%

upper price limit and having large returns in (4%, 4.99%), which help highlight the stark

behavior of large investors. The net buy of the three groups of small and medium investors

with stock balances below 5 million RMB is exactly the opposite to that of the large

investors. Overall, Figure 2 shows that after the ST assignment, there is a sharp change in

the trading behavior of large investors around the days of hitting the upper price limit or

having large positive returns.

C. Large Investors’ Trading and Price Reversal of ST Stocks

     After showing the strengthened price reversal subsequent to hitting the 5% upper price

limit and the sharp change in the trading behavior of large investors around the days of

hitting the upper price limit after the ST assignment, we now connect these two phenomena.



                                                                                            25
We again pool the sample of the 119 ST stocks for the period 60 days before and after their

ST assignments and run the following predictive regression:

      Ret   ,   →        α       NetBuy ,          ST ,        Five ,        NetBuy , ∗ ST ,

                NetBuy , ∗ ST ,            NetBuy , ∗ Five , + NetBuy , ∗ ST , ∗ Five ,

                ψ    ,             ,   ,    ,   ∈ 1, 2,3,4,5,10,20,60,120 ,                           (3)

where the dependent variable is the abnormal return for various time windows subsequent

to a given date ∈         60, 60 .17 NetBuy , is the net buying of stock by large investors

with stock balances above 10 million RMB on date t, ST , is a dummy indicating whether

date is in the post-ST period, and Five , is a dummy indicating whether the stock return

on date is above 5% in the pre-ST period or whether the stock has hit the upper price limit

in the post-ST period. The key variable of interest is the triple interaction term NetBuy , , ∗

ST , ∗ Five , . Hypothesis 2 posits that a stronger price reversal is associated with more

buying by large investors on the day of hitting the upper price limit in the post-ST period.

That is, we expect the coefficient of the triple interaction term             to be negative for long-

term returns. We control for the same list of covariates           ,    as before. We also incorporate

a set of fixed effects       for each date around the ST assignment to capture any potential

deterministic effect associated with the ST assignment and use robust standard errors

throughout and cluster by calendar date.

     Table 6 reports the results from estimating regression (3) with Panel A not including

the fixed effects associated with the number of days to the ST assignment and Panel B

including these fixed effects. The coefficient of the triple interaction term is significantly


17
  We again provide a robust check in the Online Appendix by defining the pre-ST period as the exact period
between the announcement of a stock’s fourth quarter earnings and the official assignment of its ST status
and the post-ST period as an equally long period after the ST assignment. The results are similar.


                                                                                                      26
negative for all return periods from day 6 to day 120 subsequent to hitting the 5% upper

price limit, indicating that in the post-ST period the trading of large investors on the days

of these hits makes the subsequent price reversal more pronounced.18 Panel B reports very

similar results. Overall, Table 6 indeed shows that the destructive trading behavior of large

investors on the day of hitting the 5% upper price limit in the post-ST period is associated

with the strengthened price reversal, strongly supporting Hypothesis 2.

D. Frequency of Large Returns

     Finally, we give a visual illustration of the change in the frequency of large returns

before and after the ST assignment. Specifically, Figure 3 depicts the fraction of the 119

ST stocks in our sample on a given day with large daily returns above 4%. The figure shows

a visible increase in this fraction in the post-ST period. This increase highlights the effect

of the tighter daily price limit—the destructive trading behavior of large investors induced

by the tighter daily price limit makes the occurrence of large daily returns above 4% more

frequent rather than less frequent. Admittedly, the cutoff choice of 4% is ad hoc. We choose

a cutoff lower than 5% because large investors pursue the destructive trading strategy not

only on days hitting the 5% price limit but also on days with large returns close to the price

limit, as shown by Figure 2.


                                         V.      Conclusion

     In this paper, we study the effects of the widely used daily price limit rule on the

dynamics of stock prices and the trading behavior of different investor groups. We find a

set of results indicating that the daily price limits may have an unintended effect of inducing


18 Note that the coefficient of this triple interaction term may appear larger than that in Table 4. This
is due to the smaller quantity of the net buy of ST stocks by large investors on the days of hitting the
price limit (Panel B of Figure 2) relative to that of regular stocks on average (Panel A of Figure 1).


                                                                                                     27
large investors to pursue a destructive strategy of pushing up stock prices to the upper price

limit and then selling on the next day. This unintended effect highlights the challenge in

designing the trading system for emerging equity markets, which tend to have a mix of

experienced and inexperienced investors. The interactions between them may render a

market stabilization scheme, such as the daily price limits, counterproductive.




Reference

Barber, Brad M., and Terrance Odean, 2008. All that glitters: The effect of attention and

news on the buying behavior of individual and institutional investors. Review of Financial

Studies, 21(2): 785-818.

Chan, Soon Huat, Kenneth A. Kim, and S. Ghon Rhee, 2005. Price limit performance:

evidence from transactions data and the limit order book. Journal of Empirical Finance,

12(2): 269-290.

Cho, David D., Jeffrey Russell, George C. Tiao, and Ruey Tsay, 2003. The magnet effect

of price limits: evidence from high-frequency data on Taiwan Stock Exchange. Journal of

Empirical Finance, 10(1): 133-168.

Daniel, Kent, Mark Grinblatt, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1997. Measuring

mutual fund performance with characteristic-based benchmarks. The Journal of Finance,

52(3): 1035-1058.




                                                                                           28
De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleifer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert J. Waldmann,

1990. Positive feedback investment strategies and destabilizing rational speculation.

Journal of Finance, 45(2): 379-395.

Deb, Saikat Sovan, Petko S. Kalev, and Vijaya B. Marisetty, 2010. Are price limits really

bad for equity markets? Journal of Banking and Finance, 34(10), 2462-2471.

Hong, Harrison, Jose Scheinkman, and Wei Xiong, 2008. Advisors and asset prices: a

model of the origins of bubbles. Journal of Financial Economics 89: 268-287.

Hsieh, Ping-Hung, Yong H. Kim, and J. Jimmy Yang, 2009. The magnet effect of price

limits: A logit approach. Journal of Empirical Finance, 16(5): 830-837.

Kim, Kenneth.A. and S. Ghon Rhee, 1997. Price Limit Performance: Evidence from the

Tokyo Stock Exchange. Journal of Finance, 52(2): 885-901.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Devin Shanthikumar, 2007. Are small investors naive about

incentives? Journal of Financial Economics, 85(2): 457-489.

Seasholes, Mark S. and Guojun Wu, 2007. Predictable behavior, profits, and attention.

Journal of Empirical Finance, 14(5): 590-610.




                                                                                      29
   Figure 1．Trading around Days with Large Price Fluctuations by Investor Groups
This figure plots the NetBuy of different investor groups on the day (Day 0) and the
following day (Day 1) of large price fluctuations.
               Panel A: Trading around Days with Large Positive Returns

                     <100k                       100-500k                     500k-5m
         .01


        .005


          0


       -.005

               8%     9%     Upper Hit    8%       9%       Upper Hit   8%       9%         Upper Hit

                     5-10m                        >10m                        Institution
         .01


        .005


          0


       -.005

               8%     9%     Upper Hit    8%       9%       Upper Hit   8%       9%         Upper Hit

                                         Day 0                  Day 1



               Panel B: Trading around Days with Large Negative Returns

                     <100k                       100-500k                     500k-5m
        .004

        .002

          0

       -.002

       -.004
               -8%    -9%    Lower Hit   -8%       -9%      Lower Hit   -8%      -9%        Lower Hit

                     5-10m                        >10m                        Institution
        .004

        .002

          0

       -.002

       -.004
               -8%    -9%    Lower Hit   -8%       -9%      Lower Hit   -8%      -9%        Lower Hit

                                         Day 0                  Day 1




                                                                                                        30
Panel C: Percentage of Accounts Buying on Day 0 and Selling on Day 1 of Upper Limit
                                       Hits




                  80
                  60
            % of Investors
               40 20
                  0




                             <100k   100-500k   500k-5m   5-10m   >10m   Institution




                                                                                       31
  Figure 2. Trading of ST Stocks around Days with Large Positive Returns by Different
                                    Investor Groups
This figure plots the NetBuy by different investor groups of ST stocks around days with
large positive returns: (3%, 3.99%), (4%, 4.99%), and hitting the 5% upper price limit (or
above 5% in the pre-ST period).

                            Panel A: ST Stocks in Pre‐ST Period
                           <100k                       100-500k                   500k-5m
             .002

             .001

                0

             -.001

             -.002
                      3%    4%     Above 5%      3%      4%     Above 5%     3%       4%    Above 5%

                           5-10m                        >10m                      Insititution
             .002

             .001

                0

             -.001

             -.002
                      3%    4%     Above 5%      3%      4%     Above 5%     3%       4%    Above 5%

                                               Day 0                 Day 1




                            Panel B: ST Stocks in Post‐ST Period
                           <100k                       100-500k                   500k-5m
             .0015
              .001
             .0005
                 0
             -.0005
              -.001
                      3%     4%    Upper Hit     3%       4%    Upper Hit    3%       4%    Upper Hit

                           5-10m                         >10m                     Institution
             .0015
              .001
             .0005
                 0
             -.0005
              -.001
                      3%     4%    Upper Hit     3%       4%    Upper Hit    3%       4%    Upper Hit

                                               Day 0                 Day 1




                                                                                                        32
     Figure 3. Distribution of Large Daily Returns Before and After ST Assignment
This figure shows the fraction of stocks with daily returns larger than 4% 60 days before
and after the assignment of the ST status for 119 ST stocks.


                                                          .15
          % of Stock Hitting the Price Change within One Day
          0               .05              .1




                                                                -60   -50   -40   -30    -20 -10      0    10    20    30   40   50   60
                                                                                        Day to Assignment of ST Status




                                                                                                                                           33
                                                 Table 1. Number of Price Limit Hit Events

This table represents the number of price limit hit events in the Shenzhen Stock Exchange between 2012 and 2015, separately for regular
and ST stocks.

                                                        Regular Stock                                        ST Stock
                                      Total #     # Per Date   Total %   SD of Total %   Total #   # Per Date    Total %   SD of Total %
        Upper Hits (Closing price)    21,005        21.65      2.05%        14.19%       2,046       2.109        7.92%       27.01%
        Lower Hits (Closing price)    13,569        13.99      1.33%        11.45%       1,483       1.529        5.74%       23.26%
            # of Observations        1,020,790                                           25,831




                                                                                                                                       34
                                     Table 2. Contributions to Daily Stock Turnover by Investor Groups

This table presents summary statistics of contributions by different investor groups to daily turnover of each stock in the sample.

                                              # of Accounts                                                Contribution to Daily
                Investor Groups                                              Turnover per Day
                                              per StockDay                                                  Turnover by Group


                                                                         Panel A: Regular Stocks
                <100k                              1592                         0.00242                            7.72%
                100-500k                           1516                         0.00736                           23.46%
                500k-5m                             767                         0.01192                           38.01%
                5-10m                                52                         0.00234                            7.45%
                >10m                                 44                         0.00439                           13.99%
                Institution                         40                          0.00294                            9.36%
                Total                              4011                         0.03135                           100.00%

                                                                            Panel B: ST Stocks
                <100k                              798                           0.00143                           6.38%
                100-500k                           716                           0.00512                          22.83%
                500k-5m                            216                           0.00932                          41.55%
                5-10m                               24                           0.00312                          13.91%
                >10m                                16                           0.00327                          14.58%
                Institution                         11                           0.00017                           0.76%
                Total                              1781                          0.02243                          100.00%




                                                                                                                                      35
                                      Table 3. Stock Returns Subsequent to Days with Large Price Fluctuations
  This table presents abnormal returns subsequent to days with large returns in various categories. The sample includes all stocks in both the Shanghai
  and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges from 2012 to 2015. Close to Open return is calculated using the closing price at the event day and the open price
  on the following day. Open to Close return is calculated using the open price and closing price on the following day. Day 2, 3, 4, 5 returns refer to
  abnormal returns on the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and 5th day relative to the event day. [6, 10], [11, 20], [21, 60], and [61, 120] refer to the cumulative abnormal
  returns over the 6th to 10th day window, the 11th to 20th day window, the 21th to 60th day window, and the 61st to 120th day window relative to the
  event day. Abnormal returns are calculated using a stock’s daily return minus the average return of the stock’s benchmark group, which is formed
  at every year’s end based on a stock’s float capitalization and market-to-book ratio (5x5 groups in total). The table reports log returns. Standard
  errors are clustered by calendar date, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1%
  levels, respectively.

                                                                        Abnormal Return
                  Close to     Open to       Day 2        Day 3        Day 4       Day 5         [6,10]      [11,20]      [21,60]     [61,120]     # of Hit
                   Open         Close
Upper Hit       2.44%***     -0.30%***    0.45%***     0.09%        0.01%        -0.15%***    -0.59%***    -0.87%***   -1.31%***    -0.97%***    54811
                (20.3)       (-4.0)       (4.1)        (0.9)        (0.1)        (-3.6)       (-6.4)       (-5.3)      (-4.7)       (-7.1)
[9%, 10%)       -0.51%***    0.10%        -0.29%***    -0.11%       0.04%        -0.21%***    -0.49%**     -0.77%***   -0.58%       -0.89%**     6823
                (-10.8)      (1.4)        (-4.1)       (-1.5)       (0.5)        (-3.3)       (-2.7)       (-4.0)      (-1.7)       (-2.9)
[8%, 9%)        -0.64%***    0.18%**      -0.29%***    -0.08%       -0.09%       -0.29%***    -0.34%**     -0.47%*     -0.70%**     -0.50%       9227
                (-16.6)      (3.1)        (-5.0)       (-1.5)       (-1.2)       (-4.5)       (-2.7)       (-2.5)      (-2.8)       (-1.8)
[7%, 8%)        -0.56%***    0.21%***     -0.22%***    -0.08%       -0.13%**     -0.23%***    -0.23%**     -0.31%*     -0.57%**     -0.89%***    14582
                (-16.6)      (3.1)        (-5.0)       (-1.5)       (-1.2)       (-4.5)       (-2.7)       (-2.5)      (-2.8)       (-1.8)
[6%, 7%)        -0.44%***    0.20%***     -0.19%***    -0.05%       -0.08%*      -0.26%***    -0.23%**     -0.25%**    -0.59%***    -0.43%**     22729
                (-16.6)      (3.1)        (-5.0)       (-1.5)       (-1.2)       (-4.5)       (-2.7)       (-2.5)      (-2.8)       (-1.8)
[5%, 6%)        -0.31%***    0.15%***     -0.17%***    -0.05%       -0.08%***    -0.16%***    -0.19%***    -0.22%**    -0.69%***    -0.15%       34245
                (-20.3)      (5.4)        (-6.6)       (-1.6)       (-3.4)       (-5.5)       (-3.5)       (-2.9)      (-5.6)       (-1.1)
[-5%, 5%)       -0.02%***    0.00%        0.00%        0.00%        0.00%        0.01%***     0.02%***     0.01%       0.03%*       0.01%        2214004
                (-10.3)      (0.9)        (-0.0)       (-0.1)       (0.8)        (3.6)        (3.4)        (1.8)       (2.3)        (1.0)
[-6%, -5%)      0.01%        -0.04%       0.15%***     0.08%**      0.03%        0.09%***     -0.14%*      -0.26%**    -0.33%*      -0.27%*      28376
                (0.3)        (-1.4)       (4.8)        (2.8)        (1.3)        (3.3)        (-2.1)       (-3.0)      (-2.3)       (-2.0)
[-7%, -6%)      0.05%        -0.05%       0.12%**      0.12%        0.08%*       0.19%***     -0.08%       -0.17%      -0.59%**     0.14%        17191




                                                                                                                                                         36
              (1.5)       (-1.1)   (2.9)       (2.8)     (2.3)    (5.8)      (-0.9)   (-1.6)     (-3.0)     (0.8)
[-8%, -7%)    0.11%*      0.00%    0.12%*      0.13%*    0.04%    0.15%***   0.01%    -0.02%     -0.10%     -0.27%   10883
              (2.2)       (0.0)    (2.1)       (2.5)     (0.9)    (3.5)      (0.0)    (-0.1)     (-0.4)     (-1.1)
[-9%, -8%)    0.23%***    0.03%    0.24%**     0.11%*    0.10%    0.18%**    0.08%    0.35%      0.31%      -0.30%   7859
              (2.2)       (0.0)    (2.1)       (2.5)     (0.9)    (3.5)      (0.0)    (-0.1)     (-0.4)     (-1.1)
(-10%, -9%)   -0.01%      0.02%    0.14%       0.13%*    0.05%    0.21%***   0.26%    0.40%      0.96%**    -0.33%   9958
              (-0.1)      (0.3)    (1.9)       (2.1)     (0.7)    (4.9)      (1.5)    (1.9)      (2.7)      (-1.3)
Lower Hit     -1.13%***   -0.15%   -0.46%***   -0.21%*   -0.06%   -0.07%     0.34%*   1.33%***   1.68%***   0.28%    35113
              (-8.7)      (-1.3)   (-4.6)      (-2.5)    (-1.0)   (-0.8)     (2.2)    (6.0)      (7.1)      (1.1)




                                                                                                                             37
                                 Table 4. Regression Analysis of Stock Returns Subsequent to Large Daily Returns

This table reports the results from estimating regression specified in Equation (1). Panel A reports the estimates of all coefficients from the
regressions on the net trading of large investors with stock balances above 10 million RMB, while Panel B reports the estimates of the key coefficient,
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy, from the regressions on the net buying of all other investor groups. Standard errors are robust and clustered by calendar
date, and t-statistics are reported in parentheses with *, **, *** representing statistical significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels, respectively.


  Panel A                     AR Day1       AR Day2       AR Day3          AR Day4        AR Day5      CAR[6,10]     CAR[11,20]   CAR[21,60]   CAR[60,120]
                                                                      Investor Group with Stock Balances above 10 million
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)              (7)       (8)           (9)
  Upper Limit Hit             0.024***      0.006***        0.001            0.000         -0.002*      -0.016***     -0.013***     -0.003        -0.004
                               (17.35)        (4.50)        (1.01)           (0.06)        (-2.43)       (-7.68)        (-4.33)     (-0.76)      (-1.20)
  Net Buy                     0.166***      0.071***      0.065***         0.073***       0.047***      0.226***       0.246***    0.316***      0.252**
                               (13.29)        (6.96)        (5.71)           (6.94)        (4.02)         (9.23)        (7.47)      (5.35)        (3.21)
  Upper Limit Hit*Net
                               -0.114       -0.176**       -0.152**        -0.161***      -0.126**      -0.510***      -0.300*    -0.949***     -0.808***
  Buy
                               (-1.96)       (-3.08)        (-2.61)          (-3.45)       (-2.76)       (-6.17)        (-1.98)     (-5.55)       (-4.16)
  8-9.99%                     0.008***       0.002*         0.001            0.000       -0.002***        -0.001       -0.003*      0.001         0.003
                                (8.07)        (2.36)        (1.31)           (0.57)        (-4.22)       (-0.97)        (-2.00)     (0.24)        (1.01)
  8-9.99%*Net Buy              -0.120*       -0.095*        -0.026           -0.042        -0.002         -0.094      -0.387***   -0.691***       -0.309
                               (-2.28)       (-2.21)        (-0.74)          (-1.38)       (-0.05)       (-1.38)        (-4.58)     (-4.68)       (-1.83)
  6-7.99%                     -0.002***     -0.002***       -0.000           -0.001      -0.003***      -0.003**       -0.003*      0.002        -0.005*
                               (-4.12)       (-4.65)        (-0.27)          (-1.47)       (-6.34)       (-2.84)        (-2.00)     (0.73)        (-2.08)
  6-7.99%*Net Buy               0.026         0.003         -0.057           -0.009        -0.054         -0.093       -0.370**    -0.686**       -0.161
                                (0.59)        (0.08)        (-1.38)          (-0.20)       (-1.03)       (-1.11)        (-3.23)     (-2.78)       (-0.65)
  4-5.99%                     -0.001**      -0.003***       -0.000         -0.001***     -0.002***       -0.001*       -0.003**    -0.004**      -0.004*
                               (-2.63)       (-8.65)        (-1.19)          (-3.69)       (-7.75)       (-1.96)        (-2.94)     (-2.82)       (-2.07)
  4-5.99%*Net Buy               0.031         -0.040        0.034            -0.010        -0.013       -0.330**        -0.068      -0.232        -0.268




                                                                                                                                                    38
                           (0.72)       (-0.97)     (0.91)        (-0.26)       (-0.35)        (-3.15)       (-0.58)     (-1.16)     (-1.34)
Market-to-Book Ratio       0.000*       0.000        0.000         0.000         0.000         -0.000        0.000*     0.000***    0.000***
                           (2.19)       (1.02)      (0.72)         (1.89)        (1.58)        (-0.03)       (2.04)      (5.95)      (7.05)
Float Cap                  -0.000       -0.000      -0.000         -0.000        -0.000        0.000         0.000      0.000**       0.000
                           (-1.22)      (-1.37)     (-1.68)       (-1.79)       (-0.74)        (0.28)        (0.65)      (3.26)      (0.10)
Return in Past 30 Days    -0.003***    -0.002***   -0.002***     -0.002**        -0.000        -0.002      -0.009***    -0.007**    0.011***
                           (-6.28)      (-3.88)     (-3.41)       (-3.08)       (-0.76)        (-1.96)       (-6.17)     (-2.97)     (4.62)
Constant                  -0.000***     -0.000     -0.000***       0.000        0.000*       -0.001***     -0.002***    -0.005***   -0.002***
                           (-3.44)      (-0.74)     (-3.44)        (0.32)        (2.24)        (-5.23)       (-8.77)    (-14.25)     (-4.85)
Number of Observations    3977718      3966822     3956979        3947841       3939146       3995174       3934316     3934589     3817778
R-squared                   0.004        0.001       0.000         0.000         0.001         0.001         0.001        0.000       0.000


Panel B
                                                                             Institution Group
                               (1)         (2)         (3)            (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)         (8)        (9)
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy      -0.077      0.050       -0.063         0.011          -0.049       0.154*        -0.153      -0.140     0.030
                             (-1.25)     (0.99)      (-1.02)        (0.19)         (-0.90)      (2.02)        (-0.92)     (-0.52)    (0.16)
Number of Observations      3972792     3961900     3952076        3942932       3934249       3990232       3929395     3929672    3812852
R-squared                     0.005      0.001        0.000         0.000           0.001        0.001         0.001       0.000     0.000

                                                               Investor Group with Stock Balances below 100k
                              (10)         (11)        (12)           (13)          (14)          (15)          (16)        (17)       (18)
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy    0.079***     0.052***    0.149***       0.201***      0.009***      0.009***      0.055***    0.152***   0.152***
                             (6.67)      (4.980)    (11.050)       (11.920)       (3.460)       (3.460)       (5.930)    (11.520)   (11.520)
Number of Observations     3972792      3961900     3952076        3942932       3934249       3990232       3929395     3929672    3812852
R-squared                    0.002        0.001       0.000          0.000         0.001         0.000         0.001       0.000      0.000

                                                               Investor Group with Stock Balances in 100-500k
                              (19)        (20)         (21)           (22)          (23)          (24)          (25)        (26)       (27)
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy    0.142***      0.231*     0.245***       0.219***       0.164**       0.503**       0.503**    1.727***   0.996***




                                                                                                                                       39
                           (5.20)     (2.010)    (3.470)       (4.120)        (2.560)       (2.590)        (2.600)    (4.270)    (4.880)
Number of Observations    3972792    3961900    3952076       3942932        3934249       3990232        3929395    3929672    3812852
R-squared                  0.004       0.001      0.000         0.000          0.001         0.000          0.001      0.000      0.000

                                                           Investor Group with Stock Balances in 500k-5m
                             (28)       (29)       (30)           (31)          (32)          (33)          (34)        (35)       (36)
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy   0.188***    0.152*     0.136*        0.164***       0.088*         0.076         0.076     0.865***     0.253
                           (12.85)    (1.980)    (2.040)        (4.380)       (1.980)       (1.210)       (1.450)     (4.790)    (1.560)
Number of Observations    3972792    3961900    3952076        3942932       3934249       3990232       3929395     3929672    3812852
R-squared                   0.001      0.001      0.000          0.000         0.001         0.000         0.001       0.000      0.000

                                                            Investor Group with Stock Balances in 5-10m
                            (37)        (38)       (39)           (40)          (41)          (42)           (43)       (44)       (45)
Upper Limit Hit*Net Buy   0.035**     -0.114     -0.066         -0.013        -0.077        -0.203         -0.203     -0.376     -0.834
                           (3.03)     (-1.12)    (-0.09)        (-1.11)       (-1.08)       (-1.17)        (-1.20)    (-1.32)    (-1.44)
Number of Observations    3972792    3961900    3952076        3942932       3934249       3990232        3929395    3929672    3812852
R-squared                  0.001       0.001      0.000          0.000         0.001         0.000          0.001      0.000      0.000




                                                                                                                                  40
                       Table 5. Regression Analysis of Price Reversal before and after Assignment of ST Status

This table reports the estimates from the regression in equation (2). Only the coefficient of the interaction term between the post-ST
dummy and the daily price change equal to or above 5% is reported. Both Panels show estimates using a fixed event window of [-60,
60] days around ST assignment. Panel A controls the main effects of the post-ST dummy and the dummy for above 5% daily price
change, the market-to-book ratio, size of float cap, and the average returns in the past 30 trading dates, while Panel B includes both these
control variables and the number of days to ST assignment fixed effects. Standard errors are robust and clustered by calendar date, and
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels, respectively.

                             Close to    Open to
                                                      Day 2      Day 3       Day 4       Day 5       [6,10]     [11,20]     [21,60]    [61,120]
                              Open        Close
  Panel A                        (1)        (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)       (9)           (10)
  ST*Five Above              0.016***     -0.004     0.011**     0.007*      0.006       0.001      0.012     -0.045*** -0.077***      -0.052*
                               (8.48)     (-1.32)     (3.02)     (2.28)      (1.93)      (0.40)     (1.77)      (-4.38)   (-4.37)       (-2.47)
  # of Observations            14074      14074       13973      13896       13825       13781      14358       14331     14316         14210
  Adjusted R-squared           0.046       0.004      0.004       0.003      0.003       0.002      0.012        0.046     0.069         0.020
  Control Variables             Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes

  Panel B                       (11)        (12)       (13)        (14)       (15)        (16)       (17)         (18)      (19)          (20)
  ST*Five Above              0.016***     -0.005     0.009**     0.007*      0.007*      0.001      0.013     -0.042*** -0.079***      -0.053**
                               (8.49)     (-1.46)     (2.85)     (2.23)      (2.33)      (0.25)     (1.82)      (-4.21)   (-4.82)       (-2.62)
  # of Observations            14074      14074       13973      13896       13825       13781      14358       14331     14316         14210
  Adjusted R-squared           0.102       0.047      0.072       0.072      0.082       0.076      0.085        0.116     0.143         0.036
  Control Variables             Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes
  Distance Days FE              Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes          Yes       Yes           Yes




                                                                                                                                         41
                       Table 6. Regression Analysis of Price Reversal and Trading by Large Investors in ST Stocks

This table reports the estimates from the regression in equation (3). Both Panels show the estimates using a fixed event window of [-60,
60] days around ST assignment. Panel A controls the main effects of the post-ST dummy and the dummy for above 5% daily price
change, the market-to-book ratio, size of float cap, and the average returns in the past 30 trading dates, while Panel B includes both these
control variables and the number of days to ST assignment fixed effects. Standard errors are robust and clustered by calendar date, and
t-statistics are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** represent statistical significance at the 5%, 1%, and 0.1% levels, respectively.

                            AR Day 1     AR Day 2     AR Day 3      AR Day 4     AR Day 5     CAR[6,10]    CAR[11,20]   CAR[21,60]   CAR[60,120]
  Panel A                       (1)           (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)           (7)          (8)           (9)
  ST                          -0.000        0.001        0.001        0.001       0.002*      0.009***      0.032***     0.065***      -0.019**
                              (-0.13)       (0.79)      (1.42)       (1.38)       (2.14)        (3.48)        (8.35)      (11.02)       (-2.74)
  Five Above                  -0.003       -0.005       -0.003       -0.003       -0.002        -0.007        -0.001       -0.008       -0.040*
                              (-0.83)      (-1.49)      (-1.10)      (-1.53)      (-0.59)       (-1.43)       (-0.12)      (-0.51)      (-2.13)
  ST*Five Above               0.009*       0.009*        0.006        0.006        0.001         0.009      -0.040***    -0.062***     -0.055**
                              (2.52)        (2.52)      (1.78)       (1.92)       (0.34)        (1.31)        (-3.84)      (-3.61)      (-2.60)
  Net Buy                      0.373       -0.099       -0.111        0.196       -0.418         0.475        -1.639        0.850        2.859
                              (1.57)       (-0.39)      (-0.28)      (0.72)       (-1.37)       (0.87)        (-1.48)      (0.71)        (1.43)
  ST*Net Buy                  -0.365        0.486        0.097       -0.182        0.420         0.287         2.750        0.584      2.411**
                              (-1.15)      (1.35)       (0.22)       (-0.54)      (1.02)        (0.34)        (1.54)       (0.32)        (3.30)
  Five Above*Net Buy          -0.093       -0.079       -0.495       -0.205        0.713        -0.565         0.617        1.006       5.866*
                              (-0.17)      (-0.18)      (-0.99)      (-0.55)      (1.67)        (-0.79)       (0.44)       (0.42)        (2.03)
  ST*Five Above*Net Buy        0.903     -0.178***      -0.797        0.235       -0.573      -1.106***      -4.306*      -7.063*      -9.227**
                              (1.20)       (-5.72)      (-1.26)      (0.47)       (-1.01)       (-3.90)       (-2.00)      (-2.37)      (-3.15)
  # of Observations           13911        13973        13896        13825        13781         14358         14331        14316         14210
  Adjusted R-squared           0.008        0.006        0.004        0.003        0.004         0.014         0.051        0.069        0.025
  Control Variables             Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes




                                                                                                                                         42
Panel B                   (10)        (11)        (12)       (13)      (14)        (15)        (16)        (17)         (18)
ST                       0.008       0.015       0.017      0.003     0.001       0.017      0.041*    -0.057***   -0.182***
                        (0.82)      (1.62)      (1.59)     (0.36)    (0.13)      (0.70)      (2.02)      (-3.53)     (-5.78)
Five Above              -0.002      -0.003      -0.003    -0.005*    -0.001      -0.006      -0.000      -0.007      -0.038*
                        (-0.79)     (-1.26)     (-1.30)    (-2.20)   (-0.39)     (-1.32)     (-0.02)     (-0.49)      (-2.15)
ST*Five Above           0.009*      0.008*       0.006    0.007*      0.001       0.009    -0.038***   -0.064***    -0.056**
                        (2.50)       (2.40)     (1.80)     (2.31)    (0.19)      (1.36)      (-3.69)     (-3.96)     (-2.79)
Net Buy                  0.316      -0.063      -0.136      0.125    -0.427       0.682      -1.731       1.309        2.762
                        (1.37)      (-0.30)     (-0.36)    (0.46)    (-1.33)     (1.36)      (-1.80)      (1.07)      (1.26)
ST*Net Buy              -0.208       0.583       0.187     -0.064     0.395       0.201       2.637      -0.111     1.405**
                        (-0.66)     (1.79)      (0.45)    (-0.19)    (0.97)      (0.26)       (1.63)     (-0.06)      (3.08)
Five Above*Net Buy       0.046       0.003      -0.404     -0.274     0.727      -0.867       0.932       0.024       -5.302
                        (0.09)      (0.01)      (-0.84)   (-0.75)    (1.66)      (-1.24)     (0.74)       (0.01)     (-1.79)
ST*Five Above*Net Buy    0.592    -0.114***   -0.304***     0.225    -0.558    -1.260***    -4.264*     -6.070*     -8.642**
                        (0.83)      (-5.42)     (-5.72)    (0.46)    (-0.99)     (-3.05)     (-2.12)     (-2.13)     (-2.98)
# of Observations       13911       13973       13896      13825     13781       14358       14331       14316        14210
Adjusted R-squared       0.051       0.075       0.073      0.084     0.079       0.087       0.120       0.143        0.041
Control Variables         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
Distance Days FE         Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes




                                                                                                                    43
