NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW WELL DO STRUCTURAL DEMAND MODELS WORK? COUNTERFACTUAL
PREDICTIONS IN SCHOOL CHOICE
Parag A. Pathak
Peng Shi
Working Paper 24017
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24017

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank Boston Mayor Thomas Menino and Boston Public School Superintendent Carol
Johnson for authorizing this study. Boston Public Schools staff, including Kamal Chavda, Tim
Nicolette, Peter Sloan, Kim Rice, and Jack Yessayan, provided essential help. We are grateful to
our discussant Liran Einav for comments inspiring Section 7, Josh Angrist, Dan McFadden and
Ariel Pakes for encouragement, and participants at the McFadden 80th Birthday conference and
the NBER Market Design conference for input. We also thank Nikhil Agarwal, Isaiah Andrews,
Steve Berry, Glenn Ellison, Drew Fudenberg, Adam Kapor, Patrick Kline, and Michael Whinston
for feedback. Financial support is from the National Science Foundation under grant
SES-1426566 and the W.T. Grant Foundation. Pathak is on the scientific advisory board of the
Institute for Innovation in Public School Choice. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Parag A. Pathak and Peng Shi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

How Well Do Structural Demand Models Work? Counterfactual Predictions in School Choice
Parag A. Pathak and Peng Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 24017
November 2017
JEL No. C10,C78,D12,I20
ABSTRACT
Discrete choice demand models are widely used for counterfactual policy simulations, yet their
out-of-sample performance is rarely assessed. This paper uses a large-scale policy change in
Boston to investigate the performance of discrete choice models of school demand. In 2013,
Boston Public Schools considered several new choice plans that differ in where applicants can
apply. At the request of the mayor and district, we forecast the alternatives' effects by estimating
discrete choice models. This work led to the adoption of a plan which significantly altered choice
sets for thousands of applicants. Pathak and Shi (2014) update forecasts prior to the policy change
and describe prediction targets involving access, travel, and unassigned students. Here, we assess
how well these ex ante counterfactual predictions compare to actual outcome under the new
choice sets. We find that a simple ad hoc model performs as well as the more complicated
structural choice models for one of the two grades we examine. However, the structural models'
inconsistent performance is largely due to prediction errors in applicant characteristics, which are
auxiliary inputs. Once we condition on the actual applicant characteristics, the structural choice
models outperform the ad hoc alternative in predicting both choice patterns and policy relevant
outcomes. Moreover, refitting the models using the new choice data does not significantly
improve their prediction accuracy, suggesting that the choice models are indeed “structural.” Our
findings show that structural demand models can effectively predict counterfactual outcomes, as
long there are accurate forecasts about auxiliary input variables.

Parag A. Pathak
Department of Economics, E52-426
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
ppathak@mit.edu
Peng Shi
Marshall School of Business, BRI 303D,
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
pengshi@usc.edu

1

Introduction

Developing models capable of quantitatively forecasting the effects of policy changes has been an
aim of economics since at least Hurwicz (1950) and Marschak (1953). In recent years, design-based
research strategies that estimate particular parameters or causal effects have become increasingly
popular. The design-based approach, however, does not immediately allow for ex ante policy evaluations of changes that lie far outside historical experience. An alternative approach that allows for
ex ante evaluation of new policies is structural modeling, which involves estimating an underlying
model of agent decision-making and simulating equilibrium outcomes induced by this model under
the new policy. Both Angrist and Pischke (2010) and Heckman (2010) attribute the growth of
design-based research to skepticism about structural modeling, particularly its reliance on parametric and behavioral assumptions.
Though opinions vary on the value of structural models, there is one area of consensus: there
are relatively few systematic evaluations of the accuracy of structural models in predicting counterfactual outcomes. For instance, Angrist and Pischke (2010, “Industrial Disorganization”) lament:
“Many new empirical industrial organization studies forecast counterfactual outcomes based
on models and simulations, without a clear foundation in experience. [...] At minimum,
we’d expect such a judgement to be based on evidence showing that the simulation-based
approach delivers reasonably accurate predictions. As it stands, proponents of this work
seem to favor it as a matter of principle.”1
This paper aims to fill this void by evaluating the performance of predictions from discrete choice
demand models, which underlie many studies in the new empirical industrial organization, using a
large-scale policy change that affected thousands of families in Boston in 2014.
Each year, thousands of Boston families submit rank order lists of public schools to the city’s
student assignment plan.2 In 2013, Boston Public Schools’ (BPS) officials, the mayor, and members
of the school committee sought to modify the plan in order to assign students to schools closer to
their homes, in part to reduce transportation costs. BPS publicized a number of plans that redrew
neighborhood boundaries and changed applicant choice sets. BPS and the broader community
were interested in predicting both the choices families would make under these alternatives and
the ensuing final assignments.3 The mayor of Boston and the superintendent of BPS delayed the
1

Misra and Nair (2011) use a structural agency model to design and implement a compensation scheme and report
that the new scheme’s outcomes match those from the model. For merger analysis, Peters (2006) examines the
predictive value of structural simulation methods for airline mergers and finds they do not accurately predict postmerger ticket prices. Ashenfelter and Hosken (2008) argue that design-based estimates of mergers differ markedly
from structural estimates. In response to Angrist and Pischke (2010), Nevo and Whinston (2010) describe a few
counterfactual validations in the context of merger analysis and Einav and Levin (2010) support more retrospective
analyses of past mergers, though they also express skepticism about cross-merger extrapolation. Lumsdaine, Stock,
and Wise (1992) estimate models of retirement behavior before and after the introduction of a pension incentive, and
using data from before the incentive, they forecast the effect on retirement.
2
The Boston assignment system has been subject to a number of theoretical studies including Abdulkadiroğlu and
Sönmez (2003), Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth, and Sönmez (2005), Pathak and Sönmez (2008), and Dur, Kominers,
Pathak, and Sönmez (2016).
3
For more details, see Goldstein (2012) and Handy (2012). BPS communications reported more than 1,850 residents

2

timeline for selecting a new plan and asked us to forecast the effects of these alternatives, stating
(Menino, 2012b):
“We have the opportunity to generate an advanced analysis that will allow us to better
predict how families would make choices in the real world [...] This is something we have
never been able to do before.”
Our policy report, Pathak and Shi (2013), uses historical participation and rankings to predict new
choices under the different proposals. The methodology is based on structural choice modeling.
BPS administrators and the public referred to the report to compare alternatives and ultimately
selected a new plan.
In January 2014, families throughout Boston ranked schools under new choice sets. For a typical
applicant in grade K1, the new system added three new school choices, removed sixteen choices,
and kept nine choices intact. The magnitude of the change is similarly large for grade K2. Figure 1
summarizes the timeline of the reform. Pathak and Shi (2014) published predictions of the outcome
of this policy reform before it happened, based on estimating structural models using the latest data
before the reform. In this paper, we evaluate these predictions using the actual choices of students
after the reform.
To describe our approach and questions, we first introduce some notation. Let X encode the
characteristics of student and schools, including the set of schools to which each student can apply.
Let Y encode student choice outcomes, which is a rank-ordering over eligible school programs for
each student. We observe (X, Y ) under the existing policy and can compute equilibrium outcomes of
interest, such as the chance students from various neighborhoods have of being assigned to higherperforming schools, as well as the distance students travel and the number unassigned.4 These
predictions target come from Pathak and Shi (2013) and were central to the Boston policy debate.
Let M (X, Y ) denote these equilibrium outcomes. This is a well-defined function of X and Y , since
the assignment mechanism can be exactly recreated before and after the reform.
The forecasting problem is to predict what happens under the new policy. Because the assignment mechanism in Boston is strategy-proof, we assume that the historical choice rankings of
students, which is restricted to schools in their choice set, reflect their underlying preferences across
the set of all schools, which we do not observe but can estimate using a structural choice model. We
use this estimated model to simulate choices under the new choice sets and forecast the equilibrium
outcomes of interest. Our paper focuses on two questions:
1. How well do structural models predict equilibrium outcomes important for the school choice
context?
2. How well do structural demand models predict raw choice patterns?
offered feedback on the plans. For specific reactions to proposed plans, see Vaznis and Andersen (2012) and Burge
(2012).
4
We refer to these as equilibrium outcomes because they depend not only on the behavior of an individual student,
but also on the behavior of everyone else.

3

Let (X ∗ , Y ∗ ) be the dataset observed under the new policy regime. The first question compares
the actual equilibrium outcomes M (X ∗ , Y ∗ ) with the forecast M (X, Y ), which depends both on a
forecast of characteristics X and the choice model. The second question compares actual choices
Y ∗ with the predicted choices conditioned on the actual applicant characteristics. Conditioning on
the actual characteristics isolates the performance of the demand model from auxiliary forecasts of
characteristics.
An innovation of our research design, illustrated in Figure 2, is that we published predictions
prior to the policy change. Opportunities for the external validation of structural models are rare,
especially in high-stakes contexts where they had a direct influence on a policy decision. The benefit
of publishing forecasts before the new policy is that it guarantees that our forecasts and hypotheses
are in no way biased by the actual outcome. This goes one step further to ensure genuine out-ofsample assessment than papers that use a hold-out sample of past outcomes such as Wise (1985),
Todd and Wolpin (2006), and Keane and Wolpin (2007), because it prevents us from possibly
estimating multiple structural models and only reporting what matches the outcome. Moreover,
even when researchers do not directly look at post-reform data, qualitative information about
the outcome could unconsciously influence modeling decisions. Motivated by Nevo and Whinston
(2010)’s call to compare structural models to other possibilities, we also report forecasts not based
on random utility maximization. The simple alternative we propose provides a reference point from
which to judge relative performance.
The structural choice models we fit are the multinomial logit (MNL) model and the mixed MNL
model. In a pioneering contribution, McFadden and co-authors used the MNL model to study the
impact of BART, San Francisco’s rapid transit system (McFadden, Reid, Talvitie, Johnson, and
Associates, 1979). Prior to the introduction of BART, they collect data on the travel behavior
of a sample of individuals, and estimate MNL models to predict their behavior if BART were to
be introduced. After BART began, they compare the predictions with the actual travel behavior
of these individuals. McFadden, Talvitie, and Associates (1977) provide a detailed account of the
performance of these models. McFadden (2001) summarizes
“our overall forecasts for BART were quite accurate, particularly in comparison to the official
1973 forecast [...]. We were lucky to be so accurate, given the standard errors of our forecasts,
but even discounting luck, our study provided strong evidence that disaggregate RUM-based
models could outperform conventional methods.”
Based in part on the BART experience, random utility models are widely employed in travel analysis
and other areas of economics involving choice (McFadden, 2001). There have also been many
developments in choice modeling in the subsequent four decades. Yet, to our knowledge, our paper
is the first post-BART study to publish counterfactual predictions of a structural choice model
before the policy reform, and follow up to compare with the actual outcome.
Our exercise has the potential to provide unusually compelling evidence about the forecasting
performance of structural demand models and their value in counterfactual analysis. On one hand,
our setting is in many respects the ideal for structural choice modeling. First, the choice data
4

we use is richer than the typical data for discrete choice modeling, as we not only have the top
choice of students but also their entire ranking of schools. This helps us to estimate choice model
parameters precisely. Second, our dataset includes a large number of observables, including student
characteristics and exact geographic location. Third, Boston’s choice plan has been in existence
for more than two decades, so there is a wealth of knowledge and shared experience about the
system among participants. The current strategy-proof system, in place since 2005, eliminates the
need for participants to be strategic about their choices, and the advice BPS provides participants
reflects this feature.5 The fact that strategy-proof mechanisms generate reliable demand data is an
argument advocates have used in their favor.6 Finally, the policy change is relatively simple, being
primarily a change in choice sets, and this allows us to easily decompose sources of error, which
may not be possible in a more complicated policy change.
On the other hand, the premise of our exercise, like other predictions based on discrete choice
models of demand, is that preferences are stable, can be estimated accurately, and can be used to
extrapolate to different environments. Along with a change in the choice set, BPS also presented
the choice set in a different way, which may have induced a change in underlying preferences (Figure
3 shows how choices were presented). In a field experiment, Hastings and Weinstein (2008) show
that choice behavior in Charlotte’s school choice plan can be swayed by informational cues. In
other contexts, interventions simplifying information can significantly alter choice behavior (Kling,
Mullainathan, Shafir, Vermuelen, and Wrobel, 2012). If these features dominate decision-making,
then they may interfere with the reliability of forecasts that assume stable preferences over time.
Our study tests a crucial assumption of most structural choice models, that to a first-order
approximation, there exists stable underlying preferences about potential school assignments that
are not widely swayed by behavior considerations such as framing and informational cues. The result
is relevant for a large and growing literature using choice modeling to study school assignment.7
It is also relevant for research that uses a random utility choice model as a component of a larger
structural model.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides details on the Boston student
assignment plan and events leading up to the adoption of a new plan in 2014. Section 3 describes the
data, forecast targets, and the prediction generation process. Section 4 discusses how we evaluate
predictions, and Section 5 reviews hypotheses motivated by back-testing our framework. Section 6
compares our predictions to the the actual outcomes in the first year of the new plan. The section
also decomposes sources of prediction error by examining changes to the set of participants and
5

For instance, the 2012 School Guide states: “List your school choices in your true order of preference. If you list
a popular school first, you won’t hurt your chances of getting your second choice school if you don’t get your first
choice.”
6
Several authors have made this point, including Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Roth, and Sönmez (2006), Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, and Roth (2009) and Sönmez (2013).
7
The growing literature estimating school demand from similar datasets includes: Abdulkadiroğlu, Agarwal, and
Pathak (2015), Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters (2017), Agarwal and Somaini (2014), Burgess,
Greaves, Vignoles, and Wilson (2015), Calsamiglia, Fu, and Guell (2017), Glazerman and Dotter (2016), Harris and
Larsen (2015), Hastings, Kane, and Staiger (2009), He (2012), Hwang (2015), Kapor, Neilson, and Zimmerman (2017),
Ruijs and Oosterbeek (2012), and Walters (2014).

5

the underlying stability of the demand model. Section 7 reports on how prediction errors affect the
ranking of plans other than the one Boston ultimately selected. Section 8 concludes and discusses
directions for future work.

2

Background

2.1

School Choice in Boston

Boston Public Schools has one of the nation’s most well-known school choice plans. From 1988 to
2013, the city was divided into the North, West, and East Zones, shown in Figure 3, for elementary
school admissions. There are roughly 25 to 30 elementary schools in each zone, and each school
may have multiple programs. There is often a separate program for regular education students and
for English language learners (ELL), and there may be specialized ELL programs for students of a
certain language group. Students are allowed to rank programs in any school in the zone in which
they reside as well as any school within a one mile of their residence and a handful of city-wide
schools. Students can rank as many programs as they want, as long as the programs meet certain
eligibility criteria.8
At each program, students are prioritized as follows: continuing students (who were already
assigned to the school in an earlier grade) have the highest priority, followed by students who have
an older sibling at the school, followed by other students. Until 2013, for half of the program seats,
students residing in the walk zone obtained priority, but this priority did not extend to the other
half. A single lottery number served as the tie-breaker.9
Since 2005, after students submitted their choices, they were processed through a version of
Gale and Shapley (1962)’s student-proposing deferred acceptance (DA) algorithm (Abdulkadiroğlu,
Pathak, Roth, and Sönmez, 2005; Pathak and Sönmez, 2008). This algorithm takes as inputs both
students’ submitted preference rankings and their priorities to generate an assignment. DA works
as follows:
1. Each student applies to his first choice program. Each program ranks applicants by their
priority, rejecting the lowest-ranked students in excess of its capacity. The rest of applicants
are provisionally admitted: they are not rejected at this step but may be rejected in later
steps.
2. The rejected students apply to their next most preferred program (if any). Each program
considers these new applicants together with applicants that it admitted provisionally in the
previous round, ranks them by their priority, rejecting the lowest-ranking students in excess
of capacity. This produces a new set of provisionally admitted students at each program.
The algorithm terminates when there are no new applicants (some may remain unassigned). Under
DA, it is a weakly dominant strategy for all participants to rank programs truthfully (Dubins and
8

For example, in order to rank a ELL program, the student must not be a native English speaker and must not
exceed a certain score in a BPS administered language test. All students are able to rank regular education programs.
9
Dur, Kominers, Pathak, and Sönmez (2016) present additional details on Boston’s DA implementation.

6

Freedman, 1981; Roth, 1982). Moreover, this algorithm produces a stable assignment (Gale and
Shapley, 1962; Abdulkadiroğlu and Sönmez, 2003).

2.2

Policy Reform

The new policy, which began in 2014, affects the set of schools each applicant is allowed to rank.
There were two major rationales for the reform. First was the desire to assign students to schools
closer to home, which many families value and which reduces the school district’s busing costs.10
Second, there were longstanding concerns about inequities in the three zone system.
The reform was informed by the Pathak and Shi (2013) report, which used choice modeling
and simulations to predict the effects of the proposed plans. The study was commissioned by a
mayoral-appointed city committee, which met for over a year and hosted community meetings to
collect feedback and discuss proposals.11 The report’s methodology inspired BPS to later propose a
10 Zone plan and a modified 11 Zone plan while also considering other plans from the community.
Shi (2015) provides more details on the role of the report. It’s worth noting that there were two
prior failed attempts to reform the choice sets of students in 2003 and 2009. Decision-makers did
not have access to comparable forecasts during these prior attempts.
Based on the Pathak and Shi (2013) report and other discussions, the Boston School Committee
adopted the Home-Based plan (see Seelye (2013) and Shi (2013)). This plan constructs customized
choice sets based on applicants’ exact residential address. It uses a BPS categorization of schools into
quality tiers, which are computed using schools’ prior Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment
System (MCAS) test score growth and levels. Tiers were finalized as of January 2013 for 2014
admissions. Under the new plan, every applicant can choose from any school within one mile (as
the crow flies), the two closest Tier 1, the four closest Tier 1 or 2, the six closest Tier 1, 2, or
3 schools, and the three closest “option schools” chosen by BPS. The set of choices also includes
the closest early learning center (ELC) and the closest school with an advanced work class (AWC)
program.12
Families access their choice set via an online portal, which shows a map of all schools in the
choice menu and a summary of their attributes. Figure 3 illustrates how participants see choice
information. The online application platform lists information on transportation, tier category,
10

This motivation was emphasized by Mayor Menino, who spent the last year of his administration advocating for
a “radically different school assignment process—one that puts priority on children attending schools closer to their
homes” Menino (2012a). Other districts have similar objectives; see, e.g., the discussion about Seattle in Pathak and
Sönmez (2013).
11
BPS’s initial plans either divided the city into 6, 9, 11, or 23 zones or assigned schools based purely on neighborhood. When these plans were publicly unveiled in September 2012, they were met with widespread criticism (see,
e.g., Seelye (2012)).
12
There are a few exceptions to this formula. First, students residing in parts of Roxbury, Mission Hill, and
Dorchester are allowed to rank the Jackson Mann school. Second, because transportation outside of East Boston
requires tunnel travel, East Boston students are eligible for any East Boston school. East Boston students have
priority over non-East Boston students at East Boston schools. Non-East Boston students have priority over East
Boston students for non-East Boston Schools. Finally, students who are English Language Learners or special needs
have additional choices. Level 1, 2, and 3 ELL students are allowed to apply to any compatible ELL program within
their ELL zone, a six-zone overlay of Boston. Substantially-separate special education students do not apply in round
one.

7

and why the choice can be ranked. Previous years’ school brochures did not include comparable
information.
Aside from the changes to choice menus, the new plan also eliminates walk zone priority (Dur,
Kominers, Pathak, and Sönmez, 2016). The school priorities are: continuing students, followed by
siblings, followed by other students. As before, a single lottery number serves as tie-breaker. There
are no other changes to the implementation of the assignment algorithm.
The new plan involves large changes in applicant choice sets. This fact can be seen in Table
1, which shows that for an average grade K1 student, the reform adds three new options, removes
sixteen options, and keeps nine options intact. This implies that the new plan removes 63% of
the old choice options, and 21% of choice options under the new plan were not in the old plan.
The magnitude of this change is reduced when we focus only on highly ranked choices, but the
magnitude is nevertheless substantial given there are thousands of applicants in each grade. Table
1 reports that about 32% of old choice options that are ranked top five were no longer offered in
the new plan, while about 10% of top five choices under the new plan were not available options
under the old plan. The magnitude of the change in choice sets is similar for grade K2 applicants.

3

Prediction Approach

3.1

Data Sources

Our data come from BPS round one choice and enrollment files covering years 2010 to 2014. We
focus on round one assignment, which takes place in January and February, because over 80% of
students are assigned then. Forecasts are based on data from 2010 through 2013. We use the data
from the first post-reform year (2014) to evaluate these forecasts.
The choice data contain preference rankings and demographic information for every round one
participant. The fields include student ID number; English language learner (ELL) status and first
language; special education or disability status; geocode (a geographic partition of the city into 868
regions); school program to which the student has guaranteed priority (designation for continuing
students); lottery number; first 10 choices and priorities at each; school program to which the
student was assigned and the priority used for that assignment. Using the assigned school and
program codes, we infer each school program’s capacity available for round one assignment. We
place students in one of 14 neighborhoods using the geocode.13
The enrollment data are a December snapshot and contain additional student demographics.
The fields are enrolled school and program, grade, geocode, address, gender, race, and languages
spoken at home. The file covers the vast majority of the students in the choice data and can be
linked by student ID number. When there is a conflict between the demographic information in the
choice and enrollment files, we use the choice file. We also match geocodes to 2010 census block
groups, which contain median household income.
13
For internal reporting, BPS classifies students into 16 neighborhoods. We combine three neighborhoods with few
students, Central Boston, Back Bay, and Fenway/Kenmore, into one neighborhood that we call “Downtown.”

8

We have school characteristics for each year between 2010 and 2014. The school file has the
building code, address, school type, % of students of each race, % of ELL students, % of students
who have special education requirements, and % of students who scored Advanced or Proficient in
grades 3, 4, and 5 for MCAS math and English in the previous year. To measure distance to school,
we use walking distance estimates from Google Maps API.14

3.2

Forecast Targets

Each targeted equilibrium outcome corresponds to a single number for each grade and each neighborhood. They are defined as follows:
• Access to Quality: The chance an average student from this neighborhood has of being
assigned to a top tier school if he wanted to be assigned to such schools, holding fixed the
submitted rankings of other students. In particular, we define a “top tier school” to be any
Tier 1 or 2 schools within the student’s choice menu, and define “wanting to be assigned to
such schools” as ranking all eligible programs in such schools, and ranking them above all
other programs. students’ submitted rankings.
• Distance: The average distance between the residences of assigned students from this neighborhood and their respective school assignments.
• Unassigned: The number of students who are unassigned from this neighborhood at the end
of round one.
We refer to these as equilibrium outcomes because they depend on the preference submissions of
all students since program capacities are limited and assignment depends on each program’s level of
competition. As previously mentioned, we chose these outcomes because the Boston debate focused
on equal access to quality schools and assignments close to home. A forecast of unassigned students
at the end of round one is important for facilities’ planning, staffing, and other budgeting issues,
especially for grade K2 as BPS is required by law to add capacity in later rounds to assign every
K2 applicant.
The second set of targets involve student choices. We predict both individual student choices
and choice patterns across a group of students.
For individual choices, we predict the k options ranked highest for each student, where k
varies from one to three. For a given pair of options in a student’s choice set, we also predict
whether the student would prefer one option over the other.
For distribution of choices, we predict the percentage of top k choices for each school by
grade and neighborhood. Furthermore, we predict the aggregate distribution of the top two choices
for students who rank at least two choices.
14

For students with missing address information, we treat the centroid of the student’s geocode as the address.

9

3.3

Generating Predictions

We use data from before the reform to fit choice models to forecast outcomes for the reform’s first
year and compare these forecasts to outcomes induced by the actual choice data submittted in the
reform’s first year.15 To protect the integrity of our out-of-sample comparison, we specify choice
models and forecasts prior to the reform by posting a pre-analysis plan in Pathak and Shi (2014)
before the post-reform choice data were available.16
Our counterfactual predictions come from three choice models, two of which are based on random
utility models. Each choice model maps an individual student’s characteristics and the set of eligible
programs in his menu to a ranking over programs. The three choice models we examine are:
• Multinomial Logit (MNL): This widely-used and easy-to-estimate model is motivated by
random utility maximization. It is developed in McFadden (1974) and used in the BART
analysis (McFadden, Talvitie, and Associates, 1977). It is also the basis of the Pathak and
Shi (2013) report that informed the Boston reform.
• Mixed MNL (MMNL): This model is a popular alternative to MNL since it can capture
substitution patterns that violate the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives property of MNL
models. Mixture models are a significant development in discrete choice models of demand in
the years following McFadden (1974) (see e.g., Berry, Levinsohn, and Pakes (1995) and Nevo
(2001)).17
• Lexicographic: This model serves as our benchmark for models not motivated by random
utility maximization. The model is motivated by psychology and marketing literature. It
assumes that applicants rank programs based on an intuitive heuristic.
Before describing each of the choice models in detail, we first describe how they are used to
compute forecasts. For choice outcomes, we use the choice model to predict the relative ranking
of options within the choice menu for the actual set of students who applied in the first reform
year. We use the actual set of students to isolate choice prediction from population forecasting. For
individual choices, we set the prediction to be the modal outcome after many simulations.18 For
choice patterns, we set the prediction to be the empirical choice distribution from the simulations.
For forecasting equilibrium outcomes, there are additional simulation layers. Rather than using the actual applicants, as in the choice forecasts, we simulate the pool of applicants and their
15

The outcome induced by the actual choice data may not be identical to the actual round one assignment outcome,
since we use previous year’s program capacities in our computation rather than the actual capacities. We abstract
away from forecasting capacities as they are at the discretion of the school board and outside the scope of our structural
model.
16
Pathak and Shi (2014) describe the specification of the mixed MNL model, but did not report estimates before
posting the report. Estimating the mixed MNL model was too computationally-intensive to complete in time. Pathak
and Shi (2015) update the report with the mixed MNL forecasts.
17
McFadden (2001) states that the MNL methods used to account for substitution between modes of transportation
in the BART study are inferior to current methods.
18
We focus on the mode because the best deterministic prediction of a biased coin that yields heads 60% of the
times is that it always yields heads.

10

characteristics. At the time of the typical counterfactual forecast, an analyst does not know future participants. With the simulated applicant pool, we then use each choice model to generate a
complete ranking of options within each student’s menu, similar to method in the choice forecasts.
Next, we truncate the generated preference rankings to the first ten choices. Truncation is
necessary because the choice data we receive from BPS only have the first ten choices, although
there is no restriction on the number of choices in the mechanism. More importantly, this assumption
allows us to sidestep modeling students’ outside options, for which we have little data.19 In Pathak
and Shi (2013), we performed sensitivity analysis on list length and found ten to be reasonable. In
Section 6.2, we further examine this assumption. Another parameter that affects the equilibrium
outcome is the number of seats in each school program. For the purpose of the prediction exercise
in this paper, we generate predictions based on the assumption that the school board uses the
same capacities as in the previous year. In practice, Boston runs DA several times with minor
tweaks to capacity but does not report the outcome until the final run of round one assignment. To
abstract away from this back-and-forth iteration, we use these capacities when we compute actual
equilibrium outcomes using the actual choice submissions in the first post-reform year.
Finally, we generate uniformly distributed lottery numbers for each student and compute the
assignment using the DA algorithm. In computing access to quality, we compute the probability
that the student receives a lottery number that is good enough to be assigned one of the Tier 1 or
2 schools in his menu.20
3.3.1

Multinomial Logit (MNL) Choice Model

The MNL choice model assumes that students rank program according to a latent utility for each
program, which depends on the observed characteristics in a certain way. Let uij be the unobserved
latent utility of student i for program j, and xij be a K-dimensional vector of observed characteristics
corresponding to the student and program, such as the student’s distance to the program or whether
the student has a sibling at the same school. The k th component of this vector is denoted xkij . The
utility of student i for program j is assumed to take the form:
uij = δs(j) +

K
X

β k xkij + ij ,

(1)

k=1
19

Moreover, students often enroll in options they did not rank but could have ranked, undermining the usual
assumption that an unranked option is inferior to the student’s outside option. In our interactions with parents and
BPS staff, it seems that many families are ranking few options not because they have better outside options, but
because they feel confident they would get into the ones they picked.
20
This probability is estimated in a tractable way as follows. If there is at least one Tier 1 or 2 school with a
program, with excess capacity, for which the student is eligible, then the student’s access to quality is 100%. If all
such programs are full, then we compute a lottery cutoff for the student, which is the worst lottery number needed
for that student to displace out at least one currently-assigned student from one of these programs, and we report
the chance that the student gets a lottery number at least as high. As shown in Azevedo and Leshno (2016), this
approach computes access to quality exactly in a continuum large market model, and is a good approximation in a
discrete market with many participants.

11

where s(j) denotes the school containing the program21 , δs(j) is a school effect, β is a K-dimensional
vector of coefficients, and ij represents an unobserved idiosyncratic taste. We assume that ij
is distributed according to a type-I extreme value distribution, Gumbel(0,1). Since utility has
no scale, we normalize the scale parameter to one. The school effect captures unobserved school
characteristics such as safety, reputation, facilities, environment, and teacher quality. The estimated
parameters are (δ, β).
The list of characteristics in xij are as follows.22
• distance: walking distance from the student’s residence to the school;
• continuing: indicator for whether the student is already enrolled in the school at the previous
grade. This primarily affects grade K2, for which many applicants are already enrolled in BPS
in grade K1.23
• sibling: indicator for whether the student has one or more sibling(s) already enrolled at the
school;
• ell match: indicator for the student being ELL and the program being specialized for ELL;
• ell language match: indicator for the student being ELL and the program having a languagespecific ELL program in the student’s first language;
• walk zone: indicator for whether the student lives in the school’s (one mile) walk zone.
The list of characteristics also includes student-school interaction terms. The interacted student
characteristics are race and the median household income of the student’s census block group.24
The interacted school characteristics are distance and the following:
• mcas: the proportion of the school’s students who score Advanced or Proficient in the previous
year’s MCAS standardized test for math, averaging the proportions for grades 3, 4, and 5.25
• % white/asian: the proportion of the school’s students who are White or Asian.
Hausman and Ruud (1987) extend MNL models to situations with ranking data, and we estimate
the parameters (δ, β) by maximum likelihood. To quantify uncertainty in the estimation, we estimate
21

Each school may have multiple programs such as regular education or a specialized program for English Language
Learners. Since students may later transfer between programs within a school, and since Pathak and Shi (2013) did
not find significant program fixed effects, we include a school effect rather than a program effect.
22
The rationale for this list is in our pre-analysis plan Pathak and Shi (2014).
23
Grade K1 is before mandatory school starts, so not everyone has to be enrolled in K1. In fact, BPS only has
about half as many K1 seats as it has K2 seats.
24
The race data include whether the student is Black, Hispanic, Asian, White, or Other. Based on comparing
alternatives, the pre-analysis plan only includes interaction terms that are statistically in the back-test in Pathak
and Shi (2014). White, Asian, and Others are therefore grouped together for all three interactions, and Black and
Hispanic are grouped together for two of the interactions. Table A1 reports the set of interaction terms.
25
The MCAS test begins at grade 3. Grade 5 is the highest grade in many elementary schools. We only choose math
because it is highly correlated with English, with a correlation of 0.84 in both 2012 and 2013. MCAS performance
levels need not be a measure of school effectiveness. Abdulkadiroğlu, Pathak, Schellenberg, and Walters (2017) show
that in New York City, applicant preferences are uncorrelated with effectiveness once we control for peer quality.

12

a covariance matrix by taking the inverse of the Hessian of the log likelihood function at the
maximum. Table A1 reports estimated parameters and standard errors.
When simulating choices using the MNL model, we first draw parameters (δ, β) using the point
estimate and covariance matrix from the maximum likelihood estimation. We then draw idiosyncratic tastes ij independently for each student i and program j. Hence, the simulated choices
capture both uncertainty in the model estimation and the unobserved components of preferences.
3.3.2

Mixed MNL (MMNL) Choice Model

This mixed MNL model adds applicant-specific random coefficients to the MNL model, allowing the
model to capture heterogeneous preferences for observed characteristics. Suppose we place random
coefficients on the first L components of xij . The model specifies the latent utility of student i for
program j as
uij = δs(j) +

K
X

β k xkij

+

k=1

L
X

γil xlij + ij ,

l=1

γi ∼ N (0, Σ),
where δ and β are fixed effects and coefficients in the MNL model and γi is a L-dimensional
vector of individual coefficients, assumed to be distributed according to a multivariate normal
distribution. The mean is zero without loss of generality because it is already captured in β, and
the covariance matrix Σ satisfies certain restrictions that we specify below. The idiosyncratic term,
ij , is distributed Gumbel(0,1) as in the MNL model. The estimated parameters are (δ, β, Σ). The
set of characteristics xij is the same as in the MNL model and also include mcas and % white/asian
(which are explained in Section 3.3.1).
We allow random coefficients for the following characteristics, which we organize into “blocks.”
We assume independence across blocks but allow arbitrary covariance within each block. The blocks
are:
Block

Features

1

ell match

2

walk zone

3

distance, mcas, % white/asian.

The covariance matrix Σ therefore satisfies the restriction


Σ1

0


Σ=0

Σ2

0

0

0




0 ,
Σ3

where Σ1 , Σ2 , and Σ3 are 1×1, 1×1 and 3×3 symmetric positive definite matrices. This formulation
allows students to have heterogeneous preferences for ELL programs (if applicable), for schools in
the walk zone, and for distance, school performance, and school demographics.
13

Because the log-likelihood function cannot be expressed in a closed form and is no longer globally
concave, we fit the model by Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods. One difficulty with our
specification is that there are 75 school effects. As far as we are aware, the state-of-the-art MCMC
techniques for including fixed effects in mixed logit models, described in Train (2003), involve adding
a layer of Gibbs sampling and simulating the conditional distribution of the fixed effects using the
Random Walk Metropolis-Hasting algorithm. However, simulating a 75-dimensional distribution
is prohibitively slow using Random Walk Metropolis. We therefore use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo
(HMC) , which incorporates the gradient of the log likelihood function, to quickly update the 75dimensional fixed effect (Neal, 2011). We fit the model by using 1,000,000 iterations of MCMC
sampling, throwing out the first half as burn-in. To check for convergence, we repeat the MCMC
procedure six times with independent draws with random starting values. The results from the
seven runs are nearly identical. Tables A1 and A2 report the estimated parameters and standard
errors. Additional details on the MCMC procedure are in Appendix A.
When simulating choices using the mixed MNL model, we first draw (δ, β, Σ) from the posterior
distribution of the MCMC, then draw individual coefficients γi ∼ N (0, Σ), and finally draw the
idiosyncratic taste shocks ij .
3.3.3

Lexicographic Choice Model

When evaluating structural choice models, Nevo and Whinston (2010) emphasize the importance of
comparing to an alternative. We therefore consider a model motivated by intuitive heuristics. We
posit that every student ranks the programs in his menu lexicographically based on the following
hierarchy, treating the highest hierarchy as most important and using subsequent hierarchies to
break ties.
Hierarchy
1 (most important)

Criteria
(for continuing students) current program

2

(for continuing students) another program in current school

3

programs in a school where sibling attends

4

(for ELL students) ELL program

5

(for ELL students) ELL program in home language

6

better tier school

7

closer walking distance

.

Students only consider the hierarchy that pertains to them. For example, applicants who are
not continuing students do not consider hierarchies 1 or 2 and non-ELL students do not consider
hierarchies 4 and 5.
This choice model does not require parameter estimation, but it is still motivated by past choice
behavior and expectations of how applicants would choose in the new plan.26 For instance, the
vast majority of continuing students (91%) rank their current program first, and we anticipated
26

This model is also motivated by a report from an independent consulting company commissioned by BPS when
the initial plans were announced. That report evaluated plans by using tiers first and then distance.

14

this pattern to continue under the new choice sets. Similarly, most students who have a sibling
at a school rank that school first. Furthermore, from conversation with parents and BPS staff, we
learned that many people expect families to simply choose schools in the highest tier first and then
break ties within tier using distance. For ELL students, BPS staff believed from their interactions
with families that the vast majority of ELL students would prefer ELL programs, especially ones
targeted to the student’s home language.
The Lexicographic model is motivated by the psychology and marketing literature. The model
is related to Tversky (1969)’s lexicographic semi-order choice model in which options are rated with
respect to a variety of attributes and there is a lexicographic order across attributes. Between two
options, an agent first compares the most important attribute, and if there is significant difference,
the agent chooses the better option according to this attribute; if there is little difference, then the
agent goes to the next attribute. This encapsulates the Lexicographic model above if we define
the academic quality of schools based on tier. Another related choice model is Tversky (1972)’s
elimination by aspect. In this model, the agent chooses an option from a set by going through
different aspects (discrete attributes) in order of importance and eliminating options that are suboptimal with respect to that aspect. Although the original paper allowed for probabilistic choice of
aspects, subsequent papers use a deterministic order of aspects: see, for example, Thorngate (1980),
Johnson, Meyer, and Ghose (1989), and Payne, Bettman, and Johnson (1988). Our lexicographic
choice model is therefore a special case of elimination by aspects with a deterministic ordering of
aspect given by the hierarchy.27
The empirical support behind lexicographic models makes it a useful benchmark for random
utility models. Slovic (1975) conducts a laboratory experiment involving a choice between two
options evaluated on two dimensions, and show that the majority of subjects chose consistently based
on the more important dimension. Tversky, Sattah, and Slovic (1988) conduct other laboratory
experiments and show that in cases in which a decision is framed as choosing from a set, then a
lexicographic rule is often used. (If the same decision is framed in terms of varying a numerical
dimension to make the decision maker indifferent between the two options, then subjects are less
biased toward the more important dimension; this suggests that in decisions framed as a choice,
the lexicographic rules are good approximations of reality.) In the marketing literature, Drolet and
Luce (2004) show that lexicographic rules are adopted more often when consumers have emotional
reasons to avoid making trade-offs. Yee, Dahan, Hauser, and Orlin (2007) study consumer cell
phone choices and fit a variety of choice models to consumer choice data. A lexicographic rule by
aspect predicts 75% of choices, which is comparable to other discrete choice procedures.
3.3.4

Predicting Who Applies

For grades K1 and K2, all students who wish to be assigned to a Boston public school must
participate in the choice process. The set of applicants is therefore an important determinant of
27

The lexicographic-type models have also been axiomatized. Fishburn (1974) surveys the older literature. Kohli
and Jedidi (2007) study when lexicographic orders can they be represented by a linear utility function. Manzini and
Mariotti (2012) generalize the original Tversky (1969) model to choosing from more than two options.

15

our equilibrium targets. A large influx of new applicants in a given neighborhood would increase
the number of them unassigned and reduce average access to top tier schools. If we had data on
all potential applicants and their non-BPS options, we might include the decision to participate as
part of the structural model. Since we don’t have this data, we need to reflect the uncertainty in
the applicant pool and to capture any trends in the neighborhood participation patterns.
To predict who applies, we use demographic trend projections. A similar approach was used in
the McFadden, Reid, Talvitie, Johnson, and Associates (1979) BART study; the authors write, in
Chapter IV.3,
“It is in the nature of auxiliary forecasting that one does not have available complete structural or causal models; hence, forecasting must use data analysis and trend projection techniques, combined with available external forecasts.”
The BART study uses census demographic data and projections to construct a representative sample
of San Francisco households. Since we have the universe of participants in previous years, we directly
observe the joint distribution of household characteristics and use it to predict the applicant pool.
We construct our applicant pool as follows. For continuing students, we exploit the fact that
they are already in the previous year’s enrollment data and focus on the probability that a given
student who is currently enrolled will choose to continue on to the next grade. Once we have
a predicted probability, we include each currently enrolled student as a continuing student with
this probability, independently from everything else, and assume that the student will continue
in the same program in the next year.28 We model the probability of continuing to be normally
distributed and common across students for each grade-neighborhood combination. The common
probability for the neighborhood allows for a common shock on the number of continuing students.
For each grade and neighborhood, we estimate the mean and standard deviation of the normal
random variable based on previous years’ data. To detect time trends, we regress the number of
students per neighborhood by year using four years of data from 2010-2013. For grade-neighborhood
combinations in which the regression slope is not significant at a 95% confidence level, we discard
any time trend and use the sample mean and sample standard deviation from the previous four
years. For the grade-neighborhood combinations in which the regression slope has 95% significance,
we use the predicted mean and standard error of the regression.29
For students who are not continuing from a previous grade, we use previous year’s applicant
demographics as proxies. We first forecast the total number of new applicants from each grade and
neighborhood, and then sample with replacement from the set of the previous-year’s new applicants
from this grade and neighborhood. We model the number of new applicants as the product of two
independent normals, one representing a BPS-wide shock and the other a neighborhood-specific
shock. The common shock captures macro effects such as BPS publicity compaign or economic
28

This assumption turned out to be problematic as BPS may change the program of continuing students from one
grade to the next. This erroneous assumption contributed to our mis-predictions on continuing students, as explained
further in Section 6.3.
29
Grade K1 Charlestown and K2 Downtown are the only two grade-neighborhood combinations for which applicant
number trend steadily upwards.

16

factors driving private school enrollment. The neighborhood-specific shock captures local population
surges or unobserved reasons that affect participation. By using one common shock for all grades,
we implicitly assume that different grades trend in the same way. Pathak and Shi (2014) provide
additional details about this approach. All predictions of equilibrium outcomes are based on 1,000
independent simulated samples of the applicant pool.

4

Evaluating Predictions

4.1

Equilibrium Outcomes

Our metrics for evaluating equilibrium outcomes (i.e. access to quality, unassigned, or distance)
take several forms of uncertainty into account. Let ωh be a random variable that corresponds to
the simulated outcome for neighborhood h generated by a choice model, and let outcome vector
ω = (ω1 , ..., ωH ), where H = 14 is the number of neighborhoods. This vector is random due to the
randomness in generating the applicant pool, uncertainty in estimated choice model parameters,
the choice model’s taste shocks, and the lottery numbers. The prediction for neighborhood h is
ω̄h ≡ E[ωh ]. This quantity can be estimated by sampling ωh many times and taking the average.
Because this paper takes many samples, for notational simplicity we assume that the estimated
mean is exactly equal to ω̄h for each h.
Let ω ∗ denote the actual outcome vector, computed using the actual population, actual choices
and actual lottery numbers. The root mean squared error (RMSE), which is our main measure of
prediction error for equilibrium outcomes, is defined as the Euclidean distance between the predicted
and the actual outcome vectors:
v
uH
uX
∗
RMSE ≡ kω̄ − ω k ≡ t (ω̄h − ωh∗ )2 .
h=1

The RMSE is an overall measure of prediction error across neighborhoods. To measure uncertainty
in the prediction, we define
Expected RMSE ≡ E[kω̄ − ωk].
The expected RMSE measures how much prediction error we should expect when the choice model
is correct.
For each grade and neighborhood, and each predicted outcome, we estimate a 95% prediction
interval by computing the empirical 2.5th and 97.5th percentile of 1000 simulations. Let this interval
be denoted as Ωh . The proportion of neighborhoods for which the actual outcome is within the
prediction interval,
% in 95% P.I. = |h : ωh∗ ∈ Ωh |/H,
is our last measure of prediction accuracy. If the model is correct, then we expect this to be close
to 95% on average.

17

4.2

Choice Forecasts

To measure prediction accuracy for individual choices, we report the percentage of prediction mistakes for top choices and for pairwise comparisons from the rank order list. For a given choice
model, let yi be the vector of simulated preference rankings of student i. yi1 is the index of the
top choice, yi2 is the index of the second choice, and so on. Define the set of top k choices as
Yik ≡ {yi1 , ..., yik }. Similarly, let yi∗ denote the student’s actual choice ranking, ri denote the actual
number of choices ranked, and Yik∗ denote the actual set of top k choices. Denote Ik = {i : ri ≥ k}
as the set of students that ranked at least k choices.
Given a choice model, define Ŷik to be the best prediction of the top k choices for student i.
We predict by simulating the top k choices Yik = {yi1 , · · · , yik } many times and taking the k most
common choices across simulations. Our first measure computes prediction mistakes among the top
k choices:
% Mistakes in Top k Choices =

1 X |Ŷik \Yik∗ |
.
|Ik |
k
i∈Ik

That is, we report the average proportion of predicted top k choices in the set Ŷik that are not in
the actual set of top k choices, Yik∗ , counting only students who ranked at least k choices. When
k = 1, for example, this measures the fraction of top choices that turn out to be different from our
prediction for the individual.
A second measure of prediction error considers pairwise comparisons. Given the actual ranking
yi∗ ,

define the set of pairwise comparisons implied by this ranking to be the collection of ordered

pairs:
Ci∗ = {(j, l) : program j is ranked before l in yi∗ }.
A pair of programs (j, l) is in this set if both programs j and l are ranked and j is preferred, or
if j is ranked and l is unranked. Given a choice model, define ẑi (j, l) to be the indicator variable
for whether the choice model predicts the student to prefer option j over l with greater than
50% probability.30 Define the percentage of prediction mistakes in pairwise comparisons to be the
proportion of comparisons that the choice model predicts incorrectly:
% Mistakes in Pairwise Comparisons =

X
1 X 1
(1 − ẑi (j, l)).
∗
|I1 |
|Ci |
∗
i∈I1

(j,l)∈Ci

For predicting the distribution of choices, we measure accuracy using statistical distance, which
is a common metric for the distance between two probability distributions. It is also referred to
as the total variation distance. We compute this metric for the distribution of top choices and the
joint distribution of the top two choices. For neighborhood h, define market share shjk to be the
average proportion of top k choices from this neighborhood that are for school j, counting only
students who ranked at least k choices. Let Ihk denote the set of students from this neighborhood
30
Following this 50% rule results in the fewest number of prediction mistakes if the choice model were exactly
correct.

18

who ranked at least k choices. The predicted top k market share of school j in neighborhood h is
shjk =

1 X
E[|programs in Yik at school j|]/k.
|Ihk |
i∈Ihk

Similarly, define the actual market share s∗hjk using the actual set of top k choices Yik∗ instead
of the predicted set Yik for each student i. The statistical distance between two vectors is the
minimum mass needed to transform one vector to the other. The average statistical distance across
H neighborhoods is defined as:
H
1 XX
Statistical Distance in Top k Market Share =
|shjk − s∗hjk |.
2H
h=1 j

The final metric we examine is for the joint distribution of the two highest-ranked schools. For
the pair of schools (sj , sl ), define pjl as the proportion of students who ranked at least two choices
and ranked a program in school sj first and a program in school sl second. Similarly, we define p∗jl
for the corresponding actual choice rankings. The following measures the minimum mass needed to
transform one distribution to the other:
Statistical Distance in Joint Distribution of Top 2 Choices =

1X
|pjl − p∗jl |.
2
jl

5

Back-testing and Hypotheses Formulation

How well do we expect to predict the outcomes using our approach? To set expectations, we report
on a back-testing exercise that applies our methodology to data from two years before the reform
(2012) to predict outcomes one year before the reform (2013). Since applicant choice sets did not
change between these years, we expect the results from the back-test to provide a best-case scenario
for what we might expect following the reform.
To illustrate the underlying calculations for prediction error, we plot in Figure 4 the predicted
and actual access to quality by neighborhood in 2013. For each prediction, the figure also plots
the 95% prediction interval. These estimates allow us to compute the three metrics for prediction
accuracy of equilibrium outcomes described in Section 4.2. For each choice model, the root mean
squared error (RMSE) measures the overall difference between the predicted and the actual access
to quality. The expected RMSE corresponds to how long the error bars are in Figure 4. The %
of predictions within the 95% prediction interval corresponds to the proportion of actual access to
quality that falls within the error bars.
For each grade and each prediction target, the MNL and MMNL models exhibit nearly-identical
RMSE. This is shown in Table 2. Moreover, for every outcome except access to quality in grade
K1, the MNL-based models exhibit smaller RMSE than the Lexicographic model. However, the
absolute performance of the MNL-based models is not as high as one might have hoped: the RMSE
is larger than expected, and the actual outcome is within the 95% prediction interval only about
19

70% of the time, averaging across outcomes. For the Lexicographic model, the performance is worse:
the actual outcome is inside the 95% prediction interval less than 40% of the time.
The MNL and MMNL models also outperform the Lexicographic model for individual choice
predictions. Table 3 reports on MNL performance for each grade and for the top 1, top 2, and top
3 choices. As a benchmark, Table 3 also tabulates the accuracy of random guessing. For grade
K1, the table shows that random guessing incorrectly predicts the top choice 97% of the time. The
Lexicographic model predicts the top choice incorrectly 63% of the time, which means that it predicts
the top choice (out of more than 30 options) correctly 27% of the time. For pairwise comparisons,
random guessing by definition predicts wrongly 50% of the time. The Lexicographic model predicts
incorrectly 30% of the time, while the MNL and MMNL models reduce the percentage of mistakes
to 18%. A similar comparison holds for grade K2. In summary, for predicting individual choices,
the MNL-based models are indistinguishable, and both outperform the Lexicographic model.
For predicting distribution of choices, the Lexicographic model is not much better than random
guessing, and for the joint distribution of top 2 choices, it is even worse than guessing. These findings
are shown in Panel B of Table 3. The Lexicographic model does not allow students to prefer a more
distant school in the same tier to a closer school, if the continuing, sibling, and English Language
Learner status of the student are the same at both schools. For these metrics, the performance of the
MNL-based models is nearly identical, and both outperform random guessing and the Lexicographic
model.
As a result of this analysis, we formulate the following hypotheses before choices are submitted
in the new plan:
• For equilibrium forecasts, the MNL-based choice models would perform similarly to one another, and both would systematically outperform the Lexicographic model. For all models,
the actual prediction error would be significantly larger that what one would have expected
if one believed the models to be exactly correct.
• For choice forecasts, the comparison across choice models would be the same as the equilibrium
forecasts. Moreover, the Lexicographic model would reasonably predict individual choices, but
would perform poorly for the distribution of choices.

6
6.1

Comparing Forecasts and Prediction Errors
Equilibrium and Choice Forecasts

To illustrate the underlying calculations of the prediction exercise, we plot in Figure 5 the actual
access to quality in each neighborhood in the first post-reform year (2014), as well as the predicted
access to quality according to each choice model. For each prediction, the figure also contains the
95% prediction interval. The calculations for the aggregate measures of prediction accuracy are
analogous to that of the back-test.

20

Contrary to our first hypothesis, the MNL-based models outperform the Lexicographic model
in predicting equilibrium outcomes only for grade K1, but not for grade K2. Table 4 shows that for
grade K1, the MNL-based models exhibit a smaller RMSE than the Lexicographic model, with a
significantly higher fraction of outcomes being within its 95% prediction interval. This follows the
pattern observed in the back-test. However, for grade K2, the Lexicographic model exhibits similar
RMSE as the MNL model, with slightly better prediction accuracy for two out of the three targets,
namely: access to quality and the number of unassigned students. Moreover, for these two targets,
the percentage of neighborhoods for which the outcome is within the 95% prediction interval is also
higher in the Lexicographic model compared to the MNL-based models.31
We cannot reject the other hypotheses about equilibrium outcomes in Table 4. In all cases,
the MNL and MMNL models exhibit nearly identical results, regardless of whether we consider
the RMSE or the fraction of predictions within the 95% prediction interval. The expected RMSE
is also similar between the two models. In addition, regardless of the model or the metric, the
actual RMSE is higher than the expected RMSE, which shows that none of the models is absolutely
accurate.
For choice forecasts, the results are consistent with our hypotheses, as they follow the pattern
of those those reported in the back-test. Table 5 shows that the MNL and MMNL models exhibit
nearly identical performance, regardless of the grade and metric. Furthermore, the prediction error
is smaller in the MNL-based models than in the Lexicographic model. The amount by which the
MNL-based models outperform the Lexicographic model is also much higher for the distribution of
choices than individual choices. This pattern was also present in the back-test.

6.2

Decomposing Prediction Errors

The inconsistent performance that we found of the MNL-based models in predicting equilibrium
outcomes can be due to a variety of causes, including:
1. Unexpected realization of applicant pool characteristics.
2. Unexpected changes in choice patterns due to framing and other behavioral issues.
3. Unexpected changes in the number of choice ranked by students.
The first source of error is related to the applicant pool forecast, the second source is related to
the validity of the choice models themselves, and the third choice is related to our simplifying
assumption that everyone ranks up to ten options.
The largest source of error turns out to be in the applicant pool predictions. When we reproduce
the prediction exercise for equilibrium outcomes using the characteristics of actual post-reform
applicant, we find that the MNL-based choice models consistently outperform the Lexicographic
model, as expected from our back-test. Table 6 shows that the RMSE of MNL-based models
31

This phenomenon is not due to greater uncertainty in the Lexicographic model prediction. Column 5 of Table 4
shows the expected RMSE of Lexicographic is similar to that of the MNL-based models.

21

are smaller than the Lexicographic model for both grades and all outcomes of interest32 , and the
proportion of actual outcomes that fall within the prediction interval is higher. Furthermore, the
MNL and mixed MNL models have nearly identical performance, as expected from the back-test.
Moreover, we find evidence that the choice patterns themselves remained stable across the
reform, and that any issue with our assumption on the length of ranked-order list is not of firstorder importance. Table 7 reports on how prediction accuracy changes when we allow the prediction
to use additional information from the post-reform dataset. In this table, we report the RMSE of
the MNL-based models under the following assumptions:
• New Applicants with Old Demand Model: Using the actual set of post-reform applicants and
their characteristics (instead of a simulated applicant pool from pre-reform), but fitting the
choice model using pre-reform choice data. This is the same as in Table 6.
• New Applicants with Refit Demand Model: Using the actual set of applicants and their
characteristics, and fitting the choice model also using post-reform choice data.33
• New Applicants with Refit Demand Model and Ranking Length: The same as above, except
also using the actual number of choices ranked by each applicant.
• Sampling Actual Choices and Using Applicant Forecast: Using the predicted number of students from each neighborhood, but sampling students from the actual applicant pool and
using the actual choices of these students. In predicting the number of students, we follow
the sampling methodology in the original forecasts.
Comparing the prediction error from these assumptions shows the following:
1. The MNL-based models are indeed “structural,” in the sense that the model estimated from
pre-reform data predicts outcomes just as well as the model estimated from post-reform data.
The RMSE in Table 7 for “New Applicants with Old Demand Model” is similar to “New
Applicants with Refit Demand Model.”
2. The assumption about rank-order list length is not of first-order importance. When we control
for the actual lengths of submitted rank-order lists, the prediction error only improves for
access to quality, but not for distance to school and the number unassigned. In comparison,
predictions of the applicant pool are first-order, as the RMSE improves significantly for every
metric when we compare the original forecasts with a simulated applicant pool to the version
using the actual applicant pool.
3. Much of the overall error in the original forecast is due to predicting the wrong number of
students from each neighborhood. This is seen in how large the prediction error is with
Sampling Actual Choices Using Applicant Forecast.
32
For the number of unassigned students, all three models perform similarly in RMSE, but the prediction intervals
from MNL-based models cover the actual outcome more often than the intervals from the Lexicographic model, despite
a similar expected RMSE.
33
Table A1 and Table A2 contain the coefficient estimates.

22

Our findings suggest that the MNL-based models’ unexpectedly poor performance in the original
prediction exercise is primarily due to poor predictions of the applicant pool, rather than due to
changes in choice patterns or in the lengths of rankings. Hence, choice models may effectively predict
counterfactual outcomes, as long as there are accurate forecasts about auxiliary input variables.
The robustness of the MNL-based models across the reform is further supported by an analogous
exercise that compares prediction accuracy for choice outcomes using models estimated from prereform and post-reform data. Note that using the MNL model estimated from post-reform choice
data should always perform better than the model using pre-reform data since we are evaluating on
post-reform data. However, Table 8 shows that the improvement from estimating using post-reform
data is small: the choice patterns are stable enough so that it is reasonable to use a model estimated
from pre-reform data to predict post-reform outcomes.
What about the effect of information cues due to the change in how choices are presented?
Figure 6 show that the salience of tier information in the new presentation of choices has a small
effect on the distribution of preferences: for grade K1, the actual percentage of students who ranked
a Tier 1 school as top choice is not higher than predicted by the MNL model. For grade K2, the
actual percentage is slightly higher, but only by a few percentage points.34 The Lexicographic
model, on the other hand, vastly overstates the importance of tier, as it predicts that more than
half of the students will rank a Tier 1 school first, when the actual percentage is less than 35%.35

6.3

Causes of Errors for Population Forecast

The errors in population forecasts resulted in the MNL-based models performing badly for grade K2
in predicting equilibrium outcomes. What was wrong with the forecasts? Table A3 shows that there
are three major errors: (1) the number of continuing K2 students is much larger than predicted,
(2) the number of new grade K1 and K2 students is significantly less than predicted, and (3) the
proportion of grade K2 ELL students are smaller than predicted.
Were these errors foreseeable? It is difficult to comment on this with any level of rigor since
nearly anything can seem foreseeable after the fact. Nevertheless, we give our best guesses below.
We think that the first source of error was possibly foreseeable, as it is caused by misunderstanding
how BPS assigns continuing students. We assumed that currently enrolled students who wish to
continue are assigned the same program code for the next grade, but in reality BPS sometimes
changes the program code when students change grades and our forecast did not capture these
changes adequately. The second error is unexpected, as the number of applicants had been rising in
previous years. The low number of applicants is due to either a break in the previous trend in the
number of kindergarten-aged children in Boston or a greater substitution to school options outside
of BPS, including charter and private schools or public schools in neighboring districts. Our data
34

Hastings and Weinstein (2008) find in a study on the Charlotte-Mecklenburg school district that information cues
in school choice may affect school market shares by about 5%, which is of the same order of magnitude as we find
here.
35
Even under the lexicographic model, students may rank a lower tier school first if he is a continuing student at
the school, has an older sibling at that school, or is an ELL student wanting to go to a particular language program.

23

do not allow us to distinguish between these two alternatives. The third discrepancy is driven by
a simultaneous change in the test that BPS uses to determine eligibility for ELL programs, as the
new test decreased the proportion of eligible students. This third change was done by the BPS
Office of English Learners, which has little overlap with the office in charge of school assignment,
and was therefore hard for us to foresee.

7

Selecting Another Policy

While our analysis has focused on the absolute accuracy of the choice models, in this section, we
consider whether BPS would have chosen a different choice plan given the prediction errors. Even if
the prediction errors are large in an absolute sense, they may not affected either the relative ranking
of alternative plans or BPS’s policy decision.
The alternative choice plans we consider are the 2012-2013 school assignment reform proposals
described in Pathak and Shi (2013). Most proposals partition the city into alternative zones,
ranging from six to 23. Two proposals are variants of the Home-Based plan. The decision process
that led Boston to adopt the Home-Based plan involved a compromise across several dimensions.
But the effects on access and proximity were central, and the school board was also concerned
about insufficient school capacity. We therefore evaluate the relative performance of other plans
with respect to these three equilibrium targets.
Table 9 reports on access to quality for grade K1 for the Allston-Brighton neighborhood. Each
entry of Panel A reports access to quality for eight plans for different choice models and applicant
samples. Column 1, for example, shows that access to quality is highest under the 10 Zone plan,
according to the MNL choice model estimated with post-reform choices and post-reform applicants.
In contrast, access to quality is the lowest under the status quo. Since we cannot directly compare
plans that were not implemented, column 1 serves as our reference point. The relative ranking
across the eight plans is completely unchanged when we use the MNL model fit using pre-reform
choice data, but applying the model on post-reform applicants. Panel B shows that, of the possible
comparisons (e.g., Status Quo vs. Home Based A, Status Quo vs. Home Based B, Home Based A
vs. Home Based B, etc.), there are no reversals of pairwise comparisons.36
How would the comparisons across plans be affected by prediction errors in applicant pool
charateristics? Column 3 of Table 9 assesses this by forecasting access to quality based on prereform choices and applicants. This more closely mirrors the Pathak and Shi (2013) report. The
forecast provides a more optimistic scenario for both versions of the Home-Based plan compared
to the reference in column 1. Specifically, the Home-Based plans have the highest access to quality
after the 10 Zone plan, but in column 1 they have the lowest access to quality after the status
quo. In fact, there are reversals across 8 of 22 possible non-trivial pairwise comparisons of plans.
This suggests that if Boston chose a plan based only on access to quality in the Allston-Brighton
neighborhood, the MNL model forecast could have led to a different choice. However, this pattern
36

For this tabulation, we only consider comparisons where the difference in access is at least 1%, to avoid tallying
trivial differences across plans.

24

also is present with the Lexicographic model, under which access is higher under the Home-Based
plans than other alternatives. There are more reversals of pairwise comparisons under Lexicographic
than MNL.
Access to quality in a given neighborhood is not the only factor used to select among plans. We
therefore report on how the ranking across plans changes under different choice models, aggregating
across the three outcomes and 14 neighborhoods in Table 10. Only 5% of the pairwise comparisons
across plan dimensions change when the MNL model is fit from pre-reform data compared to postreform data, which supports the stability of choice patterns across the reform. In other words,
any effect due to information cues would not have significantly changed the relative ranking across
plans. However, column 3 shows that there are larger reversals across the ranking of plans with the
choice model fit using pre-reform choices and applied on pre-reform the applicant pool. As shown
in the last row of the table, the relative rankings reverse on average 16% of the times, which is
three times as high as when we had applied the choice model on the same post-reform applicant
pool as in the point of reference. This shows that the relative ranking of alternative policies may
change significantly due to errors in forecasting applicants. In other words, Boston may have chosen
another plan had there been a better forecast of the auxiliary variables.
Does the MNL forecast’s susceptibility to errors in who applies undermine its value for decisionmaking? The answer to this question depends on the performance of the alternative. Column 3
shows that errors in forecasting applicants do not erase the benefits of the MNL model compared
to Lexicographic. Despite the errors in the forecast of the auxiliary variables, there are significantly
fewer prediction reversals with the MNL model fitted from past data than the Lexicographic model,
under which nearly one-third of pairwise comparisons across plans are reversed. The performance of
the Lexicographic here is not much better than a random prediction, which would reverse one-half
of comparisons. In summary, even though counterfactual comparisons of choice plans are sensitive
to prediction errors in auxiliary covariates, there is still value in using a structural choice model
instead of an ad-hoc alternative.

8

Conclusions

This paper reports on an out-of-sample validation of structural models of school demand. Forecasts
from these models influenced a policy change that affected thousands of Boston families. We made
predictions prior to the policy change, so as to make sure that the forecasts are truly ex ante, free
from the biases of the researcher’s ex post rationalizations. Since we observe choices participants
made in the new policy, we also conduct a decomposition of sources of prediction error.
We find that, once we control for changes in the environment outside of the structural model,
the choice models are reasonably accurate compared to expectations set by back-testing. Both the
MNL and mixed MNL choice model significantly outperform the Lexicographic model, when using
the actual applicants. Moreover, the MNL-based models perform similarly when refit with postreform data, suggesting that the preference distribution measured by the choice model is stable

25

even with a large change in choice sets and how choices are framed. We also find that the MNL
model’s performance is similar to the mixed MNL model, a fact foreshadowed by the back-tests.
The richness of the data we have on individual characteristics likely reduces the potential benefit
of the more flexible and computationally-intensive specification.
The scenario in which an analyst has access to the actual participants under the new policy
allows us to focus attention on choice model performance. Yet this hypothetical scenario does not
correspond to any real-world forecasting problem. Without the actual participants, the magnitude
of the error from the applicant forecast is so large for grade K2 that it undermines the benefit
of the MNL model. In fact, without using the actual applicants, the prediction error from the
Lexicographic specification is smaller for several forecast targets compared to the MNL model. Our
decomposition shows that the Lexicographic’s superior performance in grade K2 is driven by the
fact that errors in the applicant and choice forecasts counteract each other. The error in the MNL
forecast is large enough to change the ranking of several other alternative policies, and may have led
the city to pick a different plan. However, the negative effects of errors in the applicant forecast do
not erase the benefit of structural modeling: despite the presence of the errors in auxiliary inputs,
the correctly specified model fitted from past data still reproduces the majority of counterfactual
comparisons across plans, and does so much more consistently than the Lexicographic alternative.
In absolute terms, there is still substantial scope to improve the demand model predictions.
An open question is whether a more principled approach to variable selection in the choice models
would have led to further improvements. It’s also possible that alternative non-structural approaches
would have had higher performance.
Structural demand models have widespread applications in economics beyond school demand.
Our setting and policy change show possibilities for scenarios where substitution among choices
is central. While standard choice models may succeed in predicting choice behavior, there can
still be significant unforeseen prediction error for policy relevant outcomes due to changes in the
environment that are outside of the model. Difficulty predicting these auxiliary inputs likely plays
a large role in other applications.

26

A

Estimating the Mixed MNL Choice Model

Unlike in the MNL model, the log likelihood function associated with the mixed MNL (MMNL)
model is difficult to evaluate directly since it involves many multi-dimensional integrals. Hence,
we estimate the MMNL model using Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) instead of maximum
likelihood.
Train (2003) reviews the basic framework to estimate MMNL models using MCMC. The framework is based on Gibbs sampling and the Metropolis-Hasting algorithm. However, our setting has
more fixed coefficients since we have a fixed effect for every school, and there are about 80 schools.
It is known that the simple Metropolis Hastings with random walk proposals does not perform
well when estimating a vector of many dimensions (see Katafygiotis and Zuev (2008)), especially if
the dimensions are correlated. We therefore modify the framework to use Metropolis-Within-Gibbs
(MWG), which samples blocks of coordinates iteratively (rather than all coordinates at once), and
Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC), which incorporates gradient information for directions to sample.
We describe these methods in greater detail in Section A.2.

A.1

Specifying the Likelihood Function

The first step of applying MCMC techniques is specifying the full likelihood function of observing
the data given the model parameters. An equivalent representation of the MMNL model from
Section 3.3.2 is as follows. Let the vector of characteristics xij = (xijr , xijf ), where xijr corresponds
to the first L components, which represent the terms with random coefficients, and xijf the last
K − L components, which have fixed coefficients. Let coefficient vector β = (βr , βf ) similarly. The
latent utilities are as follows.
uij = δs(j) + βf · xijf + γi · xijr + ij ,

(2)

γi ∼ N (βr , Σ),

(3)

ij ∼ Gumbel(0, 1),

(4)

The set of parameters to be estimated is (δ, β, Σ). In order for the model to be well-specified,
we normalize the last component of δ to be zero. Moreover, the covariance matrix Σ can be written
in the block diagonal form

Σ1

Σ=
Σ2



,
Σ3

where Σ1 , Σ2 , and Σ3 are 1 × 1, 1 × 1 and 3 × 3 symmetric positive definite matrices.
The data to fit these parameters are the observed choices of every student along with the
observed characteristics vector xij . Suppose that student i makes mi choices, and let the chosen
programs from best to worst be yi1 , yi2 , · · · , yimi .
The likelihood function can be expressed as follows. Given γi , the conditional likelihood is

27

φi (δ, βf |γi ) =

mi
Y
c=1

exp(δs(yic ) + βf · xiyic f + γi · xiyic r )
Pmi
.
d=c exp(δs(yid ) + βf · xiyid f + γi · xiyid r )

(5)

This is the MNL likelihood function. The full likelihood function incorporating all the data is
Φ(δ, βf , βr , Σ) =

n Z
Y
i=1

1
φi (δ, βf |γi ) exp(− Σ−1 kγi − βr k2 )dγi .
2
R5

(6)

Here, n is the number of students; recall that the random coefficients γi each has five dimensions.)
The goal is to sample in proportion to the posterior likelihood function Φ. Because Φ is complex,
we do this by MCMC. As a detour, we will give an overview of MCMC and the specific techniques
we use. Readers familiar with these techniques can jump to Section A.3.

A.2

Overview of the MCMC procedure

The idea behind Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) is to sample from a distribution by constructing a Markov chain whose unique stationary distribution is the desired distribution of interest. If
the chain is easy to simulate and fast-mixing, meaning that it converges quickly to the stationary
distribution, then we can sample by simply simulating the chain. After throwing out a so-called
“burn-in” period at the beginning, we arrive at samples from the desired distribution.
The workhorses of MCMC are Gibbs sampling and Metropolis-Hasting. Gibbs sampling is used
when the desired distribution can be factored into several marginal distributions that are easier
to sample. For example, to sample from a joint distribution on x, y, and z, one might iteratively
sample one variable at a time conditional on the other ones. We initialize x0 , y 0 and z 0 arbitrarily.
For each t ≥ 1, sample iteratively from the following conditional distributions:
xt | y t−1 , z t−1
y t | xt , z t−1
z t | xt , y t
After a sufficient number S of samples, and after throwing out the initial burn-in of B samples,
{(xt , y t , z t )

: B < t ≤ S} would approximate samples from the desired posterior distribution,

although successive samples are not independent. One can remove the serial correlation by either
sampling independently from this set or keeping only samples in which t is a multiple of ∆, where
∆ is a chosen positive integer.
Metropolis-Hasting is a technique used to sample from an arbitrary distribution with given
likelihood function L(x). There are many variants, but the common idea is to use a proposal
distribution that is easy to sample from and reject certain samples to get the likelihood ratios to be
correct. The proposal distribution may depend on the current iterate x. Let transition probability
density be T (y|x); this is the probability density of proposing y given that the current sample is x.
In order to obtain the correct likelihoods, we can only accept a fraction of the samples proposed
and must reject the others. The probability that we accept proposal y given the previous iterate
28

being x is
A(y|x) = min(1,

L(y)T (x|y)
).
L(x)T (y|x)

Note that if T (y|x) is proportional to L(y), then the acceptance probability is always 1 as the
proposal distribution already matches the target. Otherwise, the above formula is tuned so that
the following identity, called “detailed balance” in the literature, holds:
L(x)T (y|x)A(y|x) = L(y)T (x|y)A(x|y).
This equation guarantees that the desired density p(x) is a stationary distribution of the Markov
chain induced by the proposal and acceptance process. Furthermore, if the chain is ergodic, which
is true for example if the proposal distribution has full support, then p(x) is the only stationary
distribution.
The sampling procedure is then to initialize x0 arbitrarily, and for each t ≥ 1
1. Draw y according to T (y|xt−1 ).

y
with prob. A(y|xt−1 ),
2. Set xt =
xt−1 otherwise.
By iterating this many times and discarding sufficient burn-in samples, we arrive at the desired
distribution.
Because of the flexibility in the proposal distributions, the above techniques have many variants.
The goal is to find a proposal distribution that balances ease of sampling with locally approximating
the target distribution. Without easy sampling, each step would take too long; if it is too far from the
target distribution, then the acceptance probabilities would be very low and the chain may get stuck
at a certain iterate for a very long time. In the following sections we present the three variants we
use: Random Walk Metropolis (RWM), Metropolis-Within-Gibbs (MWG), and Hamiltonian Monte
Carlo (HMC).
A.2.1

Random Walk Metropolis (RWM)

This method is the easiest to sample from, as it uses a simple random walk to propose the next
value: if the current iterate is x, it proposes y = x + , where  is multivariate normal distributed,
 ∼ Normal(0, ρI), where I is the identity matrix, and ρ is a scale parameter. Other covariance
matrices can also be used instead of the identity but it must be the same for every x. The scale
parameter is tuned to match the overall variance of the desired distribution. Too small a ρ will
produce too much serial correlation; too large a ρ and acceptance probability might be near zero so
the chain may get stuck. We tune ρ by multiplying it up or down so that the average acceptance ratio
since last tuning is between 0.4 and 0.6, which is the ball park value suggested by the literature.37
37

See Roberts, Gelman, and Gilks (1997).

29

The number of steps we wait before tuning increases exponentially, so that between the conclusion
of our burn-in sample until our last iteration there is no tuning.
This method performs well when the target distribution does not have too many dimensions
and approximately the same scale in each dimension. However, when there are many dimensions,
it becomes exponentially harder to guess the right direction, and the method may take very long to
converge; when there are dimensions that are at very different scales, then there may be no ρ that
is good for all dimensions.
A.2.2

Metropolis Within Gibbs (MWG)

Metropolis Within Gibbs is a simple extension of RWM that allows various coordinate sub-blocks
to have different scales. It is simple to sample each sub-block iteratively, conditional on the others,
much like running several RWM within a Gibbs sampling framework. This method also reduces the
number of dimensions sampled at each step. The drawback is that more samples are needed.
Precisely speaking, instead of sampling all dimensions of vector x simultaneously, write it in
 x1 
 x2 
0

terms of sub-vectors x = 
 ... . Each sub-vector may represent several coordinates. Initialize x
xk
arbitrarily and for t ≥ 1, sample
xt1

|

t−1
xt−1
2 , · · · xk

xt2

|

t−1
xt1 , xt−1
3 , · · · xk

···
xtk

|

xt1 , · · · xtk−1

Each of the above is sampled using RWM, perhaps with different scale parameters for different sub-vectors. In each Gibbs iteration, for each of the variables, we only take one step of
Metropolis-Hasting, which involves one proposal and possible acceptance. Because of detailed balance, embedding Metropolis-Hasting into Gibbs sampling in this way also works.
A.2.3

Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC)

This method uses the gradient of the log likelihood function to inform the proposals, which can
significantly improve the acceptance probabilities in high dimensions. The drawback is that each
iteration is slower as several gradient calls are needed. The method, motivated by Hamiltonian
dynamics in physics, models the current iterate x as a location vector and treats the negative log
likelihood function as an energy potential. In each step, the method samples a random momentum
vector and simulates the trajectory of the object by discretizing time and alternatively updating the
momentum using the potential function and updating the position using the momentum. To make
detailed balance work out, the first and last steps of simulation are half-steps. Precisely speaking,
let the gradient of the log likelihood function be G(x) = ∇(log(L(x))). Let  and ∆ be tuning

30

parameters representing the discretization in time and the number of steps to simulate respectively.
The proposal is based on the pseudocode in this algorithm (this is taken from Neal (2011)):
Algorithm 1 Pseudocode for one step of HMC
Function HMC STEP(x):
Draw momentum p0 ∼ Normal(0, I).
Initialize y = x, p = p0 .
Update p = p − G(y)/2.
for ∆ − 1 iterations do
Update y = y + p
Update p = p − G(y).
end for
Update y = y + p.
Update p(= p − G(y)/2.
2
2
L(y)
y with prob. A(y|x) = min(1, L(x)
exp( kp0 k 2−kpk )
return
x otherwise
Note that the chance of proposing y given x is simply the chance of drawing momentum p0 .
Moreover, by the reversibility of the intermediate steps of discrete simulation, if we started at y and
drew a momentum of −p (where p is the final momentum vector in HMC STEP), then the proposal
would be x. This implies that
exp(− 12 kp0 k2 )
T (y|x)
=
,
T (x|y)
exp(− 12 k − pk2 )
which implies that
exp(− 12 kp0 k2 ) L(y)
kp0 k2 − kpk2
L(y)
T (y|x)A(y|x)
=
exp(
)=
.
1
2
T (x|y)A(x|y)
2
L(x)
exp(− 2 k − pk ) L(x)
So detailed balance holds, and the following is a valid Metropolis-Hasting sampler: Initialize x0
arbitrarily. For t ≥ 1, set xt = HMC STEP(xt−1 ).
One can show that as the time discretization  → 0, for any fixed total simulation time ∆, the
acceptance probability goes to 1. Hence, we would like  to be small enough so the chain does not
get stuck and ∆ large enough so that successive samples are not too serially correlated. In practice,
we fix ∆ = 20 and tune ρ so that the empirical acceptance rate since last tuning is between 0.5
and 0.8. As before, we increase the interval between tuning times exponentially so that no tuning
happens in the sample we keep (after burn-in and before the last iteration). Another detail is that
to prevent cases in which ∆ is exactly what makes the proposal y go back to original point x,
instead of using the same , we draw ˜ ∼ Uniform(0.85, 1.15) before each call to HMC STEP, and
use ˜ as the step size throughout that call. Because this distribution is a-priori fixed, we preserve
detailed balance. Neal (2011) describes these as best practices for applying HMC.

31

A.3

The MCMC Sampler

Our MCMC procedure is based on the one in Train (2003) but breaks the fixed coefficient estimation
into two steps, one step using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) and the other Metropolis Within
Gibbs (MWG). We use HMC to estimate the school fixed effects and MWG to estimate the other
fixed coefficients. These techniques allow us to accommodate the large number of school fixed effects
and the unequal scales across the other fixed coefficients.
To sample from the full likelihood function Φ(δ, βf , βr , Σ) (Equation 6), we initialize δ 0 , βf0 ,
βr0 , Σ01 , Σ02 , Σ03 arbitrarily. For each t ≥ 1, we do a few layers of Gibbs sampling. In some of the
layers we embed a form of Metropolis-Hasting, but in each Gibbs iteration we only take one step of
Metropolis-Hasting, much as it is in MWG. Furthermore, let T be a parameter indicating how long
we wait before tuning. We initialize T to be 1 and increase this parameter steadily, so that tuning
becomes exponentially less frequent. For t ≥ 1, each MCMC step is as follows:
1. Draw γit |δ t−1 , βft−1 , βrt−1 , Σt−1 . This is done using one iteration of RWM with likelihood function

1
L(x) = φi (δ t−1 , βft−1 , x) exp(− (Σt−1 )−1 kx − βrt−1 k2 )
2

and starting value γit−1 . (See Equation 5 for definition of φi .) We initialize ρ = 0.05 and
initially to tune for each i every Uniform(1000T, 1500T ) steps.
2. Draw βrt |γit , Σt−1 . This is sampling from Normal( n1

Pn

t 1 t−1 ).
i=1 γi , m Σ

3. Draw Σt |γit , βrt . This can be done as follows: for l ∈ {1, 2, 3}, let Ctl be the covariance matrix
of the lth block of γit assuming mean as in the lth block of βrt . (Recall that the random
coefficients are organized into three blocks, with ell match being the first block, walk zone
being the second, and distance, mcas, and % white/asian being the third.) Let kl be the
number of variables in the lth block and let n be the number of students. Draw Σtl according
to the Inverse Wishart Distribution with degree of freedom ν = kl + n and scale matrix
Ψ = kl Il×l + nCtl .
4. Draw δ t |γit , βft−1 . This is done using one step of HMC with likelihood function
L(x) =

n
Y

φi (x, βft−1 |γit ),

i=1

and constraining the last component to be zero. We initialize  = 0.015, and ∆ = 20. We
tune every 1000T steps.
5. Draw βft |γit , δ t . This is done using one iteration of MWG with likelihood function
L(x) =

n
Y
i=1

32

φi (δ t , x|γit ).

We break the fixed coefficients βf into 6 subvectors: 1) “continuing;” 2) “sibling;” 3) “ell
language match;” 4) “distance*black/hispanic” and “distance*income est.”; 5) “mcas*black”
and “mcas*income est.”; 6) “% white/asian*black/hispanic” and
“% white/asian*income est.” We initialize the scales ρ for each subvector to be .5, .5, .1, .1,
.5, and .5 respectively. We tune every Uniform(100T, 150T ) steps.
We run these steps 1,000,000 times, increasing the tuning interval parameter T by a factor of
1.2 every 5000 iterations. We throw out the first 500,000 iterations as burn-in. Note that no tuning
happens in the interval we keep. This ensures the correctness of the Markov chain in this period.
For a robustness check, we re-ran this procedure six times, each time with different initial values,
and we found nearly identical results each time.

B

Computing Equilibrium Forecasts

All post-reform equilibrium forecasts are computed by averaging the results of 1000 iterations of
the following sequence of steps.
1. Sample applicant pool X according to the assumptions described in Section 3.3.4. More details
are given in Section 4.2 of the Part I report, Pathak and Shi (2015).
2. Sample choice model parameters:
• For the Lexicographic model, we skip this step since the model does not have parameters.
• For the MNL model, we sample
(δ, β) ∼ N (µ, Σ),
where µ is the maximum likelihood estimate of the fixed effect δ and coefficients β, and
Σ is the inverse of the Hessian of the log-liklihood function evaluated at µ.
• For the MMNL model, we sample (δ, β, Σ) from the posterior distribution from MCMC
and independently sample for each student i the individual coefficients γi ∼ N (βr , Σ).
3. For each student, compute a relative ranking of all options for which he is eligible within
his choice menu, truncating to the top 10 choices. (This corresponds to the Y |X, using
the notation introduced in Section 1. ) For the MNL and MMNL models, this involves
independently sampling idiosyncratic taste shocks ij ∼ Gumbel(0, 1) for every student i and
eligible option j. We also sample a lottery number li for each student i, li ∼ U nif orm(0, 1).
4. Compute the assignment using the deferred acceptance algorithm described in Section 2 using
the following inputs:
• The simulated choice rankings from the previous step.

33

• The program capacities imputed from the round one assignment from the previous year
(which is 2013 for the calculation of post-reform forecasts.)
• The following priority structure: define the priority of student i for program j to be (the
higher the better)
πij = Boostij + li ,

(7)

Boostij = 8Continuingij + 4P resentSchoolij + 2Siblingij + SameSideij ,

(8)

where the variables on the right hand side of (8) are binary indicator variables for whether
the student is a continuing student for program j, a continuing student for another
program in the same school as program j, has a sibling in the school of program j, or is
on the same side of the East Boston bridge as the school housing program j.
5. Compute the equilibrium outcome of interest for each of the fourteen neighborhoods:
• Access to quality: Let the set of students assigned to school j be denoted Ij , and define

min
i∈Ij πij
zj =
0

if school j is full,

(9)

otherwise.

This is an estimate of the minimum priority needed to get into school j, given the
generated preferences and priorities of other students. The estimate is based on the large
market approximation of Azevedo and Leshno (2016). Define the access of student i to
school j to be the probability that his lottery number is high enough for his priority to
be higher than the cutoff of zj ,
Accessij = max(min(Boostij + 1 − zj , 1), 0),

(10)

and the student’s access to quality as the maximum Accessij over all program j in his
menu from a Tier 1 or 2 school. The final result is the average of the access to quality
estimates for every student i living within the neighborhood.
• Distance: compute the average walking distance for an assigned student from the neighborhood to his assigned school. The walking distance is from Google Maps API, based
on the student’s home address and the school’s address. For students for whom we do
not have a home address, we use the centroid of the geocode where the student lives as
a proxy.
• Unassigned: compute the number of students from the neighborhood who are not assigned.
In each of the 1000 iterations, we compute for each neighborhood a scalar estimate for each of
the three equilibrium outcomes of interest. The final forecast is the average of these 1000 values.
34

The estimated 95% prediction intervals are from the empirical 2.5 and 97.5 percentiles of these 1000
values.
In computing the actual outcome, only Steps 4 and 5 are needed. Instead of the simulated values
from steps 1-3, we use the actual applicant pool X ∗ , the actual choices Y ∗ , and the actual lottery
number li for each student i. As a result, only one iteration is needed.
The pre-reform forecasts (from the back-testing exercise) are computed similarly, except that
Step 4 above is altered to account for the different priority structure. Instead of the same-side
priorities above, the pre-reform assignment plan contains walk-zone priorities, which only apply to
50% of the seats. The exact implementation is as follows. Each program j is split into two bins of
equal size, j1 and j2 . Bin j1 is called the walk-zone bin and j2 is the open bin. If program capacity
is odd, then the walk-zone bin has one additional seat. Student preferences are augmented to be
over the bins, so that for the same program, every student prefers the walk-zone bin over the open
bin, but the relative preference between programs is as before. Priorities are now computed for
every student i and every bin. For a walk-zone bin j1 of program j, the priority boost is
Boostij1 = 8Continuingij + 4P resentSchoolij + 2Siblingij + W alkZoneij ,
where W alkZoneij is a binary indicator variable for whether student i lives in the walk-zone of the
school housing program j. For an open bin j2 , the boost is as above except without the W alkZoneij
term. Given these preferences over bins and student priorities, we compute student assignments
using the deferred acceptance algorithm. For access to quality, we define each student’s access to
each bin using the analog of equation (10) for bins and define a student’s access to quality by finding
the maximum access to an eligible quality bin, which is defined to be a bin of a program from a
Tier 1 or 2 school in the student’s menu.

C

Evaluating Choice Forecasts

Using the notation of Section 4.2, the quantities that need to be computed to evaluate choice
forecasts for a given choice model are as follows.
1. Best prediction Ŷik for the set of top k choices of student i, where k ∈ {1, 2, 3}.
2. For each k ∈ {1, 2, 3}, market share shj of top k choices from this neighborbood that is for a
program in school j.
3. For each tuple of schools (sj , sl ), the proportion pjl of students who ranked at least two choices
and ranked school j first and l second.
4. For each tuple of programs (j, l), best prediction ẑi (j, l) for whether student i prefers program
j over program l.
Items 1-3 can be computed using many samples of the permutation of top 3 choices, (yi1 , yi2 , yi3 ),
for each student i. For Ŷik this is because, due to how the percentage of mistakes in Top k choices
35

is defined, we have by linearity of expectations that the optimal deterministic prediction Ŷik , if we
believe the choice model to be correct, is simply the top k most commonly occurrent options in
the set {yi1 , · · · , yik }. For shl and pjl , having many samples of the permutation of top 3 choices
suffices since the empirical market shares and empirical proportions are unbiased estimates of the
true values. The details for each choice model are as follows.
• For the Lexicographic model, one sample of (yi1 , yi2 , yi3 ) for each student i suffices since the
model is deterministic.
• For the MNL model, we sample 5000 independent draws of model parameters (δ, β) ∼ N (µ, Σ),
where µ is the maximum likelihood estimate and Σ is the inverse of the Hessian of the loglikelihood function at µ. For each draw of (δ, β), and for each student i and program j,
we produce 200 independent draws of ij ∼ Gumbel(0, 1) and use these to simulate rankings.
Hence, for each student, we have 1,000,000 samples of (yi1 , yi2 , yi3 ) that are almost independent
of one another.38
• For the MMNL model, we use the same recipe as above: we produce 5000 independent samples
of the model parameters (δ, β, Σ) from the MCMC posterior, and for each of these samples
and each student i, we produce an independent draw of individual coefficients γi ∼ N (βr , Σ).
For each of the 5000 combinations of (δ, β, γ), we produce 200 draws of ij for each student i
and program j as before and compute 1,000,000 almost independent samples of (yi1 , yi2 , yi3 ).
Item 4 can be computed easily for the Lexicographic model. For the MNL-based methods, the
desired quantity ẑi (j, l) has the following form:

1
ẑi (j, l) =
0

if P(uij ≥ uil ) ≥ 0.5,

(11)

otherwise.

Define ūij = uij − ij . This is student i’s utility for program j without counting his idiosyncratic
taste shock ij . Define ūil similarly. Observe that for the MNL model,


exp(ūij )
P(uij ≥ uil ) = E
| β, δ
exp(ūij ) + exp(ūil )


(12)

Hence, we can estimate the above quantity using the 5000 independent samples of model parameters
β and δ from the previous calculations for items 1-3. For the MMNL model, the same technique
can be applied except that Equation (12) also requires conditioning on γi , and we use the 5000
independent samples of (δ, β, γ) from before.
Another benchmark we use in evaluating choice forecasts is random guessing, in which case the
choice ranking yi is assumed to be a uniformly random permutation of options within student i’s
38
They are not completely independent because 5000 draws of (δ, β) are shared across students and across each 200
draws of ij . The completely independent alternative would be to produce one million independent draws of (δ, β) for
each student, which is computationally expensive and we doubt would change the results.

36

menu. For the metrics on individual choice, we do not need to explicitly sample but can instead
explicitly write formulae for computing the relevant quantities. Let |Si | be the number of options
in student i’s menu.
% Mistakes in Top k Choices = 1 − k/|Si |,
% Mistakes in Pairwise Comparisons = 0.5.
For the metrics on distribution of choices, we can compute the top k market shares simply by
distributing each student’s market share uniformly among his available options and averaging over
students of each neighborhood. For the joint distribution of top two choices, we assume that every
ordered pair of distinct options is equally likely and apply the linearity of expectations and average
across students.

37

External
Advisory
Committee
(EAC)
appointed

EAC selects
new plan

EAC decides
on criteria
for evaluation

EAC elicits
plans from
community

New plan
implemented
across Boston

Boston School
Committee
ratiﬁes new plan

BPS proposes
new zoned
plans

2012

2013

EAC commissions
MIT SEII study
(demand modeling
and simulations)

2014

SEII study
released

Figure 1: Timeline of Policy Reform
On the top of the timeline, we mark milestones in the Boston school assignment reform that culminated in the
implementation of the Home Based plan in 2014. On the bottom of the timeline, we mark the timelines of the Pathak
and Shi (2013) study from the MIT School Effectiveness and Inequality Initiative (SEII) that influenced the decision.
The SEII study was based on structural choice modeling.

38

Boston School
Committee
ratiﬁes new plan

DiscoverBPS
website
launched

2013

Choices collected
under new plan

2014

Gathered latest
data on students
and schools

Posted predictions
from competing
demand models on
outcomes of interest
(published on arXiv
and NBER)

Compared predictions
with outcomes simulated
from actual choices

Figure 2: Timeline of this Research Project
On the top of the timeline, we mark milestones in the implementation of the new assignment plan. On the bottom of
the timeline, we mark the main steps of this project.

39

Grade

K1

Map data ©2014 Google

School Name

 Getting
There

Eligibility

1

BTU K-8 Pilot

 1.33 mi

Tier 2

2

Curley K-8



1 Mile, Tier 2

3

Dudley St Neigh. Schl

 1.92 mi

Citywide

4

Ellis Elementary



1 Mile,
Option Sch

 Grades Offered
Early Learning
Center



K-5 (Elementary)
K-8

0.52 mi

 Enrollment
Large
Small
Medium

 Uniform Policy
Mandatory

(a) Before reform (in 2013)

0.76 mi

(b) After reform (in 2014)

Figure 3: Illustration of the Change in Choice Sets
Panel (a) shows the geographic zones under the Three Zone plan in 2013. The choice sets include all schools in a
student’s zone, as well as any additional schools within a one-mile walk-zone and a few city-wide schools. Panel (b)
shows a portion of the web portal which generated the list of school options available under the Home Based plan in
2014 for each student. The list is generated based on the student’s home address and various school characteristics,
including the tier of the school and its distance to the student.

40

100%
90%
80%

Access to Tier 1 and 2 Schools

70%
60%
50%

Actual

Lex
40%

MNL
MMNL

30%
20%
10%
0%

(a) Grade K1
100%
90%
80%

Access to Tier 1 and 2 Schools

70%
60%
50%

Actual

Lex
40%

MNL
MMNL

30%
20%
10%
0%

(b) Grade K2

Figure 4: Backtesting Access to Quality Predictions
This figure compares for each grade and neighborhood the actual access to quality one year before the reform (2013)
and the predicted access to quality using each choice model based on data from two years before the reform (2012).
Access to quality is defined as the average chance students from the neighborhood have of being assigned to a tier
1 or tier 2 school, supposing that the student ranks all such schools and ranks them first and supposing that all
other students hold their preferences fixed. The three choice models are Lexicographic, Multinomial Logit (MNL)
and Mixed MNL (MMNL). Whisker bars represent 95% prediction intervals.

41

100%
90%
80%

Access to Tier 1 and 2 Schools

70%
60%
50%

Actual

Lex
40%

MNL
MMNL

30%
20%
10%
0%

(a) Grade K1
100%
90%
80%

Access to Tier 1 and 2 Schools

70%
60%
50%

Actual

Lex
40%

MNL
MMNL

30%
20%
10%
0%

(b) Grade K2

Figure 5: Predicted vs. Actual Access to Quality
This figure compares for each grade and neighborhood the actual access to quality in the first year after the reform
(2014) and the predicted access to quality using each choice model based on data from before the reform. Access to
quality is defined as the average chance students from the neighborhood have of being assigned to a tier 1 or tier 2
school, supposing that the student ranks all such schools and ranks them first and supposing that all other students
hold their preferences fixed. The three choice models are Lexicographic, Multinomial Logit (MNL) and Mixed MNL
(MMNL). Whisker bars represent 95% prediction intervals.

42

70%

Percentage of Top Choices of Tier 1

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1

2

Actual

3
4
Number of Top Choices Counted

Random

Lex.

MNL

5

MMNL

(a) Grade K1
70%

Percentage of Top Choices of Tier 1

60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
1

2

Actual

3
4
Number of Top Choices Counted

Random

Lex.

MNL

5

MMNL

(b) Grade K2

Figure 6: Predicted vs. Actual Fraction of Top Choices Ranking Tier 1 Schools
This figure shows the actual percentage of top ranked choices that are for tier 1 schools in the first year after the
reform (2014), and compares it with the predicted percentage using various choice models estimated from pre-reform
data, but applied to the actual post-reform applicant characteristics. The actual percentages is shown in the solid
line, while the choice models are dashed. The choice models compared are Lexcographic, Multinomial Logit (MNL),
Mixed MNL (MMNL), and ranking programs uniformly randomly. In computing the percentage of top k choices (k
ranging from 1 to 5), we average across all students who ranked at least k options.

43

Table 1. Comparison of Choice Sets
Grade K1
Grade K2
(1)
(2)
A: Applicants in New Assignment Plan
Schools in New and Old Choice Sets
9.4
12.6
Schools Added to New Choice Sets
2.5
2.9
Schools Removed from Old Choice Sets
16.1
18.4
% of Top k Choices under New Choice Sets that were in Old Choice Sets
Top 1
93%
Top 3
91%
Top 5
90%

95%
92%
91%

B: Applicants in Old Assignment Plan
% of Top k Choices under Old Choice Sets that are in New Choice Sets
Top 1
84%
79%
Top 3
76%
73%
Top 5
68%
68%
Notes: This table compares choice sets between the old three-zone plan (in 2013) and the new home-based
assignment plan (in 2014). Schools in New and Old Choice Sets is the average number of choices a student who
applied in 2014 has that were also available in 2013 under the old plan. Schools Added to New Choice Sets is
the average number of choices an applicant in the new plan has that were not available in the old choice set.
Schools Removed from Old Choice Sets is the average number of choices an applicant in the new plan no
longer have under the new plan, but would have had under the old plan. "% of Top k Choices under New
Choice Sets that were in Old Choice Sets" reports whether highly ranked choices in the new plan were also
available in the old plan. For each k (1, 3 or 5), we compute the percentage of top k choices of applicants under
the new plan that were also possible options if those applicants were to apply a year earlier under the old plan.
"% of Top k Choices under Old Choice Sets are in New Choice Sets" reports whether highly ranked choices
under the old plan are still possible options in the new plan. For each k (1, 3 or 5), we compute the percentage
of top k choices of applicants under the old plan that are still available options if those applicants were to apply
a year later under the new plan.

Table 2. Backtesting Equilibrium Predictions Using Data from Two Years Prior to Predict One Year Prior

RMSE

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

Grade K1
Exp. RMSE % in 95% P.I.

(1)

(2)

22%
23%
20%

0.72
0.44
0.40

51
19
18

RMSE

Grade K2
Exp. RMSE % in 95% P.I.
(5)

(6)

(3%)
(6%)
(6%)

(3)
(4)
A: Access to Quality
36%
31%
36%
5%
36%
5%

(3%)
(4%)
(4%)

36%
100%
100%

(0.25)
(0.18)
(0.18)

B: Distance (miles)
36%
0.46
64%
0.26
64%
0.26

(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.10)

29%
64%
79%

(17)
(17)
(17)

C: Unassigned
14%
26
93%
19
93%
18

(13)
(10)
(11)

57%
71%
79%

Notes: This table reports backtesting results for equilibrium outcomes for the last year of the old assignment
plan (in 2013) using choice models estimated from data two years prior (in 2012). In both years, we use the
choice set from the old assignment plan (in 2013). For each of the 14 neighborhoods, access to quality is
defined as the chance a random student from a neighborhood has of being assigned a tier 1 or tier 2 school, if
the student were to rank all eligible programs in such schools first, holding fixed the choices of other students.
Distance is the average Google-Maps walk distance between each assigned student from the neighborhood
and his assigned school. Unassigned is the number of students unassigned from the neighborhood.
Lexicographic, multinomial logit (MNL), and mixed MNL (MMNL) are the three choice models. For each grade,
each choice model and each outcome of interest, we compute a 14-dimensional vector corresponding to our
prediction for each of the 14 neighborhoods. The prediction is based on the average of 1000 independent
simulations, accounting for uncertainty from sampling students, coefficients estimates, unobserved taste
shocks, and lottery numbers. Columns 1 and 4 report the root mean squared error (RMSE), which is defined as
the Euclidean distance between the 14-dimensional vector of predictions and the corresponding vector of
actual outcomes. Columns 2 and 5 report the expected RMSE, which measures how large a RMSE we should
anticipate from a random sample if the model were correct. Each independent simulation yields a 14dimensional vector of predictions, which we call a prediction sample. The expected RMSE is estimated using
the average Euclidean distance between each prediction sample and the sample mean. Columns 3 and 6
present another metric of how unexpected the RMSE is if the model were completely correct. % in 95% P.I. is
the percentage of neighborhoods for which the actual outcome lies within the 95% prediction interval of the
outcome, using the respective choice model. The prediction interval is estimated from the 2.5 and 97.5
percentiles of 1,000 simulations of each choice model.

Table 3. Backtesting Choice Predictions Using Data from Two Years Prior to Predict Choices from One Year Prior
Grade K1
Grade K2
Random Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL
Random Lexicographic
MNL
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A: Individual Choices (% Mistakes)
97%
63%
58%
58%
97%
37%
35%
Top Choice
94%
70%
59%
58%
94%
67%
57%
Top 2 Choices
90%
69%
54%
54%
90%
67%
54%
Top 3 Choices
50%
30%
18%
18%
50%
16%
10%
All Pairwise Comparisons

MMNL
(8)
34%
57%
54%
10%

B: Distribution of Choices (Statistical Distance)
Market Shares by Neighborhood
Top Choice
Top 2 Choices
Top 3 Choices
Joint Distribution of Top 2
Choices

56%
52%
49%

46%
48%
49%

22%
19%
16%

21%
18%
16%

52%
52%
48%

26%
48%
51%

16%
20%
17%

15%
19%
16%

64%

76%

45%

41%

67%

79%

51%

47%

Notes: This table reports backtesting results for choices for the last year of the old assignment plan (in 2013) using choice models estimated from data two
years prior (in 2012). In both years, we use the choice set from the old assignment plan (in 2013). Panel A reports on individual choices of students, and
Panel B reports on the distribution of student choices averaged across 14 Boston neighborhoods. Each column corresponds to a choice model: Random in
columns 1 and 5 denotes uniformly random choices, Lexicographic in columns 2 and 6 denotes the lexicographic model, MNL in columns 3 and 7 denotes
the multinomial logit model, and MMNL in columns 4 and 8 denotes the mixed MNL model. % Mistakes in Panel A uses each demand model's best guess of
the student’s choice and reports the fraction of incorrect guesses. Top Choice is for the first choice. Top 2 Choices is for the unordered set of first and
second choice, and we report the percentage of elements in this set that are wrongly predicted and average over students who ranked at least two options.
Top 3 Choices reports the analog for the unordered set of first, second and third choice, averaging over students who ranked at least three choices.
Pairwise is the set of pairwise comparisons of options implied by the student’s actual ranking compared to the best guess of each comparison from each
choice model. The first three rows of Panel B report the statistical distance (a.k.a. total variation distance) between the predicted distribution of
neighborhood-level market shares and the actual distribution, averaged across the neighborhoods. Joint distribution of top 2 choices aggregates students
across neighborhoods and compares the predicted joint probability distribution of the first and second choice of students who ranked at least two choices
and the actual distribution.

Table 4. Accuracy of Equilibrium Predictions Compared to Actual Outcomes
Grade K1
Grade K2
RMSE
Exp. RMSE % in 95% P.I.
RMSE
Exp. RMSE % in 95% P.I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A: Access to Quality
Lexicographic
26%
(5%)
14%
13%
(4%)
86%
MNL
13%
(6%)
71%
15%
(5%)
36%
MMNL
13%
(6%)
79%
14%
(5%)
36%

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

0.34
0.19
0.19

(0.14)
(0.12)
(0.12)

B: Distance
50%
0.14
57%
0.13
57%
0.14

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

30
22
21

(16)
(16)
(17)

C: Unassigned
57%
34
86%
41
86%
40

(0.09)
(0.07)
(0.07)

71%
71%
71%

(9)
(7)
(8)

43%
14%
14%

Notes. This table reports the accuracy of predictions under three choice models for equilibrium outcomes using
data from 2013 (the last year of the old assignment plan) compared to data from 2014 (the first year of the new
assignment plan). For each grade, each outcome of interest, each choice model, and each of the 14
neighborhoods, we compute the prediction error as the squared difference between the predicted outcome for
this neighborhood (based on the demand model) with the actual outcome (based on the actual choices). Table 2
notes contain definitions of the prediction targets and the columns.

Top Choice
Top 2 Choices
Top 3 Choices
All Pairwise Comparisons

Table 5. Accuracy of Choice Predictions Compared to Actual Choices
Grade K1
Grade K2
Random Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL
Random Lexicographic
MNL
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
A: Individual Choices (% Mistakes)
93%
59%
54%
53%
93%
33%
32%
85%
62%
51%
51%
87%
60%
54%
78%
58%
47%
47%
80%
56%
50%
50%
28%
23%
23%
50%
14%
12%

MMNL
(8)
33%
55%
51%
13%

B: Distribution of Choices (Statistical Distance)
Market Shares by Neighborhood
Top Choice
Top 2 Choices
Top 3 Choices

47%
41%
37%

41%
43%
41%

20%
16%
13%

21%
16%
14%

45%
43%
38%

22%
48%
44%

15%
19%
15%

15%
20%
17%

Joint Distribution of Top 2 Choices

62%

72%

41%

41%

67%

75%

49%

48%

Notes: This table reports on the accuracy of choice predictions using data from 2013 (the last year of the old assignment plan) compared to data
from 2014 (the first year of the new assignment plan). Table 3 notes define the prediction targets and the columns.

Table 6. Accuracy of Equilibrium Predictions Using Actual Applicants with Estimated Choices
Grade K1
Grade K2
RMSE
Exp. RMSE
% in 95% P.I.
RMSE
Exp. RMSE
% in 95% P.I.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
A: Access to Quality
Lexicographic
22%
(2%)
7%
22%
(2%)
0%
MNL
5%
(3%)
64%
12%
(3%)
79%
MMNL
6%
(3%)
64%
12%
(3%)
79%
B: Distance
Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

0.21
0.15
0.15

(0.07)
(0.08)
(0.08)

Lexicographic
MNL
MMNL

8
7
7

(4)
(4)
(4)

43%
57%
50%

0.15
0.08
0.09

C: Unassigned
50%
15
79%
14
64%
15

(0.03)
(0.04)
(0.05)

14%
57%
71%

(3)
(4)
(4)

21%
36%
43%

Notes: This table reports the accuracy of predictions under three choice models for equilibrium outcomes using data
from 2013 (the last year of the old assignment plan) compared to data from 2014 (the first year of the new assignment
plan) with the actual set of applicants. Unlike Table 4, which randomly samples the applicant pool using past data, the
calculation here uses the actual set of number of applicants and their characteristics. Choices are generated from
demand model estimates fit from old data. Table 2 notes contain definitions of the prediction targets and the columns.

Table 7. Prediction Improvements Using Post-Reform Data
Grade K1
Grade K2
MNL
MMNL
MNL
MMNL
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A: Access to Quality
13%
13%
15%
14%

Original Prediction
New Applicants with
Old Demand Model
Refit Demand Model
Refit Demand Model + Ranking Length
Sampling Actual Choices Using Applicant Forecast

5%
7%
3%

6%
7%
3%

12%
13%
7%

8%

12%
13%
7%
10%

Original Prediction
New Applicants with
Old Demand Model
Refit Demand Model
Refit Demand Model + Ranking Length
Sampling Actual Choices Using Applicant Forecast

0.19

B: Distance
0.19
0.13

0.14

0.15
0.16
0.18

0.15
0.15
0.18

0.09
0.07
0.10

Original Prediction
New Applicants with
Old Demand Model
Refit Demand Model
Refit Demand Model + Ranking Length
Sampling Actual Choices Using Applicant Forecast

22

C: Unassigned
21
41

40

7
7
6

7
7
6

15
14
10

0.08
0.07
0.09

0.08

22

0.07

14
14
10
15

Notes: This table compares the accuracy of predictions from Table 4 using additional information from the new assignment plan. Each cell entry is the RMSE
of the prediction error. Table 2 notes contain definitions of the prediction targets. Original Prediction is reproduced from columns 1 and 4 of Table 4. New
Applicants with Old Demand Model uses new applicants in 2014, their characteristics, and predicted choices from the demand model fit in 2013, following
columns 1 and 5 of Table 5. New Applicants with Refit Demand Model uses new applicants in 2014 and predicted choices from demand model refit in 2014.
New Applicants with Refit Demand Model + Ranking Length uses new applicants in 2014, predicted choices from demand model refit in 2014, and the actual
number of choices ranked by each new applicant in 2014. Sampling Actual Choices Using Applicant Forecast does not use demand-model predicted choices. It
is computed by considering continuing and non-continuing students separately. Continuing students are already registered in BPS in a lower grade. Noncontinuing students are new to the system. We predict the set of continuing students using the same methodology as in the original prediction and assume
each chooses their previous choice. For non-continuing students, we use the same methodology as in the original prediction and sample actual choices in
2014 with replacement.

Table 8. Accuracy of Choice Predictions from Refit Demand Models
Grade K1
Grade K2
Demand Model
MNL
MMNL
MNL
MMNL
Fit Using Data
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A: Individual Choices (% Mistakes)
Top Choice
Old
54%
53%
32%
33%
New
49%
49%
31%
30%
Top 2 Choices
Old
51%
51%
54%
55%
New
50%
49%
51%
51%
Top 3 Choices
Old
47%
47%
50%
51%
New
45%
45%
48%
48%
All Pairwise Comparisons
Old
23%
23%
12%
13%
New
21%
21%
11%
11%
B: Distribution of Choices (Statistical Distance)
Market Shares by Neighborhood
Top Choice
Top 2 Choices
Top 3 Choices
Joint Distribution of Top 2 Choices

Old
New
Old
New
Old
New
Old
New

20%
18%
16%
14%
13%
11%
41%
39%

21%
17%
16%
13%
14%
10%
41%
37%

15%
12%
19%
15%
15%
11%
49%
45%

15%
11%
20%
14%
17%
11%
48%
43%

Notes: This table compares the accuracy of choice predictions from choice models fitted using 2013 data (the last year of
the old assignment plan) and choice models fitted using 2014 data (the first year of the new assignment plan). Accuracy
is evaluated compared to the actual choices of students in 2014. Table format follows Table 7, except we include an
additional row for each outcome specifying the source year for the data used to fit the demand model. We consider only
the multinomial-logit (MNL) model (columns 1 and 3) and the mixed MNL (MMNL) model (columns 2 and 4). Table 3
notes contain definitions of the prediction targets.

Table 9. Reversals of Comparisons of Counterfactual Predictions for Access to Quality in Grade K1 for the
Neighborhood Allston-Brighton under Various Simulation Assumptions
Choice Model (Year of Fitting) MNL (2014)
MNL (2013)
Lexicographic
Applicant Pool
2014
2014
2013
2013
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
A. Counterfactual Predictions
Status Quo (3 Zone)
72.0%
77.7%
84.3%
100%
Home Based A
77.5%
82.9%
96.3%
55.0%
Home Based B
79.1%
84.5%
97.8%
57.0%
6 Zone
87.3%
91.3%
94.5%
54.3%
9 Zone
86.5%
90.7%
94.2%
54.4%
10 Zone
98.4%
99.8%
100.0%
64.9%
11 Zone
86.4%
90.5%
94.2%
54.2%
23 Zone
86.7%
91.3%
94.6%
57.6%
B. Reversal of Pairwise Comparisons
# of Non-Trivial Comparisons
22
(Point of
# of Reversals of Non-Trivial Comparisons
0
reference)
Percentage of Reversals
0%

22
8
36%

25
14
56%

Notes. In panel A, we report the point predictions for access to quality in grade K1 for the neighborhood Allston-Brighton under
various proposed plans. Each row corresponds to a plan proposed during the 2012-2013 Boston student assignment reform, with
each plan representing a different set of choice menus and priorities. The first row is the pre-reform status quo, and the second is the
plan chosen after the reform. The third row is a variant of the plan in the second row, except with more choices. The remaining plans
represent alternative partitioning of Boston into assignment zones. Each column specifies the choice model and the applicant pool
used in the simulations. Column 1 uses the multinomial-logit (MNL) choice model fitted from post-reform choices using the postreform applicant pool in 2014. Column 2 uses the MNL model fitted from pre-reform choices from 2013 but still simulated using the
post-reform applicant pool. Column 3 is similar to Column 2 but uses the pre-reform applicant pool from 2013. Column 4 uses the
lexicographic choice model and the pre-reform applicant pool.
In Panel B, we measure how much columns 2 through 4 in Panel A differ from panel 1 in terms of the relative rankings of access to
quality across plans. Since column 1 is the point of reference, it is left blank in panel B. Consider first the comparison between
columns 1 and 2 of Panel A, which are reported in column 2 of Panel B. Since there are 8 plans, there are 28 comparisons. Each
comparison corresponds to a pair of rows from Panel A, and we call the comparison "trivial" if the access to quality predictions in
these two rows are within an addititve difference of 1.0% of one another in both columns 1 and 2. For example, the comparison
between the 11 and 23 Zone plans is trivial, but the comparison between the Status Quo and the Home Based A plan is not. Row 1 in
column 2 of Panel B reports the number of non-trivial comparisons between columns 1 and 2 of panel A. Row 2 of Panel B reports
the how many non-trivial comparisons are reversed, which means that the columns differ in which plan results in a higher access to
quality. For example, for columns 1 and 3 of Panel A, the comparison between the Home Based A plan and the 23 zone plan is
reversed, but between the Home Based A plan and the Status Quo is not. Row 3 of Panel C reports the ratio between the previous
two rows expressed as a percentage. As a benchmark, if the columns agree exactly on the relative rankings across plans, then the
percentage of reversals is 0.

Table 10. Percentage of Reversals of Comparisons of Counterfactual Predictions Under
Alternative Simulation Assumptions
Choice Model (Year of Fitting) MNL (2014)
Applicant Pool
2014
(1)
Access to Quality
K1
K2
Distance
K1 (Point of
K2 reference)
Unassigned
K1
K2
Overall

MNL (2013)
2014
2013
(2)
(3)

Lexicographic
2013
(4)

13%
4%

17%
23%

32%
35%

2%
1%

7%
11%

18%
24%

5%
5%
5%

20%
21%
16%

44%
38%
32%

Notes: This table reports the aggregate result of the analysis in Table 9 on the percentage of reversals of pairwise
comparisons of counterfactual predictions, when averaged across the 14 neighborhoods and performed for each of
the three equilibrium moments of interest. See the notes for Table 9 for a description of the columns as well as the
eight proposed plans compared. See the notes for Table 3 for a description of the three forecast targets. The numbers
in the first row correspond to an analysis that is analogous to that in the last row of Panel B of Table 9 for all 14
neighborhoods, instead of just Allston-Brighton, and reporting the average across neighborhoods. The second row is
similar, except for grade K2. The next four rows are for different moments of interest, but the analysis is analogous.
Recall from the notes of Table 9 that the analysis requires a definition of "non-trivial" difference between given pair of
plans, and that the threshold for a non-trivial difference in access to quality is set to an additive difference of 1.0%. For
distance, this threshold is set to 0.01 miles. For unassigned, this is set to 0.5 students/neighborhood. The last row
reports the unweighted average of the first six rows, and corresponds to an aggregate measure of how much relative
rankings of counterfactual predictions are different across simulation assumptions.

References
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., N. Agarwal, and P. Pathak (2015): “The Welfare Effects of Coordinated School Assignment: Evidence from the NYC High School Match,” NBER Working Paper,
21046.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, and A. E. Roth (2009): “Strategy-proofness versus
Efficiency in Matching with Indifferences: Redesigning the New York City High School Match,”
American Economic Review, 99(5), 1954–1978.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, A. E. Roth, and T. Sönmez (2005): “The Boston Public
School Match,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 95, 368–371.
(2006): “Changing the Boston Public School Mechanism,” Discussion paper, NBER WP
11965.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., P. A. Pathak, J. Schellenberg, and C. Walters (2017): “Do Parents
Value School Effectiveness?,” NBER Working Paper, 23912.
Abdulkadiroğlu, A., and T. Sönmez (2003): “School Choice: A Mechanism Design Approach,”
American Economic Review, 93, 729–747.
Agarwal, N., and P. Somaini (2014): “Demand Analysis Using Strategic Reports: An Application to a School Choice Mechanism,” NBER Working Paper 20775.
Angrist, J., and J.-S. Pischke (2010): “The Credibility Revolution in Empirical Economics:
How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, 24(2), 3–30.
Ashenfelter, O., and D. Hosken (2008): “The Effects of Mergers on Consumers Prices: Evidence from Five Selected Case Studies,” NBER Working Paper 13589.
Azevedo, E. M., and J. D. Leshno (2016): “A Supply and Demand Framework for Two-sided
Matching Markets,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(5), 1235–1268.
Berry, S., J. Levinsohn, and A. Pakes (1995): “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63(4), 841–890.
Burge, K. (2012): “Study Finds Inequalities in Schools’ Zone Plans,” Boston Globe, October 1.
Burgess, S., E. Greaves, A. Vignoles, and D. Wilson (2015): “What Parents Want: School
Preferences and School Choice,” Economic Journal, 125(587), 1262–1289.
Calsamiglia, C., C. Fu, and M. Guell (2017): “Structural Estimation of a Model of School
Choices: the Boston Mechanism vs. Its Alternatives,” Working paper, CEMFI.

54

Drolet, and Luce (2004): “The Rationalizing Effects of Cognitive Load on Response to Emotional
Tradeoff Difficulty,” Journal of Consumer Research, 31(1), 63–77.
Dubins, L. E., and D. A. Freedman (1981): “Machiavelli and the Gale-Shapley algorithm,”
American Mathematical Monthly, 88, 485–494.
Dur, U., S. D. Kominers, P. A. Pathak, and T. Sönmez (2016): “Reserve Design: Unintended
Consequences and the Demise of Walk Zones in Boston,” forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Einav, L., and J. Levin (2010): “Empirical Industrial Organization: A Progress Report,” Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 145–162.
Fishburn, P. (1974): “Lexicographic Orders, Utilities and Decision Rules: A Survey,” Management
Science, 20(11), 1442–1471.
Gale, D., and L. S. Shapley (1962): “College Admissions and the Stability of Marriage,” American Mathematical Monthly, 69, 9–15.
Glazerman, S., and D. Dotter (2016): “Market Signals: Evidence on the Determinants and
Consequences of School Choice from a Citywide Lottery,” Mathematica Policy Research, June.
Goldstein, D. (2012): “Bostonians Committed to School Diversity Haven’t Given Up on Busing,”
The Atlantic, October 10.
Handy, D. (2012): “Debate on Overhauling Boston Schools’ Assignment System Continues,” 90.9
WBUR, November 13.
Harris, D., and M. Larsen (2015): “What Schools Do Families Want (and Why?),” Technical
Report, New Orleans, LA: New Orleans Education Research Alliance.
Hastings, J., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2009): “Heterogeneous Preferences and the
Efficacy of Public School Choice,” Working paper, Brown University.
Hastings, J., and J. M. Weinstein (2008): “Information, School Choice and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1373–1414.
Hausman, J. A., and P. A. Ruud (1987): “Specifying and Testing Econometric Models for
Rank-ordered Data,” Journal of Econometrics, 34(1), 83–104.
He, Y. (2012): “Gaming the Boston Mechanism in Beijing,” Working paper, Rice University.
Heckman, J. (2010): “Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation Approaches
to Evaluating Policy,” Journal of Economic Literature, 2, 356–398.
Hurwicz, L. (1950): “Prediction and Least Squares,” in Statistical Inference in Dynamic Economic
Models, ed. by T. C. Koopmans. John Wiley & Sons.
55

Hwang, S. (2015): “A Robust Redesign of High School Match,” University of Britsh Columbia.
Johnson, E. J., R. J. Meyer, and S. Ghose (1989): “When choice models fail: Compensatory
models in negatively correlated environments,” Journal of Marketing Research, 26(Aug), 255–290.
Kapor, A., C. Neilson, and S. Zimmerman (2017): “Hetereogneous Beliefs and School Choice
Assignment Mechanisms,” Working Paper, Princeton University.
Katafygiotis, L., and K. Zuev (2008): “Geometric insight into the challenges of solving highdimensional reliability problems,” Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, 23(2–3), 208 – 218, 5th
International Conference on Computational Stochastic Mechanics.
Keane, M., and K. Wolpin (2007): “Exploring the Usefulness of a Nonrandom Holdout Sample
for Model Validation: Welfare Effects on Female Behavior,” International Economic Review,
48(4), 1351–1378.
Kling, J. R., S. Mullainathan, E. Shafir, L. C. Vermuelen, and M. V. Wrobel (2012):
“Comparison Friction: Experimental Evidence from Medicare Drug Plans,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 127, 199–235.
Kohli, R., and K. Jedidi (2007): “Representation and Inference of Lexicographic Preference
Models and their Variants,” Marketing Science, 26(3), 380–399.
Lumsdaine, R., J. Stock, and D. Wise (1992): “Three Models of Retirement: Computational
Complexity vs. Predictive Validity,” in Topics in the Economics of Aging, ed. by D. Wise. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Manzini, P., and M. Mariotti (2012): “Choice by lexicographic semiorders,” Theoretical Economics, 7, 1–23.
Marschak, J. (1953): “Economic Measurements for Policy and Prediction,” in Studies in Econometric Methods, eds., Hood and Koopmans, New York Wiley, p. 1-26.
McFadden, D. (1974): “The Measurement of Urban Travel Demand,” Journal of Public Economics, 3, 303–328.
(2001): “Economic Choices,” American Economic Review, 91(3), 351–378.
McFadden, D., F. Reid, A. Talvitie, M. Johnson, and Associates (1979): “Overview
and Summary: Urban Travel Demand Forecasting Project,” Urban Travel Demand Forecasting
Project, Final Report, Vol. I. Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California Berkeley.
McFadden, D., A. Talvitie, and Associates (1977): “Validation of Disaggregate Travel Demand Models: Some Tests,” Urban Travel Demand Forecasting Project, Final Report, Vol. V.
Institute of Transportation Studies, University of California Berkeley.
56

Menino, T. (2012a): “Press Release,” http://www.cityofboston.gov/news/default.aspx?id=5873
November 29.
(2012b):

“State

of

the

City

Address,”

January

17

Available

at

http://www.cityofboston.gov/.
Misra, S., and H. Nair (2011): “A Structural Model of Sales-Force Compensation Dynamics:
Estimation and Field Implementation,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 9(3), 211–225.
Neal, R. (2011): “MCMC using Hamiltonian dynamics,” in Handbook of Markov Chain Monte
Carlo, ed. by S. Brooks, A. Gelman, G. L. Jones, and X.-L. Meng, chap. 5. CRC Press.
Nevo, A. (2001): “Measuring Market Power in the Ready-to-Eat Cereal Industry,” Econometrica,
69(2), 307–342.
Nevo, A., and M. Whinston (2010): “Taking the Dogma out of Econometrics: Structural Modeling and Credible Inference,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 69–82.
Pathak, P., and P. Shi (2013): “Simulating Alternative School Choice Options in Boston,”
Working Paper, MIT.
Pathak, P. A., and P. Shi (2014): “Demand Modeling, Forecasting, and Counterfactuals, Part
I,” NBER Working Paper 19589.
(2015): “Demand Modeling, Forecasting, and Counterfactuals, Part I,” Available at http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1401.7359.
Pathak, P. A., and T. Sönmez (2008): “Leveling the Playing Field: Sincere and Sophisticated
Players in the Boston Mechanism,” American Economic Review, 98(4), 1636–1652.
(2013): “School Admissions Reform in Chicago and England: Comparing Mechanisms by
their Vulnerability to Manipulation,” American Economic Review, 103(1), 80–106.
Payne, J. W., J. R. Bettman, and E. J. Johnson (1988): “Adaptive strategy selection in
decision making,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14,
534–552.
Peters, C. (2006): “Evaluating the Performance of Merger Simulation: Evidence from the US
Airline Industry,” Journal of Law and Economics, 49(2), 627–649.
Roberts, G. O., A. Gelman, and W. R. Gilks (1997): “Weak convergence and optimal scaling
of random walk Metropolis algorithms,” The Annals of Applied Probability, 7(1), 110–120.
Roth, A. E. (1982): “The Economics of Matching: Stability and Incentives,” Mathematics of
Operations Research, 7, 617–628.

57

Ruijs, N., and H. Oosterbeek (2012): “School choice in Amsterdam. Which schools do parents
prefer when school choice is free?,” Working paper, Amsterdam.
Seelye, K. Q. (2012): “4 Decades after Clashes, Boston Again Debates School Busing,” New York
Times, October 4.
(2013): “No Division Required in This School Problem,” New York Times, March 12.
Shi, P. (2013): “Closest Types: A Simple Non-Zone-Based Framework for School Choice,” Working
paper, MIT.
(2015): “Guiding School-choice Reform through Novel Applications of Operations Research,” Interfaces, 45(2), 117–132.
Slovic, P. (1975): “Choice Between Equally Valued Alternatives,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception Performance, 1, 280–287.
Sönmez, T. (2013): “Bidding for Army Career Specialties: Improving the ROTC Branching Mechanism,” Journal of Political Economy, 121(1), 186–219.
Thorngate, W. (1980): “Efficient Decision Heuristics,” Behavioral Science, 25(May), 219–225.
Todd, P., and K. Wolpin (2006): “Assessing the Impact of a School Subsidy Program in Mexico:
Using a Social Experiment to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Child Schooling and
Fertility,” American Economic Review, 96(5), 1384–1417.
Train, K. (2003): Discrete Choice Methods with Simulation. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Tversky, A. (1969): “Intransitivity of Preferences,” Psychological Review, 76(1).
(1972): “Elimination by Aspects: A Theory of Choice,” Psychological Review, 79(4).
Tversky, A., S. Sattah, and P. Slovic (1988): “Contingent Weighting in Judgment and
Choice,” Psychological Review, 95, 371–384.
Vaznis, J., and T. Andersen (2012): “Plans Upend Boston School Assignments,” Boston Globe,
September 25.
Walters, C. R. (2014): “The Demand for Effective Charter Schools,” NBER Working Paper
20640.
Wise, D. A. (1985): “Behavioral Model versus Experimentation: The Effects of Housing Subsidies
on Rent,” In Methods of Operations Research 50, ed. Peter Brucker and R. Pauly, 441-489,
Koningsten: Verlag Anton Hain.
Yee, M., E. Dahan, J. Hauser, and J. Orlin (2007): “Greedoid-Based Noncompensatory
Inference,” Marketing Science, 26(4), 532–549.
58

Table A1. MNL and MMNL Coefficient Estimates
MNL
MMNL
2012
2013
2014
2012
2013
2014
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
distance
-0.365*** -0.403*** -0.557*** -0.638*** -0.674*** -0.793***
(0.014)
(0.015)
(0.028)
(0.037)
(0.039)
(0.045)
continuing
4.027*** 4.354*** 4.369*** 4.777*** 4.966*** 5.201***
(0.052)
(0.054)
(0.064)
(0.069)
(0.068)
(0.085)
sibling
2.104*** 2.102*** 2.619*** 2.478*** 2.451*** 3.089***
(0.037)
(0.038)
(0.048)
(0.045)
(0.045)
(0.060)
walk zone
0.500*** 0.399*** 0.133*** 0.339*** 0.185*** 0.053***
(0.019)
(0.020)
(0.023)
(0.028)
(0.028)
(0.029)
ell program x ell student
1.548*** 1.211*** 0.543*** 1.892*** 1.311*** 0.614***
(0.035)
(0.040)
(0.045)
(0.058)
(0.059)
(0.061)
ell program language match x ell
0.606*** 0.672*** 0.802*** 0.610*** 0.967*** 0.989***
(0.043)
(0.049)
(0.062)
(0.052)
(0.060)
(0.078)
student
distance x black/hispanic
0.115*** 0.114*** 0.216*** 0.188*** 0.183*** 0.268***
(0.010)
(0.011)
(0.019)
(0.024)
(0.024)
(0.031)
distance x block group income
-0.262*** -0.296*** -0.274*** -0.295*** -0.343*** -0.337***
(0.021)
(0.023)
(0.039)
(0.049)
(0.052)
(0.062)
mcas x black
-0.874*** -1.062*** -0.901*** -1.100*** -1.371*** -1.283***
(0.105)
(0.111)
(0.089)
(0.153)
(0.144)
(0.130)
mcas x block group income
0.424*
-0.906*** 1.762*** 1.065*** 0.925*** 2.388***
(0.221)
(0.252)
(0.216)
(0.299)
(0.313)
(0.278)
% white/asian x black/hispanic
-2.581*** -2.666*** -2.984*** -3.732*** -3.861*** -4.000***
(0.097)
(0.094)
(0.114)
(0.162)
(0.148)
(0.170)
% white/asian x block group income
1.982*** 1.778*** 1.052*** 2.633*** 2.217*** 1.355***
(0.211)
(0.219)
(0.249)
(0.322)
(0.311)
(0.351)
Notes: This table reports the estimated coefficients of the multinomial logit (MNL) and mixed MNL (MMNL) choice
models. The year in each column corresponds to the source year for choice data. All models include a fixed effect
for each school. distance is the Google Maps walking distance from the school to the student’s home. continuing is
a binary indicator variable for whether the student is continuing at the school from a previous grade. sibling is an
indicator for whether the student has an older sibling at the school. walk zone is an indicator for whether the
student is in the school's walk zone. ell program is an indicator for whether the program is for English language
learners (ELL). ell student is an indicator whether the student is classified by the district as an English learner and
thus eligible to ELL programs. ell program language match is an indicator for whether the program is an ELL
program that targets students who speak a certain language and this language matches the student’s home
language. black/hispanic and black are indicators for the student's racial classification. mcas is the proportion of
students at the school who scored “Advanced” or “Proficient” in the previous year’s standardized test for math,
averaging the proportions for grades 3,4, and 5. block group income is the medium household income of the
census block group containing the centroid of the student’s geocode of residence measured in hundreds of
thousands of dollars. % white/asian is the proportion of the enrolled population at the school who are White or
Asian. Standard errors are in parenthesis. Standard errors for MNL are computed using the Hessian matrix of the
maximum likelihood at the point estimate of the coefficients. Standard errors for MMNL are computed using the
sample standard deviation of the MCMC samples.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.

Table A2. Covariance Estimates for MMNL Model
2012
(1)

s(ell program x ell student)

1.638***
(0.058)

2013
(2)
A: Standard Deviations
1.358***
(0.063)

s(walk zone)

0.981***
(0.030)

0.878***
(0.030)

0.703***
(0.035)

s(distance)

0.392***
(0.011)

0.409***
(0.011)

0.499***
(0.016)

s(mcas)

2.275***
(0.093)

2.121***
(0.101)

1.837***
(0.083)

s(%white/asian)

2.672***
(0.093)

2.512***
(0.106)

2.300***
(0.106)

r(distance,mcas)

r(distance, %white/asian)

r(mcas, %white/asian)

2014
(3)
0.959***
(0.068)

B: Correlation Coefficients
-0.232***
-0.285***
-0.134***
(0.041)
(0.043)
(0.049)
-0.089**
(0.039)

-0.055
(0.040)

0.021
(0.051)

0.035
-0.110*
0.236***
(0.056)
(0.061)
(0.068)
Notes: This table reports covariance matrix estimates for the random coefficients in the
mixed multinomial logit (MMNL) model. The year in each column corresponds to the source
year for choice data. The variables ell program, ell student, walk zone, distance, mcas, and
% white/asian are defined in Table A1 notes. Panel A reports the square root of the variance
of each random coefficient. Panel B reports the Pearson correlation coefficient of the three
pairs of random coefficients for which we allow correlation. Standard errors of the
estimates are in parenthesis, computed using the sample standard deviation of the MCMC
samples.
*significant at 10%; **significant at 5%; ***significant at 1%.

Grade K1

Table A3. Prediction Error in Applicant Count and Demographics
Predicted
Std. Error
(1)
(2)
A. Count of Applicants
Continuing
92
7
New
2652
177

Grade K2

Continuing
New

ELL (Grade K1)

Yes
No
Yes
No

ELL (Grade K2)

1482
2196

30
153

B. Applicant Demographics
44.4%
1.0%
55.6%
0.7%
30.8%
0.7%
69.2%
0.7%

Actual
(3)
158
2313
2051
1875

46.7%
53.3%
14.6%
85.4%

Race

Hispanic
Black
White
Asian
Other

35.1%
28.8%
22.6%
8.4%
5.1%

0.6%
0.5%
0.5%
0.3%
0.3%

36.5%
28.0%
22.9%
7.9%
4.7%

Median Block Group Income

0-25K
25-50K

16.9%
49.7%

0.4%
0.6%

17.5%
50.0%

50-75K
75K+

20.7%
12.7%

0.5%
0.4%

20.2%
12.3%

Allston-Brighton
4.5%
0.3%
4.8%
Charlestown
3.5%
0.2%
3.2%
Downtown
3.7%
0.3%
3.4%
East Boston
12.7%
0.7%
12.3%
Hyde Park
6.3%
0.2%
6.4%
Jamaica Plain
6.7%
0.4%
7.2%
Mattapan
6.8%
0.3%
6.8%
North Dorchester
5.3%
0.5%
5.6%
Roslindale
8.5%
0.4%
8.1%
Roxbury
13.6%
0.4%
14.1%
South Boston
3.2%
0.2%
3.0%
South Dorchester
13.2%
0.5%
13.6%
South End
4.7%
0.2%
4.4%
West Roxbury
7.3%
0.4%
7.2%
Notes: This table compares the predicted and actual new applicants across demographic categories.
Column 1 reports the prediction for each category of students, and column 2 reports the standard
deviation of the prediction. These are computed from the 1,000 simulated samples of applicant pools used
for computing the equilibrium outcomes. Column 3 reports the actual number of students of each type.
Column 1 reports the predicted percentage and column 2 the standard deviation of the prediction. The
predictions are based on 2013 data (the last year of the old assignment plan). The numbers shown are the
sample mean and standard deviations of the percentage of applicants of each category in the 1,000
simulation samples used for Table 4. Column 3 reports the actual percentages in the 2014 data (the first
year of the new assignment plan). Panel A compares the predicted number of applicants to the actual
number. Continuing students are those enrolled in BPS in the previous grade at the time of application.
The remaining students are new applicants. Panel B reports applicant characteristics. ELL denotes
whether the student is classified by BPS as eligible for English Language Learner programs. Race
information is missing for students who applied but did not enroll in any school. Income and
neighborhood information are based on centroid of student geocode. Median block group income refers
to the median household income of the census block group in which the student resides, based on the
2010 census.
Neighborhood

