                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



    THE LIFE-CYCLE DYNAMICS OF EXPORTERS AND MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

                                         Anna Gumpert
                                           Haishi Li
                                        Andreas Moxnes
                                        Natalia Ramondo
                                         Felix Tintelnot

                                      Working Paper 24013
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24013


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                         November 2017, Revised November 2019


We thank the editor, Stephen Yeaple, and two anonymous referees for their comments. We
benefited from comments at various seminars. We would like to specially thank Jonathan Vogel
for his insightful comments on an early version of the paper. We also thank Costas Arkolakis,
Kerem Cosar, Javier Cravino, Stefania Garetto, Pinelopi Goldberg, Eduardo Morales, Veronica
Rappoport, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, and Mu-Jeung Yang for their comments and suggestions.
We greatly thank Julien Martin for his help with the French data. Zhida Gui and Xiao Ma
provided outstanding research assistance. This project has received funding from the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation
programme (grant agreement No 715147) and from the French National Research Agency (ANR)
as part of the “Investissements d’avenir" program (reference: ANR-10-EQPX-17—Centre
d’accès sécurisé aux données—CASD). The empirical analysis with the German data was
conducted during visits to the research center of the Deutsche Bundesbank. We gratefully
acknowledge the hospitality of the Bundesbank and the access to its Micro-database Direct
investment (MiDi). Anna Gumpert gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft through CRC TR 190. All errors are our own. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Anna Gumpert, Haishi Li, Andreas Moxnes, Natalia Ramondo, and Felix Tintelnot.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Life-Cycle Dynamics of Exporters and Multinational Firms
Anna Gumpert, Haishi Li, Andreas Moxnes, Natalia Ramondo, and Felix Tintelnot
NBER Working Paper No. 24013
November 2017, Revised November 2019
JEL No. F1,F23

                                        ABSTRACT

This paper studies the life-cycle dynamics of exporters and multinational enterprises (MNEs).
Using rich firm-level data, we document a comprehensive set of facts on entry, exit, and growth
of new exporters and new MNEs. Guided by these facts, we build a model based on the standard
proximity-concentration trade-off extended to incorporate time-varying firm productivity and
sunk costs of MNE entry. The calibrated version of the model goes far in matching cross-
sectional and dynamic moments of the data on exporters and MNEs. We show that including the
choice to become an MNE affects the predicted export dynamics after trade liberalization. The
different dynamics in a model with and without MNEs hinge on the right truncation of fast-
growing exporters induced by the inclusion of the MNE choice.

Anna Gumpert                                    Natalia Ramondo
Department of Economics                         School of Int'l Relations and Pacific Studies
LMU Munich                                      University of California at San Diego
Akademiestr. 1/III                              9500 Gilman Drive, MC 0519
D-80799 Munich, Germany                         La Jolla, CA 92093
https://annagumpert.wordpress.com/              and NBER
anna.gumpert@econ.lmu.de                        nramondo@ucsd.edu

Haishi Li                                       Felix Tintelnot
University of Chicago                           Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics
Kenneth C. Griffin Department of Economics      University of Chicago
Saieh Hall                                      5757 South University Avenue
5757 S University Ave                           Chicago, IL 60637
Chicago, IL 60637                               and NBER
haishi@uchicago.edu                             tintelnot@uchicago.edu

Andreas Moxnes
Department of Economics
University of Oslo
P.O box 1095 Blindern
0317 OSLO
NORWAY
and CEPR
andreamo@econ.uio.no
1       Introduction

Exporters’ life-cycle dynamics are important to understand the long-term and short-term
effects of economic shocks and trade policy changes. In consequence, they have been
extensively studied. However, exporting is only one possibility for firms to serve a foreign
market. Firms may also choose to become multinational enterprises (henceforth, MNEs).
Despite the overwhelming importance of these firms in the data, we know comparatively
little about the life-cycle dynamics of MNEs and their possible interaction with exporter
dynamics.1
This paper studies the life-cycle dynamics of exporters and MNEs. Using rich firm-level
data, we first provide a comprehensive set of facts on the life-cycle dynamics of new
exporters and new MNEs. We exploit data on domestic firms, exporters, and MNEs from
France and Norway and complement them with data on MNEs from Germany. First,
new exporters in a foreign market have two to three times higher exit rates than new
affiliates of MNEs in the same market. Second, average sales growth is similar for new
exporters and new MNEs. However, export growth profiles of exporters that switch to
serving the market as MNEs are steeper than those of exporters that do not switch to
MNE status. Finally, exit rates of exporters at age one exhibit gravity—they are strongly
correlated negatively with foreign market size and positively with distance—whereas
those of young MNE affiliates are uncorrelated with these foreign country characteristics.
In contrast, entry rates do not present stark differences in their gravity patterns between
the two groups. Our findings are strikingly very similar across the three economies under
study, despite their different size and structure.
Guided by the facts, we develop a dynamic model of trade and foreign direct investment
(FDI) based on the static model of the proximity-concentration trade-off in Helpman et al.
(2004, henceforth, HMY). We introduce dynamics into the model by assuming that firm
productivity evolves according to a Markov process and that MNE activities face a sunk
entry cost. The model preserves the ranking of the export and MNE choice from the static
model: The most productive firms become MNEs; firms with intermediate productivity
levels become exporters; and the least productive firms serve only their home market.
The sunk costs of MNE activities lead to a band of inaction, a range of productivity levels
where existing MNEs do not exit a market, but non-MNEs with the same productivity do
not enter. We show that our model is rich enough to qualitatively capture the facts we
document.
    1
     MNE affiliates’ global sales are twice as large as global exports, and they account for disproportionally
large shares of aggregate output and employment in many countries (Antrás and Yeaple, 2014).



                                                      1
In the calibrated version of the model, we incorporate sunk export costs, as in the dynamic
model of exporting in Roberts and Tybout (1997), and assume that fixed and sunk costs
for both MNE and export activities are heterogenous at the firm-destination level. We
evaluate this quantitative version of the model in which Helpman et al. (2004) is coupled
with dynamics features of Roberts and Tybout (1997). Although we do not target the
life-cycle exit and growth profiles of exporters and MNEs, the calibrated model captures
quite well the patterns observed in the data.
Finally, we evaluate the predictions of our calibrated model with both exporters and
MNEs regarding life-cycle and aggregate dynamics after a hypothetical trade-liberalization
episode. We compare the predictions of our model with both exporters and MNEs to a
calibrated version of the model with only exporters. Enriching the canonical dynamic
model of trade to include MNEs—a first-order feature of the data—has consequences for
the life-cycle and aggregate dynamic behavior of exporters. One source of the different
responses of exporters between the two models hinges on the right truncation of fast-
growing exporters induced by the inclusion of the MNE choice. Without the MNE choice,
the most productive firms are exporters, as in the static model in Melitz (2003); with the
MNE choice, the most productive firms become MNEs, as in HMY. In a dynamic setup,
including the MNE choice not only truncates the exporters’ distribution of productivity
levels, but also induces a truncation to-the-right of the distribution of growth rates. The
fastest-growing exporters stop exporting and become MNEs when that option is allowed,
while the slowest-growing exporters remain exporters. Those exporters with the highest
productivity growth do not contribute to the average growth rate of exporters in the
model with MNEs—because they change status—but they do so in the model where the
MNE option is not included.2
Our paper contributes to several strands of literature. First, we contribute to the small, but
growing, literature that studies the joint behavior of exporters and MNEs using dynamic
models. Ramondo et al. (2013), Fillat and Garetto (2015), and Conconi et al. (2016), among
others, document and study different implications of the proximity-concentration trade-
off in dynamic setups. We present new evidence and study implications related to the
joint life-cycle behavior of exporters and MNEs.3
   2
      This mechanism hinges on the assumption that exporters that become MNE abandon exports to serve
a foreign market. We find that exports relative to total sales in a foreign destination decrease sharply after
MNE entry, consistent with the evidence documented by Belderbos and Sleuwaegen (1998), Bloningen
(2001), and Head and Ries (2001), which use detailed firm- and product-level data.
    3
      Ramondo et al. (2013) include aggregate uncertainty into a two-period model of trade and FDI to
analyze how the properties of the international business cycle affect the choice of the entry mode into
foreign markets. Fillat and Garetto (2015) include aggregate uncertainty and sunk entry cost to study the
consequences for asset pricing. Conconi et al. (2016) include a learning mechanism to explain that most
firms enter foreign markets as exporters before opening an affiliate there. Early work by Rob and Vettas


                                                      2
Second, we complement the extensive literature that studies exporters’ dynamics. Early
work by Baldwin (1989), Baldwin and Krugman (1989), and Dixit (1989), followed by
Roberts and Tybout (1997), Ghironi and Melitz (2005), Das et al. (2007), Alessandria and
Choi (2007), and Impullitti et al. (2013), point to the importance of the hysteresis created
by sunk investments for understanding the effects of temporary and permanent shocks
on aggregate trade flows and exchange rate movements. Our model combines elements
of this rich dynamic literature on exporters with the canonical model of trade and FDI in
Helpman et al. (2004).
Our paper is also closely related to Ruhl and Willis (2017) who document a set of life-
cycle dynamics facts for Colombian exporters. We document a similar (sub-)set of facts
for new French and Norwegian exporters, but also include life-cycle facts for MNEs. We
find, as they do, that matching the observed patterns of survival and growth of new
exporters requires very low sunk export costs, but this is not the case for MNEs. Whereas
they include demand-side frictions in the model to match the observed exit and growth
patterns, we include MNEs, a first-order feature of the data. We evaluate how far the
model goes in matching the data and whether the presence of MNEs changes the dynamic
behavior of exporters after a hypothetical trade-liberalization episode.4
The paper proceeds as follows: Section 2 describes the data; Section 3 documents the
facts; Section 4 describes the model; Section 5 presents the calibration; Section 6 presents
the counterfactual exercises; and Section 7 concludes.



2    Data

Our empirical analysis is based on rich firm-level panel data sets from France, Norway,
and Germany. The French and the Norwegian data contain information on domestic
firms, exporters, and MNEs in varying levels of detail. In contrast, the German data
(2003) features demand uncertainty together with capacity constraints to study the mechanism behind the
choice of firms to simultaneously export to and maintain affiliates in the same market.
   4
     The literature on the life-cycle of domestic firms (summarized by Haltiwanger et al., 2013) and
exporters find that models with a AR(1) firm-level productivity process, as in Hopenhayn (1992), deliver
new firms that grow too large too quickly. Both literatures have resorted to demand frictions to slow down
firm growth (see Foster et al. (2016) for domestic firms). In relation to exporters’ growth driven by demand
factors, papers such as Albornoz et al. (2012), Eaton et al. (2014), and Morales et al. (2017), focus on the
dynamics of trade associated with learning. Arkolakis (2016) includes the cost of building a customer base
in a dynamic model of trade. Fitzgerald et al. (2017) evaluate the importance of demand-learning firm
growth versus customer-based firm growth to explain the life-cycle dynamics of firm export quantities
and export prices. Araujo et al. (2016) document that in markets with better contracting institutions new
exporters start bigger but grow slower (conditional on survival). They propose a framework in which
imperfect contract enforcement, together with imperfect information (and previous export experience in
other foreign markets) interact to match the observed pattern of exporter growth and survival.


                                                     3
contain extremely detailed information on the foreign affiliates of German MNEs, but do
not provide any information on exporters and domestic firms. Our analysis exploits the
strengths of each of the three data sources, all of which cover a period of more than ten
years.
France. The data span the years 1999-2011 and combine information from several sources.
Information on a firm’s domestic sales is from FICUS (1999-2007) and FARE (2008-2011);
the export data are from the French customs; information on ownership links between
firms in France and between firms in France and abroad are from LiFi; and information
on foreign affiliate sales is from OFATs (2007, 2009-2011). We restrict the sample to firms
that are subject to the BRN-taxation regime and, for some of the analysis, to the sub-period
1999-2007.5
The data contain information on each firm’s domestic sales and export sales by destination,
as well as the location of foreign affiliates of French MNEs. Information on foreign affiliate
sales is available only for a subset of large MNEs and for some (non-consecutive) years.6
While affiliate sales are recorded annually, exports are recorded monthly. Following
Kleinert et al. (2015), we consolidate the information on domestic activities, exports and
foreign affiliates to the level of the French group (i.e., if firms A and B belong to firm C,
we consolidate all three firms). We keep a consolidated firm in the sample if at least one
of its domestic members is active in the manufacturing sector in at least one year.7 For
independent firms, we focus on those that operate in the manufacturing sector in at least
one year. Our sample contains only firms headquartered in France and excludes French
affiliates of foreign MNEs.
We consider MNE-country pairs and exporter-country pairs with multiple entry and
exit over the sample period.8 We restrict our attention to majority-owned affiliates of
French MNEs, which account for around 80 percent of all affiliates of French MNEs. We
aggregate both exports and FDI at the parent firm-foreign destination-year level. We end
up with a sample of 963,375 firm-year observations. The upper panel of Table E.1 shows
that 1.6 percent of firms in our sample are MNEs and 28.7 percent are non-MNE exporters.
   5
     The FICUS/FARE databases provide balance sheet data on virtually all French firms. The principal
data source is firms’ tax statements. The BRN regime applies to larger firms. We conducted our analysis
also including all firms. As small firms rarely export or conduct FDI, results are very similar. The period
restriction is made in order to avoid structural breaks in the time series, as both the industry classification
and the definition of the domestic sales variable changed in 2008.
   6
     OFATS is a survey of French MNEs with affiliates outside of the European Union. The sample is biased
towards large MNEs, as a comparison of domestic sales for MNEs in OFATs and the other sources reveals.
   7
      This consolidation implies that wholesale firms in France may be part of our sample, which is
important because large French groups often channel exports through wholesale affiliates.
   8
     Restricting the sample to MNE-country and exporter-country pairs with a single entry and exit over
the sample period yields very similar results.



                                                      4
French MNEs account for almost 60 percent of employment in our sample, while non-
MNE exporters account for more than 30 percent. The median (mean) French MNE
operates in two (five) markets, with a handful of MNEs serving more than 81 markets,
while the median (mean) exporter serves four (ten) markets, with some exporters serving
more than 178 markets (top-coded to preserve confidentiality).
Norway. The data, which span the years 1996-2006, include information on each firm’s
domestic sales, as well as export and foreign affiliate sales by destination country. The
data nest balance sheet information on firms in the Norwegian manufacturing sector from
Statistics Norway’s Capital Database; information on exporters from customs declarations;
and data on firms’ foreign operations from the Directorate of Taxes’ Foreign Company
Report. The coverage is comprehensive: All foreign affiliates of Norwegian firms in the
manufacturing sector, as well as 90 percent of Norwegian manufacturing revenues, are
included; firms in the oil sector are excluded.
We consider MNE-country pairs and exporter-country pairs with multiple entry and
exit over the sample period. We include both majority- and minority-owned foreign
affiliates of Norwegian parents and adjust the affiliate sales by the parent’s ownership
share.9 Our sample consists of 89,018 firm-year observations. As the lower panel of
Table E.1 shows, only 1.5 percent of Norwegian firms have affiliates abroad, and 36.4
percent are non-MNE exporters. Norwegian MNEs represent more than 13 percent of
total manufacturing employment in Norway, while exporters represent 63 percent. The
median (mean) Norwegian MNE operates in two (four) markets, with a maximum at 37
markets, while the median (mean) exporter serves three (seven) markets, with a maximum
of 122 markets.
Germany. The data, which span the years 1999-2011, contain detailed balance sheet
information about foreign affiliates of German MNEs. The main data source is the Micro-
database Direct investment (MiDi, see Schild and Walter, 2015). Information about parent
firms is limited; for instance, it is not possible to distinguish between domestic and export
sales of the parent.
We consolidate the information on direct and indirect ownership shares and restrict our
attention to majority-owned affiliates, which represent 95 percent of foreign affiliates
of German MNEs, and affiliates whose parent operates in the manufacturing sector, or
whose parent is a holding company belonging to a corporate group in the manufacturing
sector, in at least one year.10 We consolidate affiliates at the parent firm-foreign destination-
   9
     A 20 percent ownership threshold, not ten percent, is used to distinguish direct from portfolio
investment. The ownership shares considered for Norway are lower than the ones for France (20 versus 50
percent) in order to gain observations.
  10
     Reporting foreign investments to the German central bank is compulsory, but the reporting

                                                  5
year level, and end up with a sample of 37,843 parent-year observations. Only 0.21
percent of German firms have affiliates abroad, but they account for 27 percent of total
sales in Germany (Buch et al., 2005). The median (mean) German MNE operates in one
(three) country(ies), with some parents operating in more than 27 markets (top-coded to
preserve confidentiality).



3    Facts on the life-cycle dynamics of exporters and MNEs

We document three novel facts about the life-cycle dynamics of MNEs and exporters.
First, we show life-cycle patterns of exit rates. Second, we present evidence on life-cycle
growth. Third, we document the relation between exit and entry rates across destination
markets and characteristics of those markets. Taken together, these facts are informative
about the features to be included in a dynamic model of exports and FDI— we explain
this connection in more detail below.
We study the behavior of new firms that start exporting to—or open an affiliate in—
a foreign country. We focus on the firm’s main mode of international operation and
distinguish between non-MNE exporters and MNEs. That is, only firms that are not
MNEs are considered exporters to a foreign destination, while firms with foreign operations
in a market are considered MNEs whether they export or not contemporaneously to the
same foreign destination. This distinction is motivated by the observation that FDI is
the dominant mode of serving the foreign market after MNE entry. Appendix Figure D.1
shows that the average export-to-foreign sales ratio decreases to around ten percent when
a firm opens an affiliate in a market, and that around ten percent of MNEs with exports
to that market before MNE entry completely discontinue exporting once they switch to
FDI.
Our facts are based on observations at the firm-destination-year level. For expositional
purposes, in the body of the paper, we present figures that show averages across the
destinations, weighted by each destination’s share of export (MNE) firms. Appendix
Table E.2 contains the results of Ordinary-Least- Squares (OLS) regressions that include a
battery of fixed effects and additional controls.
requirements change over time. We adjust the sample to unify thresholds: We include only affiliates with
either a participation of ten percent and revenues of at least ten million DM (Euro equivalent), or with
participation of at least 50 percent and revenues of at least three million Euro. We consolidate ownership
shares and restrict the sample to majority-owned affiliates only after unifying the reporting threshold.




                                                    6
                                                                               Figure 1: Exit rates by age.
                                                     (a) France                                                                                         (b) Norway




                                                                                                                           .6
                    .6

                                                                                       Exporters                                                                                       Exporters
                                                                                       MNEs                                                                                            MNEs




                                                                                                                                           .5
                                  .5




                                                                                                           Mode-market-specific exit rates
  Mode-market specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                 .4
                        .4




                                                                                                                        .3
               .3




                                                                                                                .2
       .2




                                                                                                                           .1
                    .1




                                                                                                                           0
                    0




                                       0   1        2         3            4       5               6                                            0   1   2         3            4   5               6
                                                    Mode-market-specific age                                                                            Mode-market-specific age



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by
mode-market-specific age, for exporters and MNEs. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. We
show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of export (MNE) firms. Exporters
refers to non-MNE exporters.




3.1                                    Exit rates

We first study the exit patterns of new exporters and new MNEs. We focus on exit from
the current mode of international operation and a foreign country.
Figure 1 plots the exit rates of exporters and MNEs at the firm-destination level by age.
Exit rates are calculated as the number of MNEs (exporters) that exit a given destination
relative to the number of active MNEs (exporters) in that destination at each age. Age
refers to the number of years after entry in a given market-mode, with age in the entry
year equal to zero. The figure presents averages across all firm-destination pairs.
On average, MNEs in a foreign market have between one third and one half of the exit
rates of exporters in the same foreign country in their first year of life. For both modes
of internationalization, exit rates are declining with age, though more drastically for
exporters. It is remarkable that results are qualitatively and quantitatively similar between
France and Norway.11
A formal test confirms that French exporters are around 15 percentage points more likely
to exit than foreign affiliates of French MNEs in the first two years after entry, but the
difference disappears later in life. For Norway, the difference in exit rates between exporters
  11
     Eaton et al. (2008) document similar exit rates for new Colombian exporters at the firm-destination
level. In unreported evidence, we find that the exit patterns of new MNEs from Germany are also
remarkably similar to the patterns found for French and Norwegian MNEs.



                                                                                                       7
                                               Figure 2: Exit rates by age: experienced versus non-experienced MNEs.
                                                        (a) France                                                                                           (b) Norway




                                                                                                                               .3
                       .3
                                                                              Experienced MNEs                                                                                      Experienced MNEs
                                                                              Non-experienced MNEs                                                                                  Non-experienced MNEs




                                                                                                                                               .25
                                     .25




                                                                                                                Mode-market-specific exit rates
      Mode-market specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                      .2
                            .2




                                                                                                                            .15
                  .15




                                                                                                                     .1
           .1




                                                                                                             .05
   .05




                                                                                                                               0
                       0




                                           0      1    2         3            4         5            6                                               0   1   2         3            4        5             6
                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                              Mode-market specific age



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by
mode-market-specific age. Experienced MNEs are new affiliates of MNEs that exported to a foreign market
for one or more years before opening an affiliate there. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level.
We show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of MNE firms.



and MNEs is 30 percentage points at entry, but, after two years, the difference is not
statistically different from zero. This finding is summarized in Appendix Figure D.2.
It is reasonable to conjecture that having experienced a destination market as an exporter
before entering with an MNE affiliate has an effect on the chances of survival in that
market. We explore this evidence in Figure 2. We define "experienced MNE" an MNE
that exported to a given destination market in any year before opening a foreign affiliate
there.12 Experienced MNEs have an almost 10-percentage point lower exit rate, on average,
in the first year after entry than new affiliates without export experience. However, this
advantage disappears later in life (see also Appendix Figure D.3).
We conclude that:

Fact 1. New MNEs in a foreign destination have lower exit rates than new exporters in
that destination. MNEs with previous export experience in a market have lower exit rates
at entry than MNEs without that experience.

The large difference between exit rates of exporters and MNEs suggests the presence of
sunk costs of MNEs that are much larger than sunk costs of exporting. Additionally,
the co-existence of experienced and non-experienced MNEs supports a HMY-type model
with an AR(1) process for firm productivity.
Robustness. One may be concerned that the differences in exit rates documented in
  12
                   Experienced MNEs represent almost 60 percent of new MNEs for France (47 percent for Norway).

                                                                                                         8
Figure 1 are not due to differences between the two modes of internationalization, but
that they are artifacts of definitions of age and exit. Firms may switch between modes
so that exporters become MNEs, and MNEs become exporters, for example. To exclude
such patterns from driving our results, we present two robustness results using the French
data. First, we recompute age as the number of years that the firm is active in a market,
regardless of its international mode of operation; that is, we compute market-specific,
rather than mode-market specific, age. Second, we redefine exit as complete exit from the
market rather than as exit from either exporting or MNE activities in a market. Baseline
results still hold, as columns 3 and 4 in Appendix Table E.2 show. Additionally, one may
be concerned that the entry mode of FDI plays a role: If MNEs enter a market through
Merger and Acquisition (M&A), they take over pre-existing domestic firms, whereas
Greenfield affiliates are, by definition, brand-new firms. Using the data from Germany,
Appendix Figure D.5a shows that there is no difference in exit rates between the two
modes of entry of foreign affiliates of German MNEs.13


3.2    Sales growth

Figure 3 shows the sales growth of exporters and MNE affiliates by age. We focus on firms
that survive for at least four years in a mode-market and demean the firm-destination
observations by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. We normalize sales with
respect to one-year after entry because the entry year may be contaminated, particularly
for exporters, by the so-called "partial-year effects"—artificially high first-year growth
rates due to firms that start operations in the middle of the calendar year (see Bernard
et al., 2017). Columns 5 and 6 in Appendix Table E.2 show the OLS results.
Figure 3 shows that foreign sales grow at similar rates for French exporters, Norwegian
exporters, and Norwegian MNEs, conditional on surviving for at least four years in the
market. Growth rates are markedly different only between age zero and age one, but as
outlined, this difference is likely attributable to partial-year effects.14
Lumping together exporters that eventually become MNE with the ones that never do
may mask substantial heterogeneity. Figure 4 shows that, in the French data, the group
  13
      In unreported results for France, we find that our baseline results are robust to: splitting the sample into
European Single Market (ESM) and non-ESM countries to address concerns about the different reporting
thresholds for exports to EU and non-EU members; using the unconsolidated rather than the consolidated
data; splitting the sample into the 1999-2005 and 2006-2011 periods; including cohort, rather than year,
fixed effects; and correcting for partial-year effects. Additionally, results at the firm level are very similar to
results at the firm-destination level.
   14
      Unreported evidence for Germany shows that sales profiles of German MNEs are quite similar to the
ones of Norwegian MNEs.


                                                        9
                                                                Figure 3: Sales growth by age.




                                  .3                   .2
               Log sales, relative to year after entry
             -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1           0     .1




                                                                                               Exporters, Norway
                                                                                               Exporters, France
                                  -.6




                                                                                               MNEs, Norway

                                                            0   1             2                3                   4
                                                                    Mode-market-specific age

Notes: Log of firm-destination export (affiliate) sales with respect to firm-destination export (affiliate) sales
in the year after entry. Firms with five or more years in the market. Observations are at the firm-destination-
year level. We show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of export (MNE)
firms. Log of sales first demeaned by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. Exporters refers to non-
MNE exporters.



of exporters that switch to FDI to serve a given market ("ever-MNE" exporters) clearly
grow faster, in terms of exports, in the years previous to MNE entry, than the exporters
that never become MNE ("never-MNE" exporters). In the Norwegian data, the difference
is less marked, but the number of observations also decreases substantially.
We conclude that:

Fact 2. Average life-cycle sales growth is similar for exporters and MNEs. However, ever-
MNE exporters grow, on average, much faster before MNE entry than do never-MNE
exporters.

The similarity of export and affiliate sales growth suggests that productivity evolves in a
similar way for exporters, parents and affiliates of MNEs. The higher export sales growth
of ever-MNEs than never-MNEs supports a strong role for self-selection of firms into the
different modes of internationalization, as in HMY.
Robustness. One may be concerned that normalizing sales growth by the year after
entry is not sufficient to adequately account for partial-year effects. As the French data
contain monthly export sales, we can correct for partial-year effects by calculating 12-
month growth rates (as also done by Bernard et al. 2017). A comparison of columns 5 and

                                                                                 10
                                                            Figure 4: Exporters’ sales growth by age and type.
                                                           (a) France                                                                                                     (b) Norway
                        .6




                                                                                                                                       .6
                                                                                                                Log foreign sales, relative to year after entry
  Log export sales, relative to year after entry
                                            .4




                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                     .2




                                                                                                                                                    .2
                               0




                                                                                                                                              0
                       -.2




                                                                                                                                      -.2
                -.4




                                                                                                                              -.4
         -.6




                                                                                                                        -.6
   -.8




                                                                                                                 -.8
                                                                                     Never-MNE exporters                                                                                            Never-MNE exporters
                                                                                     Ever-MNE exporters                                                                                             Ever-MNE exporters
                        -1




                                                                                                                                       -1
                                                   0   1             2                  3                  4                                                      0   1             2                  3                  4
                                                           Years from export entry                                                                                        Years from export entry



Notes: Log of firm-destination export sales with respect to firm-destination export sales in the year after export
entry, for firms with five or more years in the market as exporters. Observations are at the firm-destination-
year level. We show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of export firms. Log of
sales are first demeaned by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. Never-MNE exporters are exporters
that, in our sample period, do not change to MNE status. Ever-MNE exporters are exporters that become
MNEs after export entry. Exports for ever-MNE exporters are computed for the years before MNE entry, for
exporters that enter MNE status after exporting for four years into a given market.


7 in Appendix Table E.2 confirms that the entry year does seem contaminated by these
effects: Growth at age one is much higher for the calendar-year data than for the adjusted
data; for subsequent ages, growth rates are quite similar, which supports the age-one
normalization in Figure 3.
To document the selection induced by non-random survival, Appendix Figure D.4 shows
growth profiles by tenure in the market. As expected, firms that survive longer grow
faster. The differences are less pronounced for MNEs, but for all tenure lengths, exports
from age one onwards grow at a similar rates as MNE sales.
Finally, one may be rightly concerned that sales growth rates of new MNEs differ between
new MNE affiliates that enter the market through M&A versus Greenfield FDI. One may
expect that, as brand-new firms, affiliates created through Greenfield FDI grow faster than
affiliates created through M&As, which are older.15 Using the German data, Appendix
Figure D.5b shows that, as expected, MNEs that enter through M&A grow less than MNEs
that enter a market with a Greenfield project. Nonetheless, the differences are not large if
one disregards the entry year, again supporting our normalization choice in Figure 3.
       15
     Part of the higher growth rate may be due to partial-year-effects for MNEs because some affiliates may
not start operating in January, but later in the year.




                                                                                                           11
3.3    Entry, exit, and gravity

The previous two facts pool firms across different destination countries. Country characteristics,
however, may be an important determinant of a firm’s development over its life-cycle.
To explore this issue, we study the correlation between first-year exit rates and entry
rates of exporters and MNEs, and two country characteristics that are prominent in the
international trade literature: the size of the destination country, as measured by GDP;
and the distance of the destination country from the firm’s home country. Our finding is
that:

Fact 3. First-year exit rates of exporters exhibit gravity, whereas those of MNEs do not.
Both entry rates for exporters and MNEs exhibit gravity.

Figure 5 shows scatter plots of first-year exit rates against market size (upper panels),
and distance (lower panel), for France. We restrict the sample to countries with at least
ten firm-destination observations. We relegate results for Norway, which are extremely
similar, to Appendix Figure D.6.
The cross-country patterns of first-year exit between the two modes of international operation
are strikingly different: While exporters operating in smaller and more distant markets
are more likely to stop operations right after entry, it is not clear that affiliates of MNEs
do.16 An OLS regression shows that the exit probability increases by almost seven percentage
points when distance doubles, and it decreases by 3.4 percentage points when GDP doubles,
with both coefficients significant at the one percent level. In contrast, the effects of GDP
and distance on the exit rates of MNE affiliates are insignificant.
Figure 6 shows the same scatter plots for the entry rates. Unlike the exit rates, both
entry rates for exporters and MNEs are correlated with country characteristics. In OLS
regressions, we find that the elasticities with respect to market size are quite similar for
exporters and MNEs, but the distance elasticities are three times as large for exporters.17
Appendix Figure D.7 shows that, for Norway, distance elasticities are also higher for
exporter entry than for MNE entry and market size elasticities are similar across the two
entry modes.
The difference of first-year exit rates between exporters and MNEs suggests that higher
sunk costs of entry for exporters than for MNEs. This fact is thus key in informing
  16
     Using data from Argentina, Albornoz et al. (2016) document a similar pattern for exporters: survival
probabilities decrease with distance. They rationalize this finding with a model where sunk export costs
increase with distance proportionally less than do fixed costs.
  17
     The elasticities with respect to market size are 0.52 (s.e. 0.027) and 0.41 (s.e. 0.033) for exporters and
MNEs, respectively; distance elasticities are -1.15 (s.e. 0.105) vs -0.36 (s.e. 0.094).

                                                      12
                                            Figure 5: First-year exit rates and market characteristics, France.

                                                                                                        Market size
                                                       (a) Exporters                                                                                                     (b) MNEs
            1




                                                                                                                                  1
                             KIR
                                MHL  SLB
                                    WSM
                                                SWZ
            .8




                                                                                                                                  .8
                                  TON
                                    DMA BTN ERI    TJK
                                       KNA
                                        LBR
                                       GNBATGSLE
                                              GUY RWAPNG
                              STP
                                      VCT
                                           BDI
                                          CPV     MWI BHS AFG
                                                           BRN
                                                           BWA
                                    COMGMB
                                         LCA CAF
                                             LSO         NAM
                                                         GNQ
                                                        ZWE
                                         SYC
                                           BLZ TGO LAO
                                                   NER  NIC
                                                        MOZZMB
                                                          ALB
                                                          NPL
  First-year exit rate




                                                                                                                        First-year exit rate
                                        GRD  MDVSURGIN
                                                    BRBMLI
                                                     BEN
                                                      TCD   UGA MMR
                                                                UZB AGO
                                                               ETH     LBYIRQ
                                                  KGZHTIKHM
                                                      BFA
                                                       MKD
                                                       MDG
                                                        COG BOL
                                                           HND
                                                            JAM PAN
                                                               TKM
                                                                 KEN
                                                                YEM DOM     NGA
                                     VUTDJI     MRTMDA    SEN
                                                         GEO   TZA
                                                               CMR
                                                             BIH
                                                              BHRGHA
                                                               CIV
                                                               TTO  SYR BGDPAK
                                                                  CRI
                                                                  URY
                                                 FJIMNG
                .6




                                                                                                                                      .6
                                                       ARMGAB
                                                        MUS   JOR
                                                               SLV
                                                             ISL    SDN
                                                                   LKA
                                                                  AZE      DZA VEN
                                                            PRY     OMNQAT
                                                                  LBN    KWTEGY SAU
                                                                          PER
                                                                         KAZ         IDN
                                                       MLT         GTM  VNM
                                                                      ECU
                                                                      HRV   PHL
                                                                             MYS
                                                                            CHL
                                                                              COL ARG
                                                                                ARE
                                                                                 IRN
                                                                    BLR
                                                               CYP TUN  MARNZL
                                                                          UKRISR
                                                                             SGPHKG
                                                                                THA
                                                                                 ZAF TWN MEX
                                                                                   NOR      BRA
                                                                                            CAN CHN
                                                                                       TURKOR
                                                                                           IND
                                                                                           RUS      JPN      USA
                                                                    BGR
                                                                LVA SVN               CHE AUS
                                                              EST LTU  SVKHUN
                                                                            CZEIRL
                                                                                FIN
                                                                               PRT AUT
                                                                                 GRCPOL
                                                                                  DNKSWENLD ITA
                                                                                            ESP GBR
                                                                                                 DEU
     .4




                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                     BEL                                                                                                        IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                                                        MLT       DOM
                                                                                                                                                              TGO        GAB
                                                                                                                                                                    BENBFA        TUN              BEL KOR ITAGBR
                                                                                                                                                                        COG              NGA       SAU MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                      VNM HKG  GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                 AUT      BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           CAN DEU
                                                                                                                                                                            BHR
                                                                                                                                                                             CIV LTU
                                                                                                                                                                                   LUX       COL
                                                                                                                                                                                             PRT
                                                                                                                                                                                           CHL    SWE    ESP              USA
                                                                                                                                                                             CMR
                                                                                                                                                                        MUS CYP KEN
                                                                                                                                                                              PAN BGR       MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                      MAR SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                            ISRZAFPOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                  TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    CHE
                                                                                                                                                                       MDG     LVA AGO
                                                                                                                                                                                     SVK     VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN                 JPN
            .2




                                                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                                         SEN EST
                                                                                                                                                                              GHA        HUN IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                             THA
                                                                                                                                                                                           CZE ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                          UKR   DNK  TUR IND    CHN
                                                                                                                                                                    TCD        URY HRV DZAEGYARE  IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOR     RUS
                                                                                                                                                                       MLI      LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                  SVN     PHL
                                                                                                                                                                    GIN
            0




                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                        KAZ

                              12            14          16        18                20             22           24                             12    14                16          18         20                 22        24
                                                          GDP, $1000 (logs)                                                                                                 GDP, $1000 (logs)




                                                                                                           Distance
                                                       (c) Exporters                                                                                                     (d) MNEs
            1




                                                                                                                                  1




                                                                                                          KIR
                                                                                                          MHL
                                                                                                           SLB
                                                                                                            WSM
                                                                                                   SWZ
            .8




                                                                                                                                  .8




                                                                                                 BTN            TON
                                                                                          TJK DMA
                                                                                         ERI
                                                                                       SLE
                                                                                        LBR RWA
                                                                                      GNB      KNA
                                                                                                 GUY
                                                                                           AFG  BHS
                                                                                                VCT
                                                                                               ATG
                                                                                                 MWI          PNG
                                                                                      CPVSTP BDI    BWA
                                                                                                  COM     BRN
                                                                    ALB               GMBGNQ   LCA
                                                                                         CAF NPL   NAM
                                                                                                  ZWE
                                                                                                 ZMB
                                                                                                  SYCLSO
                                                                                                     NIC
                                                                                   NER  TGO         BLZ
                                                                                                     LAO
                                                                                                     MOZ
  First-year exit rate




                                                                                                                        First-year exit rate




                                                                        LBY         MLIGIN
                                                                                       BEN
                                                                                     TCD UZB
                                                                                           ETH
                                                                                             UGASUR
                                                                                                GRD
                                                                                               BRB   MMR
                                                                                                   MDV
                                                                     MKD            BFA
                                                                                   IRQ TKM
                                                                                       NGA    AGO
                                                                                            COG
                                                                                          KGZ
                                                                                          YEM KEN
                                                                                                DOM PAN
                                                                                                    HND
                                                                                                    MDG
                                                                                                  JAM
                                                                                                 HTI    BOL
                                                                                                       KHM
                                                                 BIH    MDA      GEO
                                                                                SYR  SEN
                                                                                   MRT   CMR
                                                                                        GHA
                                                                                        CIV
                                                                                        BHRDJI  TZA
                                                                                                  BGD
                                                                                                TTO  CRI URY VUT
                                                                                            PAKMNG
                .6




                                                                                                                                      .6




                                                                 DZA      ISL    ARM
                                                                                 JOR
                                                                                   AZE SDNGAB    VENLKA
                                                                                                     SLV
                                                                                                      MUS       FJI
                                                                                EGY
                                                                               LBN    KWT
                                                                                       SAU OMN
                                                                                         QAT
                                                                                           KAZ          PRY
                                                                                                        PER
                                                                                                          IDN
                                                              HRV     MLT            IRN ARE         VNM
                                                                                                      ECU
                                                                                                     GTM
                                                                                                    COL  ARG
                                                                                                         PHL
                                                                                                        MYS
                                                                                                          CHL
                                                                      MAR
                                                                        UKR
                                                                      BLR
                                                                  TUN TUR
                                                                 NOR            ISR
                                                                              CYP           CAN        TWN
                                                                                                      HKG
                                                                                                      BRA
                                                                                                     MEX
                                                                                                      THA
                                                                                                      ZAFSGP      NZL
                                                                            RUS               IND
                                                                                            USA    CHN
                                                                                                     KOR
                                                                                                       JPN
                                                 CHE                  BGR
                                                                     LVA                                        AUS
                                                            SVN
                                                        IRLCZE       LTU
                                                                       EST
                                                             AUTHUN
                                                              SVK
                                                             DNK POL
                                                                  PRT  FIN
                                                                         GRC
                                            GBRNLD            ITA SWE
                                               DEU           ESP
     .4




                                                                                                                           .4




                                      BEL                                                                                                                                                          IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PER
                                                                                                                                                                                     MLT                    DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TGOGAB    KOR
                                                                                                                                                    BEL GBR                    ITA TUN            BFABEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGACOG MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAU        BRA
                                                                                                                                                     LUX   DEU                AUT
                                                                                                                                                                              ESP PRTLTUGRC
                                                                                                                                                                                    SWE              BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAN VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                         USA    HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                               COL  CHL
                                                                                                                                                           CHE                    POL MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                      BGR      ISR SEN CMRKEN PAN MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                                                                               SVK     FINTUR CYP    GHA AGO VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
            .2




                                                                                                                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                         IRLCZE
                                                                                                                                                                              DNKHUN LVAUKR                     THASGP
                                                                                                                                                                                  NOR EST RUSEGY TCDAREIND CHN URY
                                                                                                                                                                               HRVDZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                               LBN MLI
                                                                                                                                                                             SVN                                   PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GIN
            0




                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       KAZ

                         5                  6              7              8                    9                10                             5          6                  7              8                9             10
                                                          Distance, km (logs)                                                                                               Distance, km (logs)



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, for
exporters and MNEs, in the first year upon mode-market entry (i.e., age zero). Destinations with ten or more
firm-year observations and with available GDP data. Exporters refers to non-MNE exporters. GDP data from
International Financial Statistics (IMF). Distance data from CEPII (Mayer and Zignago, 2011).




                                                                                                                   13
                                                   Figure 6: Entry rates and market characteristics, France.

                                                                                                           Market size
                                                   (a) Exporters                                                                                                         (b) MNEs




                                                                                                                                .001
                                                                                      CHE
         .01




                                                                                                                                .0008
         .008




                                                                                   BEL
                                                                                                ESPITA DEU




                                                                                                                                  .0006
                                                                                                                 USA
     Entry rates




                                                                                                                          Entry rates
            .006




                                                                         MAR                         GBR
                                                                   TUN                  NLD
                                                                               PRT




                                                                                                                        .0004
                                                                                  POL
                                                                                       CAN
  .004




                                                                                                         CHN
                                                                          CZE AUTTUR
                                                                         DZA                               JPN                                                                                                             USA
                                                                              GRC
                                                                             HKG SWE
                                                                         HUNIRLDNK
                                                                             ARE      RUS
                                                       SEN LBN                       KOR
                                                                           ISR NOR AUSIND                                                                                                                   ESP
                                                            CIV              FIN SAU
                                                                           SGP         BRA




                                                                                                                                .0002
                                                                              ZAF    MEX                                                                                                                          DEU
                                                       GABCMR        SVK EGY TWN
         .002




                                                                                                                                                                                            HKG BEL             GBR
                                                     MUS
                                                    MDG          BGR
                                                                  SVN        THA                                                                                                                              ITA
                                                     COG CYPLTUHRVKWT      MYS ARG                                                                                                                   CHE          CHN
                                             TGO BEN                      CHL
                                                                        UKR
                                                                         NZL IRNIDN                                                                                                                POL      CAN
                                                             LVA     VNM
                                                    MLT BHR
                                                   MLI
                                                   BFA     EST
                                                           JOR
                                                          ISL    SYRQAT PAK
                                                                          NGA
                                                                          PHL
                                                                            COL
                                                                             VEN                                                                                                  LUXMAR CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                 TUN         PRT           BRA
                                     DJI        GIN
                                             MRTNER           GHAOMNLBY
                                                                   AGO KAZ
                                                                        PER                                                                                                                               IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                         MEX         JPN
                                                  TCD COD PAN  URY
                                                              KENDOM
                                                                LKA
                                                                 BLR
                                                               AZE ECU                                                                                                                     SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                     SVK HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                          DZAIRL   SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                ARG   TUR RUS
                                     SYCCAF MDA
                                COMGMB              MKD
                                                  HTI GNQ
                                                      GEO
                                                    ARM
                                                     KHM
                                                       ALBBIH
                                                         BOL
                                                             YEM
                                                            ETH
                                                            TZA
                                                            TTOCRI
                                                                 SDN
                                                                GTM   BGD
                                                                        IRQ                                                                                           MUS  CIV   BGR  VNM UKRTHA
                                                                                                                                                                                           CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                            MYSZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                               GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                               ARE
                                                                                                                                                                                              FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                             COL  NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IDN   KOR
                        STP      VUT
                                DMA LBR
                                   GNB
                                    GRD
                                  VCT  CPV
                                      ATG
                                      LCA SLE
                                          MDV
                                        BDI
                                         ERI SUR
                                           GUY  BRB
                                               RWA
                                                LAO
                                                MNG
                                              FJI
                                               KGZ
                                               MWI
                                                TJK  MOZ
                                                     BHS
                                                    ZWE
                                                    PNG HND
                                                         PRY
                                                         UGA
                                                         JAM
                                                        BRN
                                                       NPL
                                                        ZMB
                                                       AFG
                                                     NIC
                                                     NAMBWA  SLV
                                                             UZB
                                                             MMR
                                                            TKM                                                                                                   GIN
                                                                                                                                                                  TCDMDG
                                                                                                                                                                       SEN
                                                                                                                                                                      COG
                                                                                                                                                                     MLI
                                                                                                                                                                      MLT
                                                                                                                                                              TGO BENBFA   CMR
                                                                                                                                                                       GABBHRURY
                                                                                                                                                                           CYPLBN
                                                                                                                                                                            EST
                                                                                                                                                                            PANLTU
                                                                                                                                                                             LVADOM
                                                                                                                                                                              KEN
                                                                                                                                                                            GHA    HRV
                                                                                                                                                                                 SVNAGO   EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                         NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                                                                        KAZ  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                            ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                          PHL    IRNSAU
                       KIRMHL TON  KNA
                                 SLB
                                WSM    BLZ
                                      BTN LSOSWZ
         0




                                                                                                                                0
                       -2     -1         0     1     2     3     4     5          6         7        8       9    10                      -2   -1     0       1      2      3     4      5       6      7         8   9     10
                                                         GDP, $1000 (logs)                                                                                                 GDP, $1000 (logs)




                                                                                                             Distance
                                                   (c) Exporters                                                                .001                                     (d) MNEs
                                             CHE
         .01




                                                                                                                                .0008
         .008




                                   BEL
                                             DEU
                                                                                                                                  .0006




                                                           ESP
                                                            ITA                             USA
     Entry rates




                                                                                                                          Entry rates
            .006




                                         GBR                         MAR
                                            NLD                    TUN
                                                                   PRT
                                                                                                                        .0004




                                                                  POL
                                                                                        CAN CHN
  .004




                                                         AUT DZA ROM
                                                       CZE            TUR                          JPN
                                                               SWE GRC                                                                                                                                  USA
                                                     IRL DNKHUN         RUS           ARE          HKG
                                                             NOR            ISR                  KOR         AUS
                                                                   FIN     LBN SEN  CIV
                                                                                   SAU
                                                                                          IND
                                                                                                  BRASGP                                                                     ESP
                                                                                                                                .0002




                                                                                     CMR         MEX
                                                                                                  ZAF
                                                                                                   TWN                                                     DEU
         .002




                                                          SVK               EGY       GAB
                                                                                                  THA                                               BEL GBR                                                       HKG
                                                        SVN       BGR                             MUS
                                                                                                MDG                                                                           ITA
                                                                 LTUUKR CYP KWT         COG         MYS
                                                                                                     ARG                                                      CHE                                              CHN
                                                    AND HRV                        BEN
                                                                                 IRNTGO               CHL      NZL                                                                  POL                   CAN
                                                                 LVA
                                                                   EST
                                                                  MLT        JORBFA
                                                                                MLI  QAT
                                                                                   NGA            VNMIDN                                                                               ROM                    ABW
                                                                      ISL   SYR     BHRPAK VEN
                                                                                   GIN          COLPHL                                               LUX                   CZE    TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                  PRT MAR                        BRA
                                                                    LBY        MRT
                                                                               NER  GHAOMN
                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                                       DJIAGOANTPAN PER                                                                            SWE TUR RUS             IND MEXJPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SGP
                                                                  BLR
                                                                 MKD
                                                             BIHALB              TCD
                                                                               AZE   CAF
                                                                                      YEM   DOM
                                                                                          KEN   LKA
                                                                                              SYC ECUURY                                                                 IRL DNKHUN
                                                                                                                                                                              SVK
                                                                                                                                                                             AUT DZA                             THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ZAF  CXR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ARG
                                                                    MDA      GEO
                                                                             ARM
                                                                               IRQ   GNQ
                                                                                   SDN ETH    BGD
                                                                                              COM
                                                                                             HTI
                                                                                            TZA
                                                                                            TTO  CRI
                                                                                                 GTM
                                                                                                   KHM                                                                                BGRGRC EGY CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                                                                                                                       FIN             ARE      KOR  CHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MUS
                                                               GIB                 SLE
                                                                                  GMB
                                                                                  GNBUZB
                                                                                    LBR
                                                                                  CPV
                                                                                   TKM   UGA
                                                                                         BDI
                                                                                         RWA
                                                                                       BMU
                                                                                       AFG
                                                                                      KGZ
                                                                                      STP
                                                                                     ERI
                                                                                      TJK  ATG
                                                                                           LCACUB
                                                                                            BHS
                                                                                           BRB
                                                                                            NPL
                                                                                             GUY
                                                                                           VGB
                                                                                            MNG
                                                                                           DMA
                                                                                           AIA  HND
                                                                                              JAM
                                                                                              CYM
                                                                                            GRD
                                                                                             MWI
                                                                                            VCT
                                                                                            TCA
                                                                                           KNA
                                                                                          SOMBTN
                                                                                            SHN
                                                                                           MSR   MOZ
                                                                                               MDV
                                                                                              ZWE
                                                                                             ZMB
                                                                                            SUR PRK
                                                                                                 MMR
                                                                                                 NIC
                                                                                               NAM
                                                                                                BWA
                                                                                              ABW
                                                                                                BLZ
                                                                                                 SWZ
                                                                                                 LSO
                                                                                                    BOL
                                                                                                   MAC
                                                                                                 SLVPRY
                                                                                                  LAO BRN
                                                                                                       MNP
                                                                                                       FLK  VUT
                                                                                                            FJI
                                                                                                          PNG
                                                                                                        MHLTKL
                                                                                                           SLB
                                                                                                         KIRTON
                                                                                                           PCN
                                                                                                            WSM
                                                                                                            COK
                                                                                                          NRUNFK                                                              HRVNORLTU
                                                                                                                                                                            SVN      LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                       EST
                                                                                                                                                                                     MLT      LBN
                                                                                                                                                                                             CYP   SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                               ISR BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                   IRN CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                     SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                     TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                     BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                   TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GHAGAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                         BCOG
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MU
                                                                                                                                                                                                        KAZAGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           KENVEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DOM  TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VNM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                PAN  IDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PHL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PER    COK
         0




                                                                                                                                0




                   5                     6                7              8                       9                10                      5               6                 7              8                 9              10
                                                         Distance, km (logs)                                                                                               Distance, km (logs)



Notes: Number of entries to a mode-market relative to the number of domestic firms active in the home
market. Destinations with ten or more firm-year observations and with available GDP data. Exporters
refers to non-MNE exporters. GDP data from International Financial Statistics (IMF). Distance data from CEPII
(Mayer and Zignago, 2011).



dynamic models of exporters and MNEs. The patterns observed for entry rates suggest
that exporters face distance-dependent trade costs, whereas MNEs do not, consistent with
the proximity-concentration-trade off in HMY. A static model thus suffices to capture this
fact.
Robustness. Exporters and MNEs are active in different countries: Firms penetrate many
more countries as exporters than as MNEs. To exclude that the difference in country


                                                                                                                   14
coverage drives the results, we replicate our analysis for only those countries with both
exporting and multinational activity, for France. Both the pattern of first-year exit and
entry rates for exporters are less pronounced than in the full sample, but still clearly
correlated with country characteristics.18 For MNEs, results are unchanged.



4        A dynamic model of exports and MNEs

Guided by the facts documented in the previous section, we build a dynamic model of
export and MNE activities that is based on the model of the proximity-concentration
trade-off with heterogeneous firms in HMY, extended to include an autoregressive process
for firm productivity and sunk costs for MNE activities. We construct a model of "horizontal"
FDI, i.e., affiliate sales are destined to the host market only. For simplicity, export-platforms,
i.e., locating production in market l and serving a third market n through exports from
l, and intrafirm trade are excluded.19 We focus on horizontal FDI instead of vertical FDI
as the prior literature has found horizontal FDI to be the main form of FDI activity (see
Ramondo et al., 2016).


4.1      Set up

We build a partial equilibrium model with two countries, Home and Foreign. Time
is discrete. Labor is the only factor of production and is supplied in fixed quantity.
The wage in each country is pinned down by a constant-return-to-scale freely tradable
homogeneous good sector, and normalized to one, w = 1.
Goods that are exported to the foreign country are subject to an iceberg-type trade cost,
τ ≥ 1, while production in foreign affiliates is subject to an efficiency loss given by γ ≥ 1,
with τ > γ, consistent with the empirical evidence (Antrás and Yeaple, 2014). A firm
that exports incurs a per-period fixed cost, f x , and a firm that operates an affiliate in the
foreign country incurs a per-period fixed cost f m , with f m /f x > (γ/τ )σ−1 , as in HMY.
Firms that decide to open an affiliate have to pay a sunk cost, F m > 0, at the time of MNE
entry. Fixed and sunk costs are paid in units of labor.
A firm is characterized by a core efficiency level, φ ≡ exp(z), that evolves over time
    18
     Export exit elasticities with respect to GDP and distance are -0.023 (s.e. 0.003) and 0.046 (s.e. 0.005),
while entry elasticities with respect to the same variables are 0.23 (s.e. 0.026) and -0.53 (s.e. 0.112).
  19
     See Ramondo and Rodríguez-Clare (2013) and Tintelnot (2017) for recent models of export-platform
FDI.




                                                     15
following a first-order autoregressive AR(1) process,

                                       z 0 = ρz + σ 0 ,

where 0 ≤ ρ < 1 and 0 ∼ N (0, 1). If a firm from the Home country opens an affiliate in
the Foreign country, that affiliate inherits its parent’s productivity process.
There exists a continuum of firms that compete monopolistically, and have access to a
continuum of differentiated products. The mass of Home firms, M , is fixed and normalized
to one. We assume Constant-Elasticity-of-Substitution (CES) preferences, with the elasticity
of substitution denoted by σ. Firms optimally charge a constant mark-up, κ ≡ σ/(σ − 1),
over marginal costs, so that sales follow the standard CES formula. Let E ≡ κ1−σ X/P 1−σ
be foreign demand. We assume that the firms from the home country account only for
a small fraction of the overall sales in the foreign country, so that the price index in the
foreign country is taken as fixed. We normalize Ehome = 1 so that E is the size of Foreign
relative to Home.
Static profit maximization implies that domestic sales are given by X d (φ) = φσ−1 , while
exports from Home are X x (φ) = Eφσ−1 τ 1−σ , and affiliate sales in Foreign are X m (φ) =
Eφσ−1 γ 1−σ .
Firms have two possible states: producing in the home market for domestic consumers
only and, potentially, for foreign consumers (D); or producing in the home market for
domestic consumers and in the foreign market for foreign consumers (M). The value of
being a multinational firm with core productivity φ is given by

                           X d (φ)         X m (φ)
                                           
               V (φ, M ) =         + max           − f m + βEV (φ0 , M | φ),
                             σ               σ
                                           X x (φ)
                                    max(0,         − f x ) +βEV (φ0 , D | φ)} ;          (1)
                                              σ

and the value of being a domestic firm with core productivity φ is given by

                       X d (φ)         X m (φ)
                                       
            V (φ, D) =         + max           − f m − Fem + βEV (φ0 , M | φ),
                         σ               σ
                                              X x (φ)
                                       max(0,         − f x ) +βEV (φ0 , D | φ)} .       (2)
                                                σ

The optimal policy for an MNE is to discontinue the foreign investment if being domestic
(state D) entails larger discounted expected profits than being MNE (state M). This policy
is characterized by a cutoff value of productivity φ̄m . If productivity falls below φ̄m , a
current MNE exits the foreign market and produces only in the domestic market. If


                                               16
productivity exceeds φ̄m , the firm remains an MNE (state M). Similarly, the optimal policy
for a domestic firm is characterized by a productivity cutoff level, φ̄m
                                                                       e . Once the productivity
level of the domestic firm exceeds φ̄m e , it becomes an MNE. It is possible to rank the two
productivity cut-offs: Since the second terms in the outer maximization problem in (1)
and (2), respectively, are identical, and X m and V are increasing in φ, as the expectation
operator preserves monotonicity, it follows that φ̄m < φ̄m   e . This implies that the model
delivers an "inaction" zone that exists by virtue of the sunk cost of doing FDI (Baldwin,
1989). Domestic firms with productivity φ ∈ [φ̄m , φ̄me ] remain domestic, while MNEs with
                     m   m
productivity φ ∈ [φ̄ , φ̄e ] remain MNEs. The inaction zone, thus, creates persistence in
the MNE status.
Without sunk MNE costs, it suffices to have f m /f x > (γ/τ )1−σ for MNEs to have a higher
exit cutoff than exporters, φ̄m > φ̄x . With sunk MNE costs, that assumption is not enough.
We proceed by assuming that the MNE exit cutoff is higher than the exporter exit cutoff.20


4.2    Model predictions

We now explain how the model captures the facts documented in Section 3.
The model can capture Fact 1 under some conditions. The "inaction" zone created by the
presence of sunk and fixed costs makes MNEs less likely to exit than in a setup with no
sunk costs. That exit rates for MNEs are lower than for exporters—and by how much—
depends on the values of the model’s parameters. Proposition 1 states the result.

Proposition 1. Let the entry cut-off for MNEs ln(φ̄m              m
                                                          e ) = z̄e and the entry and exit cut-off
for exports ln(φ̄x ) = z̄ x relate as z̄em = z̄ x + ϕ, with ϕ > 0. There exists ϕ∗ such that for
0 ≤ ϕ < ϕ∗ , the exit probability upon entry is higher for an exporter than for an MNE
with identical productivity before exit.

Proof. See Appendix B.1.
The effect of export experience on the exit probability of an MNE is driven by selection
on productivity, as Proposition 2 shows.

Proposition 2. The probability that a new MNE exits upon entry is lower if the firm
switched from export to MNE activity than from domestic to MNE activity.
   20
      The assumption that φ̄m > φ̄x is implicit in the way we wrote the value functions: It rules out that, for
the marginal MNE, the value of producing at home for the domestic market only is higher than the value
of producing at home for the domestic and foreign market. In our calibrations and simulations below, this
ranking of cutoffs is never violated.



                                                      17
Proof. See Appendix B.2.
All new MNEs have received a sufficiently good productivity shock that induces them
to enter a market as MNEs. As exporters are more productive than domestic firms, firms
with export experience enter MNE status with a productivity level that is higher than that
of a firm with no export experience. Given that productivity follows a Markov process
with log-normal distributed shocks, and the exit cutoffs are the same for MNEs with
and without export experience, more productive firms at the time of entry are less likely
to have a productivity draw that falls below the exit cutoff in the subsequent period.
Proposition 2 is for the case of positive sunk costs of MNE entry, but the result also holds
in the case of no sunk MNE costs.
Both exporters and MNEs follow the same productivity process in the model. However,
this does not automatically lead to the similar sales growth rates of exporters and MNEs
documented in Fact 2. The selection patterns that arise from the inclusion of fixed and
sunk costs have subtle effects on the growth rates. Ultimately, how well the model can
capture the similarity of exporter and MNE growth rates remains a quantitative question,
which we address in Section 5. Self-selection of firms also drives the higher sales growth
of ever-MNE exporters relative to never-MNE exporters.
Finally, the inclusion of sunk MNE costs allows the model to capture Fact 3: First-year
exit rates of new exporters are correlated with country characteristics, while for MNEs,
they are not. The following proposition shows the result.

Proposition 3. Let z̄ be the productivity exit cutoff from a mode of international operation.
The increase in the first-year exit probability when z̄ increases is larger when sunk costs
of entry into the mode are zero than when sunk costs are positive.

Proof. See Appendix B.3.
Because of MNE sunk costs, the productivity level required for MNE entry exceeds the
productivity level for MNE exit, φ̄m       m                              m
                                     e > φ̄ . The higher the sunk costs, F , the higher the
option value of being an MNE and, hence, the larger the zone of inaction and the less
sensitive the exit behavior to differences in variable profits.21
An important implication of the model is that new exporters in an environment without
the option to become MNE have different life-cycle properties than in an environment
where they can self-select into MNE activities. Intuitively, including the MNE choice
  21
      In an export-only model, Albornoz et al. (2016) show that the probability of export survival in a
market increases with the ratio of sunk to fixed costs. While their result is about how export survival
rates change with sunk costs, our Proposition 3 states a difference-in-difference result: How the survival—
or, equivalently, exit—probability changes due to a change of market characteristics, for different levels of
sunk costs.

                                                     18
not only truncates the exporters’ distribution of productivity levels, but also induces a
truncation to-the-right of the distribution of productivity growth rates. Only firms with
productivity above the export, but below the MNE threshold in two consecutive periods
contribute to export productivity (and sales) growth. For each z ∈ [φ̄x , φ̄m ], there is a
maximum possible increase in productivity such that an exporter remains an exporter.
Exporters that receive a higher productivity shock turn into MNEs when the MNE choice
is allowed. Those exporters with the highest productivity shocks and, thus, the highest
sales growth, do not contribute to the average growth rate of exporters in the model
with MNEs (because they change status), but they do it in the model without MNEs. In
turn, because the maximum possible growth in productivity decreases with productivity
levels, smaller exporters are the ones contributing to average productivity in the model
without MNEs, but not in the model with MNEs (because they switch status). As a
consequence, exporters in the model for which the MNE option is present have higher
average productivity early in life and, hence, lower exit rates.
Proposition 4 derives this result formally for the marginal exporter.22

Proposition 4. Assume that firm productivity follows a first-order autoregressive process,
zt = ρzt−1 + σ t , with t ∼ N (0, 1), and 0 ≤ ρ < 1, and assume that sunk costs of
MNE entry are zero, F m = 0. Consider the firm with zt−1 = z and zt > z, where z
denotes the productivity threshold above which firms become exporters. Define expected
productivity growth in a model with only left truncation in the productivity distribution
as GL ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | zt > z, zt−1 = z), while in a model with left and right truncation,
expected productivity growth is defined as GLR ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | z < zt < z̄, zt−1 = z), with
z̄ denoting the right truncation point above which the firm changes from export to MNE
status. Then, there exists a value z̄ ∗ ∈ (z, ∞) such that for z < z̄ < z̄ ∗ , GL > GLR , with
equality for z̄ = z̄ ∗ .

Proof. See Appendix B.
We quantitatively explore the effect of including the option to become MNE by comparing
calibrated versions of the model with MNEs and with only exporters in Section 6.



5        Calibration

We calibrate the model and analyze how well the calibrated model quantitatively captures
the patterns observed in the data. We extend the model in Section 4 to include sunk
    22
    In Appendix A.1, we show that the growth rate for the average exporter can be lower in the model
with MNEs for certain parameters’ values.

                                                19
export costs and assume that both fixed and sunk export and MNE costs are firm-specific.
Appendix C presents the main equations of the extended model.
Our goal is to parameterize the extended model by targeting cross-sectional features
of the data, as well as the dynamics of domestic sales, and then assess how well our
calibrated model accounts for new affiliate and exporter dynamics as reflected in the facts
in Section 3. We perform two calibrations using moments from France and Norway to
calibrate the parameters of the model. We present the calibration not only for France, but
also for Norway because the information on MNE sales in the French data is very limited.
We use the top 15 destination markets for exports and MNEs, plus a sixteenth country
constructed as a weighted average of the rest of the world (RoW). The top 15 destinations
represent more than 75 percent of export and MNE sales.23
For each destination, we calibrate the values of the iceberg trade and MNE costs, the mean
and variance of the per-period export and MNE fixed costs, the mean and variance of the
sunk costs of MNE and export entry, and the relative market size. Consistent with the
model presented in the previous section, we abstract away from export-platforms sales,
so that entry into each destination country can be solved independently. As in the model,
we restrict the analysis to a partial equilibrium setting in which wages and price indices
are exogenous.


5.1    Calibration procedure

We set the discount factor for firms β = 0.95, which is consistent with an interest rate of
five percent. The elasticity of substitution σ is set to 4, which implies a mark-up over unit
cost of 33 percent and is a common value estimated for the trade elasticity.
A first set of parameters can be calibrated without solving for the firm’s problem. Given
                                                                             1
σ, we use the ratio of export to domestic sales, rnx ≡ (Xnx (φ)/X d (φ)) 1−σ = En τn1−σ , for
firms serving market n, to get an estimate of size-adjusted trade costs for market n.
                                                                                         1
Analogously, we use the ratio of MNE to domestic sales, rnm ≡ (Xnm (φ)/X d (φ)) 1−σ =
En γn1−σ , for MNE affiliates operating in market n, to get an estimate of size-adjusted MNE
costs for market n.24 We calculate rnx and rnm , respectively, as a weighted average across
firms serving market n in each mode, with weights given by the firm’s domestic sales.
  23
     In the French data, it is not possible to distinguish exports to Belgium from exports to Luxembourg.
Therefore, we aggregate Belgium-Luxembourg and the Netherlands into one country (Benelux). Due to its
increasing importance, we add China to the list of foreign destination for France.
  24
     In order to gain observations, for some destinations of French MNEs, we impute missing MNE sales
using as covariates (log) domestic sales, (log) domestic employment, an interaction of the two previous
variables, year and sector fixed effects, for firms surviving at least five years in a foreign destination.



                                                    20
For exports, we restrict attention to firms that served market n at least three years in a
row. For MNEs, we do not limit the number of years in a market (given the low number
of observations on sales for France). Appendix Table E.3 shows the values for rnx and rnm ,
for each destination market.
The parameters characterizing the Markov process for firm-level productivity, ρ and σ ,
come from estimating by OLS a first-order autoregressive process on domestic sales, using
all French and Norwegian firms (i.e., unbalanced panel). The regression includes year
and industry fixed effects, with standard errors clustered at the industry level. With these
estimates, we directly set ρ equal to the estimated sales autocorrelation coefficient, ρ̂sales ,
and σ equal to σ̂sales /(σ − 1). For France, ρ = 0.960 and σ = 0.197, while for Norway, our
estimates imply that ρ = 0.957 and σ = 0.133.25
The remaining parameters of the model are jointly calibrated, for each market. We assume
that sunk (fixed) costs are drawn from a log-normal distribution, are constant for each
firm over time, and are independent from firm productivity. The relevant market-specific
sunk and fixed cost parameters are: the mean and standard deviation of sunk export
costs, µxen and σen
                 x
                    ; the mean and variance of sunk MNE costs, µm                   m
                                                                          en and σen ; the mean of
per-period export costs, µxfn ; and the mean of per-period MNE costs, µm        f n . We pin down
σfmn and σfxn by assuming the coefficient of variation in sunk and fixed cost draws for
                                  s
each mode is the same, i.e., |σen   /µsen | = |σfs n /µsf n | (s ∈ x, m). We target the following
six moments, for each market: the fraction of non-MNE French (Norwegian) exporters
serving market n, relative to French (Norwegian) firms that do not serve market n with
exports (which includes non-exporter firms and exporters to other destinations); the fraction
of French (Norwegian) MNEs serving market n, relative to French (Norwegian) firms
that do not serve market n with an affiliate (which includes non-MNE firms and MNEs to
other destinations); the share of French (Norwegian) MNEs that exit at age zero (i.e., entry
year) market n, relative to MNE stayers in market n; the share of French (Norwegian)
exporters that exit at age zero (i.e., entry year) market n, relative to exporter stayers in
market n; the average share of French (Norwegian) MNEs that exit market n, relative to
MNE stayers in market n; and the average share of French (Norwegian) exporters that
exit market n, relative to exporter stayers in market n. Appendix Tables E.4 and E.5
show targeted moments in the model and data, an average across destinations and by
destination. Appendix Table E.6 presents the calibrated parameters by destination.
Results below are calculated from model and data observations at the firm-destination-
year level. As for the facts in Section 3, for expositional purposes, we present averages
across the destinations included in our samples, weighted by each destination’s share of
  25
       Results are very similar if we estimate a Tobit model rather than a linear model.


                                                       21
                                 Table 1: The size of calibrated costs.

                                            Norway                                          France
                              fnx         fnm      Fnx        Fnm          fnx        fnm            Fnx      Fnm

 Values as % of sales
  25th sales pc              21.7         18.7     0.005      12.7        21.6        14.0       0.004        5.2
  50th sales pc              17.8         15.0     0.004      10.2        17.5        10.3       0.003        3.9
  75th sales pc              13.0         10.8     0.003       7.3        12.1         6.3       0.002        2.3
  90th sales pc               8.9          7.2     0.002       4.9        7.5          3.4       0.001        1.3

 Values in U.S. dollars
  25th sales pc              1,206      389,389     0.3     263,870      2,683      651,572*     0.5        243,165*
  50th sales pc              5,998     1,087,432    1.5     736,898     12,373     1,573,420*    2.2        587,196*
  75th sales pc              29,755    2,826,765    7.4    1,915,558    47,249     2,810,340*    8.4       1,048,811*
  90th sales pc            1,022,070   6,491,723    25.5   4,399,116    136,755    4,878,970*    24.4      1,820,817*

Notes: fnx are per-period fixed export costs; fnm are per-period fixed MNE costs; Fnx are sunk export costs;
and Fnm are sunk MNE costs. Values are averages across firms’ draws, conditional on a positive measure
of exporters (MNEs), in each destination. Averages across destinations included in the calibration, weighted
by each destination’s share of export (MNE) firms. Weights are data-based (model-based), for data (model)
variables. Sales percentiles are with respect to the export (MNE) sales distribution. The values in U.S. dollars
for different percentiles are calculated using the values of sales in the data, transformed to U.S. dollars using
an average of the annual exchange rate observed over our sample period, from Penn World Tables 9.0 (Feenstra
et al., 2015). (*) estimated values assuming that the xth pc of the MNE sales distribution is proportional to the
xth pc of the export sales distribution, with the proportionality factor calculated using the ratio of export to MNE
sales for each percentile, for Norway.



export (MNE) firms, relative to all export (MNE) firms in our sample. The Appendix
contains the results by destination.


5.2    Calibration results

We evaluate the size of the calibrated per-period fixed costs and sunk entry costs, for
exports and MNE activities, in terms of one year of firm sales, and in monetary values.
Table 1 presents the results.
Sunk costs, particularly for exports, do not seem to be a heavy burden on firms deciding
to internationalize. For MNEs, sunk costs represent around ten percent of annual sales
for smaller firms and around five percent for larger firms, according to our calibration
for Norway. For French MNEs, our calibration suggests that these sunk costs, in terms
of sales, are half those faced by Norwegian MNEs. In monetary terms, for Norwegian
MNEs, sunk costs range from less than 300,000 to almost 4.5 million U.S. dollars. In
contrast, the calibrated sunk export costs are very small, around 0.2-0.5 percent of annual
export sales.


                                                     22
Fixed operating costs, however, are relatively much larger. Fixed costs represent around
nine percent of foreign sales for large Norwegian exporters and reach more than 20 percent
for small exporters; per-period MNEs costs are slightly lower in terms of sales. Our
calibrated values for French exporters and MNEs entail slightly lower per-period costs, in
terms of annual sales, than for Norwegian firms. In monetary terms, given the difference
in size between MNEs and exporters, per-period fixed costs for exporters are around one
million U.S. dollars for the 90th percentile of Norwegian exporters, but reach almost 6.5
million U.S. dollars for the largest Norwegian MNEs. Appendix Table E.7 presents results
by destination market for the median exporter (MNE) in terms of sales in each destination.


5.3    Fit of calibrated model

We now evaluate how well our calibrated model captures the facts in Section 3. We start
by comparing the exit rates of new exporters and MNEs in the data and the model. Our
calibration procedure targets exit rates of MNEs and exporters at entry and on average,
but not at each age. Figure 7 shows that our calibrated model does fairly well in capturing
the life-cycle dynamics of exit for new MNEs and new exporters. Even though the first-
year exit rate is a targeted moment, the model underestimates how much exit is observed
upon entry into a market, particularly for exporters. But the quantitative model captures
well the decline in exit rates with age. Targeting the first-year exit rate is crucial to obtain
this decline; when this moment is not included in the calibration, exit rates increase, rather
than decrease, with age.26
Figure 8 shows the ability of the model to capture the growth profiles of MNE and export
sales. We compute the geometric average across destination markets and normalize sales
with respect to age one (i.e., one year after entry). The model matches the flat sales profile
for MNEs remarkably well, as well as the growth profile of export sales, for Norway. The
model calibrated to France, however, delivers exporters that, after age one, grow faster
than in the data.
To evaluate the model’s ability to quantitatively capture Fact 3 in Section 3, we estimate
by OLS the elasticity of exit rates at age zero and entry rates, for exporters and MNEs,
on geography-adjusted country size, rnx ≡ En τn1−σ (rnm ≡ En γn1−σ ), across the destinations
included in our calibration, for Norway and France. We use the observed and simulated
  26
     This is also the case in Ruhl and Willis (2017) (see their Figure 2b and 3b): When they target first-year
exit rates for exporters, they obtain exit rates that decline with age; when they only target the average exit
rate, they obtain exit rates that increase with age.



                                                     23
                                                       Figure 7: Exit rates by age, model and data.

                                                                                       France
                                              (a) Exporters                                                                                        (b) MNEs
                 .6




                                                                                                                     .6
                                                                         Exporters, model                                                                                    MNEs, model
                                                                         Exporters, data                                                                                     MNEs, data
                                 .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
 Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                     Mode-market-specific exit rates
                       .4




                                                                                                                           .4
              .3




                                                                                                                  .3
      .2




                                                                                                          .2
                 .1




                                                                                                                     .1
                 0




                                                                                                                     0
                                      0   1   2         3            4       5              6                                             0   1   2         3            4    5            6
                                              Mode-market-specific age                                                                            Mode-market-specific age




                                                                                      Norway
                                              (c) Exporters                                                                                        (d) MNEs
                 .6




                                                                                                                     .6



                                                                         Exporters, model                                                                                    MNEs, model
                                                                         Exporters, data                                                                                     MNEs, data
                                 .5




                                                                                                                                     .5
 Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                     Mode-market-specific exit rates
                       .4




                                                                                                                           .4
              .3




                                                                                                                  .3
      .2




                                                                                                          .2
                 .1




                                                                                                                     .1
                 0




                                                                                                                     0




                                      0   1   2         3            4       5              6                                             0   1   2         3            4    5            6
                                              Mode-market-specific age                                                                            Mode-market-specific age



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by
mode-market-specific age, for exporters and MNEs. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level.
We show averages across destinations included in the calibration, weighted by each destination’s share of
export (MNE) firms. Weights are data-based and model-based, for data and model variables, respectively.
Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters.


data. Results are presented in the first two panels of Table 2. One has to keep in mind
that these regressions have only 16 observations. Still, the model delivers sharper results
for exporters exit rates than for MNEs, as the theory predicts and our third fact shows:
New exporters’ exit rates decrease with size-adjusted iceberg cots, while new MNEs’ exit
rates do not have a clear pattern. The model’s implied entry rates elasticities are larger
for MNEs than for exporters as observed in the data, but the model difference between
the two is smaller.

                                                                                                24
                                                                               Figure 8: Sales growth by age, model and data.

                     .3                            (a) Exporters, France                                                                                           (b) Exporters, Norway                                                                                           (c) MNEs, Norway




                                                                                                                                     .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                         .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
 Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                  Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                   .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                                              0
                             0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
   -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
                     -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.5
                                                                                         Exporters, data                                                                                                   Exporters, data                                                                                              MNEs, data




                                                                                                                                     -.6
                                                                                         Exporters, model                                                                                                  Exporters, model                                                                                             MNEs, model
                     -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.6
                                              0       1             2                3                      4                                                  0       1              2                3                      4                                                0     1             2                3                 4
                                                          Mode-market-specific age                                                                                          Mode-market-specific age                                                                                     Mode-market-specific age




Notes: Log of firm-destination export (affiliate) sales with respect to firm-destination export (affiliate) sales in
the year after entry, for firms with five or more years in the market, in each mode. Observations are at the
firm-destination-year level. We show averages across destinations included in the calibration, weighted by each
destination’s share of export (MNE) firms. Weights are data-based and model-based, for data and model variables,
respectively. In the data, log of sales are first demeaned by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. Exporters in
the data refers to non-MNE exporters.



Table 2 includes comparisons for other non-targeted moments. Panel 3 shows that the
calibrated model correctly captures the fact that new experienced MNEs have lower exit
rates than non-experienced MNEs. Yet, the calibrated model delivers virtually zero new
MNEs that were not previously exporters. Additionally, starter rates in the model are
fairly closed to the ones observed in the French data. The model also captures rather
accurately the transitions from/to export and domestic status, and from/to MNE and
domestic status. But the model over-predicts the transition from/to MNE and export
status: Too many exporters become MNEs, and too many MNEs transition into only
exporters.


5.4                                               Model calibration with only exporters

The goal of our counterfactual exercises is to assess whether the option to become MNE
changes the predictions of the standard export dynamics model under a trade-liberalization
shock. Before turning to the counterfactual exercises, we therefore compare the goodness
of fit of our calibrated model with MNEs to a calibrated model with only exporters.
The calibration of the exporter-only model targets exactly the same moments related to
exporters as our calibration of the model with MNEs — in particular, the parametrization
of the productivity process is the same.27
                27
     The calibrated model with only exporters matches the export-related targeted and non-targeted
moments equally well as the model with MNEs (not shown). Appendix Table E.6 shows the calibrated
values of per-period and sunk export costs for the model without MNEs.


                                                                                                                                                                           25
                  Table 2: Additional non-targeted moments, data and model.

                                                                                Data                Model
                                                                           France Norway        France Norway

Elasticity of first-year exit rates to size-adjusted iceberg costs, OLS
  exporters                                                             -0.057**      -0.016   -0.028***   -0.033
  MNEs                                                                   0.035        0.062      0.079     0.047
Elasticity of entry rates to size-adjusted iceberg costs, OLS
  exporters                                                                0.143*** 0.226       0.253*** 0.843***
  MNEs                                                                     0.554*** 0.237**     0.414*** 0.212
Share of experienced MNEs                                                    0.60      0.47       0.99      0.99
Exit rates at age zero, experienced MNEs                                     0.21      0.16       0.24      0.15
Exit rates at age zero, non-experienced MNEs                                 0.29      0.21       0.29      0.19
Starter rate
  exporters                                                                 0.020     0.035      0.019      0.019
  MNEs                                                                     5.4e-04   5.0e-04     0.002      0.001
Probability of:
  exporter to MNE                                                           0.003     0.002      0.017      0.013
  exporter to domestic                                                      0.188     0.275      0.237      0.239
  domestic to MNE                                                          1.8e-04   9.4e-05    2.0e-04    1.4e-06
  domestic to exporter                                                      0.019     0.038      0.018      0.019
  MNE to exporter                                                           0.059     0.069      0.142      0.110
  MNE to domestic                                                           0.043     0.057      0.052      0.058

Notes: The elasticity of first-year exit rates (entry rates) to size-adjusted iceberg costs (rnx and rnm , for exporters
and MNEs, respectively) is the OLS coefficient of a bivariate regression (with a constant), using the 16 countries
included in the calibration, for France and Norway. The fraction of experienced MNEs is calculated as the
number of new MNEs of age zero with previous export experience in a market, relative to all new MNEs of
age zero entering that market. Starter rates for exporters are calculated as the number of firms that export to
j in t, but not in t − 1, relative to the number of Home firms at t − 1. Starter rates for MNEs are calculated
as the number of MNEs that have an affiliate j in t, but not in t − 1, relative to the number of Home firms at
t − 1. The transition probabilities are calculated for all firms, a weighted average across destinations: exporter to
MNE (domestic) is relative to the number of non-MNE exporters; domestic to MNE (exporter) is relative to the
number of domestic firms; and MNE to exporter (domestic) is relative to the number of MNEs. Observations
are at the firm-destination-year level. Averages across destinations included in the calibration are weighted by
each destination’s share of export (MNE) firms, except for starter rates, and transitions from domestic status,
which are weighted by (the inverse of) the number of destinations. Weights are data-based (model-based) for
data (model) variables. Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters. Levels of significance denoted by ***
p < 0.01, ** p < 0.05, and * p < 0.1. Standard errors in parenthesis.




                                                       26
Appendix Figure D.10a compares exit rates for exporters, averaged across destination
markets, in the data and in the calibrated model with and without MNEs, for France.
While the model with MNEs does slightly better in matching exit of young exporters, the
model with only exporters does better for older exporter.28 In contrast with the results
in Ruhl and Willis (2017), both our calibrated models feature a monotonic decrease in
exit rates with age. This is entirely driven by targeting first-year exit rates. This moment
is responsible for calibrated sunk export costs that are close to zero, and hence, for an
extremely small band of inaction for exporters.
Appendix Figure D.10b shows that the model with MNEs produces sales profiles for
exporters that are slightly flatter (three percentage-points lower) and closer to the data
than the model with only exporters.29 This finding reflects the result that a model with
left and right truncation can yield exporters that grow more slowly than exporters in a
model with only left truncation. Yet, demand-side frictions, as the ones considered by
Arkolakis (2016) and Ruhl and Willis (2017) would be needed to fully match the data on
new exporters’ growth.
As we described in Section 4, at the core of the model’s mechanism is the self-selection
of fast-growing exporters into MNE activities. Appendix Figure D.11 compares growth
profiles for ever-MNE and never-MNE exporters in the two models and the data. This
figure reveals that the difference in growth rates between the two models is mainly due
to the never-MNE exporters. The model with MNEs predicts better the growth profile of
new exporters that never switch to MNE status—the bulk of exporters in the data. The
two models perform similarly well in capturing the observed dynamics of exporters that
later in life become MNEs.
In the next section, we turn to the effects of trade liberalization episodes on aggregate and
life-cycle dynamics of exporters and MNEs. We compare the predictions of the model
with MNEs to the predictions of the model with only exporters.



6        The effects of trade liberalization

Armed with the calibrated model, we analyze the effects of trade liberalization on aggregate
dynamics and life-cycle dynamics of MNEs and exporters. For exporters, we further show
the effects predicted by the calibrated model without MNEs. Even though the differences
between the calibrated model with and without MNEs in fitting the data are not very
    28
     Appendix Figure D.8 shows results by destination.
    29
     Differences become more pronounced when one considers exporters that survive longer in the market
(not shown).


                                                 27
large, the two models can deliver different predictions regarding counterfactual exercises.
We simulate a 20-percent change in the iceberg-trade cost, τn , for all destinations n, keeping
the foreign demand, En , in the destinations unchanged (partial equilibrium).


6.1    Aggregate dynamics

Figure 9 shows the evolution from the old to the new steady state of average sales and
participation rates for MNEs and exporters. The average MNE sales increase by around
30 percent when trade costs decrease, while participation rates for MNEs decrease by
half. The transition is rather fast, with most of the adjustment taking place within three
periods. Given that sunk export costs are very low, most of the transition to the new
steady state for exporters occurs in one period: for the case of decreasing trade costs,
average export sales and participation rates are both about 30-percent higher than in
the initial steady state. Interestingly, the model without MNEs predicts smaller effects
for exporters: average sales increase by less than 25 percent and the participation rates
increase by only around 24-percent, when trade costs decrease by 20 percent. At the heart
of these differences is the self-selection of exporters into MNE activities when that option
is included in the model.
It is worth noting that increases and decreases in trade costs from the calibrated values
do not produce symmetric changes in the aggregate variables under consideration. For
instance, participation rates for exporters drop by 60 percent when trade costs increase,
but increase by 30 percent when trade costs decrease.


6.2    Life-cycle dynamics

In Figure 10 we show the steady-state exit rates and sales profiles, by age, for MNEs and
for exporters for the baseline economy, an economy with 20 percent higher trade costs,
and an economy with 20 percent lower trade costs.30
While life-cycle exit patterns of MNEs do not change much with trade-costs changes,
life-cycle growth becomes slower in an environment with lower trade costs: by age four,
new MNE sales (relative to entry) are five-percentage points lower than in our calibrated
baseline.
For exporters, including MNEs matters for the effects of moving from an environment
  30
     Because we only use data from the calibrated model, in Figure 10, we normalize sales relative to sales
at age 0 rather than age 1 as in Figures 3, 4 and 8.


                                                    28
                                                                 Figure 9: Aggregate effects of a 20-percent change in trade costs.

                                                                                                Decrease in trade costs
                                                                      (a) Average sales                                                                                                     (b) Participation rates




                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                  .3
 Change relative to initial steady state, in logs




                                                                                                                             Change relative to initial steady state, in logs
                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                .2




                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                     export sales, model with MNEs                                                                                     share of exporters, model with MNEs
                                                                                     export sales, model without MNEs                                                                                  share of exporters, model without MNEs
                                                                                     MNE sales, model with MNEs                                                                                        share of MNEs, model with MNEs




                                                                                                                                            -.2
            .1




                                                                                                                                 -.4                -.6
                          0




                                                         0   1    2   3    4       5      6     7      8      9         10                                                      0   1   2      3   4       5      6     7      8      9         10
                                                                           years from shock                                                                                                        years from shock




                                                                                                 Increase in trade costs
                                                                      (c) Average sales                                                                                                     (d) Participation rates
                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                0




                                                                                    export sales, model with MNEs
                                                                                                                             Change relative to initial steady state, in logs
      Change relative to initial steady state, in logs




                                                                                    export sales, model without MNEs
                                                                                    MNE sales, model with MNEs
                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                     -.1




                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                                                       share of exporters, model with MNEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                       share of exporters, model without MNEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                       share of MNEs, model with MNEs
                                                                                                                                            -.2
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                 -.4                -.6
                                -.3




                                                         0   1    2   3    4       5      6     7      8      9         10                                                      0   1   2      3   4       5      6     7      8      9         10
                                                                           years from shock                                                                                                        years from shock



Notes: Models calibrated to French data. The y-axis is log change with respect to the initial steady state.
Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. We show averages across destinations included in the
calibration, weighted by each destination’s share of export (MNE) firms.




                                                                                                                   29
with high trade costs to one with low trade costs. The model with MNEs predicts that
new exporters decrease their life-cycle exit rates by seven percentage points by age nine
and experience higher sales growth (eight percentage points by age four). The model
without MNEs, however, predicts that new exporters have very similar exit and growth
patterns before and after the change. These differences between the two models translate
into differences in the dynamic behavior of aggregate exports after a shock shown in
Figure 9.
A lower τ decreases the likelihood of becoming an MNE, but increases the one of becoming
(or staying) an exporter; in the limit, for τ = 1, MNEs disappear and the model collapses
to one without MNEs. This implies that exporters’ life-cycle profiles are, on average, less
similar between the model with and without MNEs as τ increases. At the same time, a
change in trade costs produces a larger change in the life-cycle patterns of exit and growth
rates of the average exporter in the model with MNEs than in the model without MNEs.
This is because the model with MNEs has two (left and right) margins changing at the
same time, which results in a larger change in the number of fast-growing exporters.
Finally, Figure 10 naturally relates to the effects of liberalizing MNE activities on new
exporters’ dynamics. Since the differences in new exporters dynamics between the model
with and without MNEs is larger in an environment with high iceberg trade costs, moving
from a scenario without MNEs to one with MNEs leads to small changes in new exporters’
dynamics if trade costs are already low, but large changes if trade costs are high.



7    Conclusions

This paper studies the life-cycle dynamics of exporters and MNEs. We provide a comprehensive
set of facts on the life-cycle dynamics of new exporters and new MNEs that are informative
about the features to be included in dynamic models of exporters’ and MNEs’ behavior.
We show that a dynamic model of the proximity-concentration trade-off in Helpman et al.
(2004) is qualitatively consistent with the documented facts. Our calibrated version of
the model also includes heterogenous sunk and fixed costs at the firm-destination level,
similar to Roberts and Tybout (1997). We show that, quantitatively, the standard model of
exports dynamics augmented to include MNEs goes far in matching cross-sectional and
dynamic moments of the data on both exporters and MNEs.
Comparing the predictions of our calibrated model with both exporters and MNEs and
a dynamic model with only exporters, we find that enriching the canonical dynamic
model of trade to include MNEs—a first-order feature of the data—has consequences

                                            30
                                               Figure 10: Life-cycle effects of a 20-percent change in trade costs.

                                                                                       New MNEs dynamics

                         .4                            (a) Exit rates                                                                                        (b) Sales growth




                                                                                                                                     .7
                                                                                   baseline trade costs
                                                                                   high trade costs




                                                                                                                                                    .6
                                                                                   low trade costs
         Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                  Log sales, relative to entry year
                                    .3




                                                                                                                                     .4      .5
                      .2




                                                                                                                     .2      .3
          .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            baseline trade costs




                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                                                                                                            high trade costs
                                                                                                                                                                                            low trade costs
                         0




                                                                                                                                     0
                                           0   1   2    3     4       5        6       7       8          9                                              0   1             2                 3                     4
                                                        Mode-market-specific age                                                                                 Mode-market-specific age




                                                              New exporters dynamics, model with MNEs
                                                       (c) Exit rates                                                           .7
                                                                                                                                                             (d) Sales growth

                                                                                   baseline trade costs
                     .4




                                                                                   high trade costs
                                                                                                                                                .6




                                                                                   low trade costs
      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                              Log sales, relative to entry year
                                                                                                                                         .5
                               .3




                                                                                                                                 .4
                 .2




                                                                                                                 .2      .3
       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            baseline trade costs
                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            high trade costs
                                                                                                                                                                                            low trade costs
                     0




                                                                                                                                0




                                           0   1   2    3     4       5        6       7       8          9                                              0   1             2                 3                     4
                                                        Mode-market-specific age                                                                                 Mode-market-specific age




                                                          New exporters dynamics, model without MNEs
                                                       (e) Exit rates                                                                                        (f) Sales growth
                     .4




                                                                                                                                .7




                                                                                   baseline trade costs
                                                                                   high trade costs
                                                                                                                                                .6




                                                                                   low trade costs
      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                              Log sales, relative to entry year
                                 .3




                                                                                                                                 .4      .5
                   .2




                                                                                                                 .2      .3
       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            baseline trade costs
                                                                                                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                            high trade costs
                                                                                                                                                                                            low trade costs
                     0




                                                                                                                                0




                                           0   1   2    3     4       5        6       7       8          9                                              0   1             2                 3                     4
                                                        Mode-market-specific age                                                                                 Mode-market-specific age




Notes: Models calibrated to French data. High, low, and baseline trade costs refer, respectively, to iceberg trade
costs, τn , which are 20 percent higher, lower, and equal to the baseline values, for each destination n. Number
of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by mode-market-specific
age. Log of firm-destination export (affiliate) sales with respect to firm-destination export (affiliate) sales in the
year after entry, for firms with five or more years in the market. Observations are at the firm-destination-year
level. We show averages across destinations included in the calibration, weighted by each destination’s share of
export (MNE) firms.                                   31
for the life-cycle and aggregate dynamic behavior of exporters after a trade-liberalization
episode. The different response of the exporters between the two models hinge on the
right truncation of fast-growing exporters induced by the inclusion of the MNE choice.




                                            32
References
Albornoz, F., S. Fanelli, and J. C. Hallak (2016). Survival in export markets. Journal of
  International Economics 102, 262–281.

Albornoz, F., H. F. C. Pardo, G. Corcos, and E. Ornelas (2012). Sequential exporting.
  Journal of International Economics 88(1), 17–31.

Alessandria, G. and H. Choi (2007). Do sunk costs of exporting matter for new exports
  dynamics? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(1), 289–336.

Antrás, P. and S. R. Yeaple (2014). Multinational firms and the structure of international
 trade. Handbook of International Economics 4, 55–130.

Araujo, L., G. Mion, and E. Ornelas (2016). Institutions and export dynamics. Journal of
  International Economics 92, 2–20.

Arkolakis, C. (2016). A unified theory of firm selection and growth. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131(1), 89–155.

Baldwin, R. (1989). Sunk-cost hysteresis. NBER Working Paper 2911.

Baldwin, R. and P. Krugman (1989). Persistent trade effects of large exchange rate shocks.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 104(4), 635–654.

Belderbos, R. and L. Sleuwaegen (1998).             Tariff jumping DFI and export
  substitution: Japanese electronics firms in Europe. International Journal of Industrial
  Organization 16(5), 601–38.

Bernard, A. B., E. A. Boler, R. Massari, J.-D. Reyes, and D. Taglioni (2017). Exporter
  dynamics and partial-year effects. American Economic Review 107(10), 3211–28.

Bloningen, B. (2001). In search of substitution between foreign production and exports.
  Journal of International Economics 53(1), 81–104.

Buch, C., J. Kleiner, A. Lipponer, and F. Toubal (2005). Determinants and Effects of Foreign
  Direct Investment: Evidence from German Firm-Level Data. Economic Policy 20(41),
  52–110.

Conconi, P., A. Sapir, and M. Zanardi (2016). The internationalization process of firms:
 from exports to FDI. Journal of International Economics 99(C), 16–30.

Das, S., M. J. Roberts, and J. R. Tybout (2007). Market entry costs, producer heterogeneity,
 and export dynamics. Econometrica 75(3), 837–873.

Dixit, A. (1989). Entry and exit decisions under uncertainty.          Journal of Political
  Economy 97(3), 630–638.

Eaton, J., M. Eslava, C. J. Krizan, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2014). A search and learning
  model of export dynamics. Mimeo, Pennsylvania State University.

                                            33
Eaton, J., M. Eslava, M. Kugler, and J. Tybout (2008). The margins of entry into export
  markets: Evidence from Colombia. In E. Helpman, D. Marin, and T. Verdier (eds.), The
  Organization of Firms in a Global Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press.

Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015). The next generation of the Penn
  World Table. American Economic Review 105(10), 3150–3182.

Fillat, J. L. and S. Garetto (2015). Risk, returns, and multinational production. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 130(4), 2027–2073.

Fitzgerald, D., S. Haller, and Y. Yedid-Levi (2017).              How exporters grow.
  Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson (2016). The slow growth of new plants:
  Learning about demand? Economica 83(329), 91–129.

Ghironi, F. and M. J. Melitz (2005). International trade and macroeconomic dynamics with
 heterogeneous firms. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120(3), 865–915.

Haltiwanger, J., R. Jarmin, and J. Miranda (2013). Who creates jobs? small vs. large vs.
 young. Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2), 347–361.

Head, K. and J. Ries (2001). Overseas investment and firm exports.             Review of
 International Economics 9(1), 108–122.

Helpman, E., M. J. Melitz, and S. R. Yeaple (2004). Export versus FDI with Heterogeneous
 Firms. American Economic Review 94(1), 300–316.

Hopenhayn, H. A. (1992). Entry, exit, and firm dynamics in long run equilibrium.
 Econometrica 60(5), 1127–1150.

Impullitti, G., A. A. Irarrazabal, and L. D. Opromolla (2013). A theory of entry and exit
  into exports markets. Journal of International Economics 90(1), 75–90.

Kleinert, J., J. Martin, and F. Toubal (2015). The few leading the many: Foreign affiliates
  and business cycle co-movement. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(4),
  134—59.

Mayer, T. and S. Zignago (2011). Notes on cepii distances measures : the geodist database.
 CEPII Working Paper 2011(25).

Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate
 industry productivity. Econometrica 71(6), 1695–1725.

Morales, E., G. Sheu, and A. Zahler (2017).        Extended gravity.    Mimeo Princeton
 University.

Ramondo, N., V. Rappoport, and K. J. Ruhl (2013). The proximity-concentration tradeoff
  under uncertainty. Review of Economic Studies 80(4), 1582–1621.


                                            34
Ramondo, N., V. Rappoport, and K. J. Ruhl (2016).             Intra-firm Trade and
  Vertical Fragmentation in U.S. Multinational Corporations. Journal of International
  Economics 98(1), 51–59.

Ramondo, N. and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2013). Trade, multinational production, and the
  gains from openness. Journal of Political Economy 121(2), 273–322.

Rob, R. and N. Vettas (2003). Foreign direct investment and exports with growing
  demand. Review of Economic Studies 70(3), 629–648.

Roberts, M. J. and J. R. Tybout (1997). The decision to export in Colombia: An empirical
  model of entry with sunk costs. The American Economic Review 87(4), 545–564.

Ruhl, K. J. and J. Willis (2017).   New exporter dynamics.      International Economics
  Review 58(3), 703–726.

Schild, C.-J. and F. Walter (2015). Microdatabase direct investment 1999-2013, data report
  2015-01 - metadata version 2-2. Deutsche Bundesbank Research Data and Service
  Centre.

Tintelnot, F. (2017). Global production with export platforms. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 132(1), 157–209.




                                           35
A     Computations

A.1    Expected productivity growth for the average exporter
Assume that firm productivity follows a first-order autoregressive process, zt = ρzt−1 +
σ t , with t ∼ N (0, 1), and 0 ≤ ρ < 1. The expected value of zt is zero with variance given
by σz2 ≡ σ2 /(1 − ρ2 ).
Conditional on a starting productivity value of k, the expected growth for an exporter in
t in the model with only left truncation is given by

                            GL (k) ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | zt > z, zt−1 = k) ,

while in a model with left and right truncation, we have that

                           GLR (k) ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | z < zt < z̄, z = k) ,

with z and z̄ denoting the left and right truncation points, respectively.
After some algebra, we get that

                                                     φ(c(k))
                               GL (k) = σ                     − k(1 − ρ)
                                                   1 − Φ(c(k))

and
                                                φ(c(k)) − φ(c̄(k))
                           GLR (k) = σ                            − k(1 − ρ),
                                                Φ(c̄(k)) − Φ(c(k))
with c̄(k) ≡ (z̄ − ρk)/σ , c(k) ≡ (z − ρk)/σ , and φ(·) and Φ(·) denoting the p.d.f. and c.d.f.,
respectively, of a standard normal distribution.
Taking expectations over all exporters yields
                                 Z ∞                           
                  L        1                φ(c(k))
                 G =                   σ             − k(1 − ρ) dF (k)
                       1 − F (z) z        1 − Φ(c(k))

and                                        z̄                                   
                                                    φ(c(k)) − φ(c̄(k))
                                       Z
               LR            1
             G      =                            σ                    − k(1 − ρ) dF (k).
                      F (z̄) − F (z)   z            Φ(c̄(k)) − Φ(c(k))
The average exporter grows faster in the model with only left truncation if and only if
GL > GLR , which is equivalent to
            Z ∞                         Z z̄                                 
                    φ(c(k))    dF (k)         φ(c(k)) − φ(c̄(k))   dF (k)
         σ                            −                                        >
              z  1 − Φ(c(k)) 1 − F (z)    z Φ(c̄(k)) − Φ(c(k)) F (z̄) − F (z)
                                  Z   ∞                    Z    z̄                      
                                              dF (k)                        dF (k)
                        (1 − ρ)            k           −              k                      .
                                   z         1 − F (z)       z          F (z̄) − F (z)




                                                       36
The r.h.s is simply
                                                                                               
                                                   φ(z/σz )    φ(z/σz ) − φ(z̄/σz )
                               (1 − ρ)σz                     −                                       .
                                                 1 − Φ(z/σz ) Φ(z̄/σz ) − Φ(z/σz )

Hence,
                        ∞                           Z z̄
                                                         φ(c(k)) − φ(c̄(k))
                   Z
                              φ(c(k))    dF (k)                                 dF (k)
                                                  −                                       >
                    z       1 − Φ(c(k)) 1 − F (z)     z Φ(c̄(k)) − Φ(c(k)) F (z̄) − F (z)
                                r                                              
                                   1−ρ       φ(z/σz )      φ(z/σz ) − φ(z̄/σz )
                                                         −                        .
                                   1 + ρ 1 − Φ(z/σz ) Φ(z̄/σz ) − Φ(z/σz )


B      Proofs

B.1      Proof of Proposition 1
Firm-productivity z follows a first-order autoregressive process, z 0 = ρz + σ 0 with 0 ∼
N (0, 1) and 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1. Let log φ̄m     m         m    m            x    x         m
                                  e ≡ z̄e , log φ̄ ≡ z̄ , and log φ̄ ≡ z̄ , with z̄e > z̄
                                                                                          m
                                                                                            > z̄ x .
      m
Let f (a) denote the probability of exit from MNE status in t + 1 for a firm that was not
an MNE in t − 1 and had productivity a in t − 1,
                                              R∞
                                                     Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                             z̄em
                                 f m (a) =                                                       ,                   (B.1)
                                                             1 − G(z̄em − ρa)

where g(·) and G(·) denote, respectively, the probability and cumulative density functions
of a normal distribution with mean zero and dispersion parameter σ . Let f x (a) denote
the probability of exit from export status in t + 1 for a firm that was only domestic in t − 1
and had a in t − 1,
                                             z̄Rem
                                                     Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ x | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                             z̄ x
                                 f x (a) =                                                       .                   (B.2)
                                                       G(z̄em − ρa) − G(z̄ x − ρa)

Under which conditions f m (a) < f x (a)? First, notice that if z̄ x = z̄ m = z̄, then
                                                                     m
         Z∞                                                    Zz̄e
                Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx ≤                      Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx.          (B.3)
        z̄em                                                    z̄


Let z̄ m = z̄ x + ξ, with ξ > 0. Then,
            Z∞                                                              Z∞
                                     x
      lim        Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx =                          Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ x | x)g(x − ρa)dx,
      ξ→0
         z̄em                                                              z̄em



                                                               37
which implies the inequality in (B.3). This means that the numerator in (B.1) is lower than
in (B.2). If
                      1 − G(z̄em − ρa) > G(z̄em − ρa) − G(z̄ x − ρa),                  (B.4)
then f m (a) < f x (a). Clearly, the inequality is true if z̄em = z̄ x . Let z̄em = z̄ x + ϕ, with ϕ > 0.
When ϕ → 0, then 1 − 2G(z̄ x + ϕ − ρa) > −G(z̄ x − ρa). More generally, there exists ϕ∗
such that for 0 ≤ ϕ < ϕ∗ , the inequality in (B.4) holds and f m (a) < f x (a).


B.2     Proof of Proposition 2
Firm productivity z follows a first-order autoregressive process, z 0 = ρz + σ 0 with 0 ∼
N (0, 1) and 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1. Let z̄em and z̄ m be the productivity entry and exit thresholds,
respectively. Let f (a) denote the probability of exit from multinational status in t + 1 for
a firm that was not a multinational in t − 1, and with productivity a in t-1, defined by
                                                R∞
                                                      Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                               z̄em
                                    f (a) =                                                          ,
                                                               1 − G(z̄em − ρa)

where g(·) and G(·) denote, respectively, the probability and cumulative density functions
of a normal distribution with mean zero and dispersion parameter σ .
Let ξ → 0, with ξ > 0. We will show that f (.) is a decreasing function—i.e., f (a) − f (a −
ξ) < 0. Replacing, we get that
                            R∞                                                  R∞
                                  Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x)g(x − ρa)dx                 Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x)g(x − ρa + ρξ)dx
                           z̄em                                                z̄em
   f (a) − f (a − ξ) =                                                     −                                                     ,
                                            1 − G(z̄em − ρa)                                 1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)

which, after some algebra, becomes
                   R∞
                         Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x) [g(x − ρa)(1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ) − g(x − ρa + ρξ)(1 − G(z̄em − ρa))] dx
                  z̄em
f (a)−f (a−ξ) =                                                                                                                      .
                                                          [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] [1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)]


Since the denominator is always positive, we need to show that the numerator is negative.
Note that Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ m | x) is decreasing in x and that
                                      R∞                         R∞
                                            g(x − ρa)dx                g(x − ρa + ρξ)dx
                                     z̄em                       z̄em
                                                            −                                   = 0.
                                     1 − G(z̄em − ρa)           1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)

We then need to show that there exists only one point m ∈ [c, ∞] such that for x < m,

            g(x − ρa) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)] − g(x − ρa + ρξ) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] < 0,




                                                                   38
and for x > m,

          g(x − ρa) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)] − g(x − ρa + ρξ) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] > 0.

Since for ξ > 0 and ξ → 0, G(x − ξ) = G(x) − ξg(x) and g(x − ξ) = g(x) − ξg 0 (x), replacing,
we get that

    g(x − ρa) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa + ρξ)] − g(x − ρa + ρξ) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)]
  = g(x − ρa) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa) − ρξg(z̄em − ρa)] − [g(x − ρa) + ρξg 0 (x − ρa)] [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)]
  = −ρξg(x − ρa)g(z̄em − ρa) − ρξg 0 (x − ρa) [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)]
                                                            
                        m          x − ρa           m
  = ρξg(x − ρa) −g(z̄e − ρa) +             [1 − G(z̄e − ρa)] ,                                (B.5)
                                     σ2

where, in the last equality, we use that g 0 (x − ρa) = −g(x − ρa)(x − ρa)/σ2 .
Denote the function inside the curly brackets in (B.5) as
                                                    x − ρa
                      k(x) ≡ −g(z̄em − ρa) +               [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] .
                                                      σ2

For x = m, k(m) = 0, with m = cσ2 + ρa where c ≡ g(z̄em − ρa)/ [1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] > 0 (since
[1 − G(z̄em − ρa)] and g(z̄em − ρa) are positive constants). It remains to show that for x < m,
k(x) is negative, and for x > m, k(x) is positive. Taking the derivative of k(·) with respect
to x yields
                                               1 − G(z̄em − ρa)
                                     k 0 (x) =                  ,
                                                     σ2
which is positive for all x. Thus, k(x) < k(m), for x < m, and k(x) > k(m), for x > m,
which implies that the expression in (B.5) is decreasing, proving that f (a) is a decreasing
function.


B.3    Proof of Proposition 3
Firm-productivity z follows a first-order autoregressive process, z 0 = ρz + σ 0 with 0 ∼
N (0, 1) and 0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1. Let z̄ denote the exit cutoff and z̄e the entry cutoff into an
international activity. Let c be a constant in the interval [z̄e , ∞). Let
                                    Rc
                                          Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                    z̄e
                          f (a) =
                                                G(c) − G(z̄e − ρa)

denote the probability of exit from status i in t+1 for a firm that is not yet in status i
in t-1 and that has a productivity level of a in t-1. The functions g(·) and G(·) denote,
respectively, the probability and cumulative density functions of a normal distribution
with mean zero and dispersion parameter σ .
Let ξ and ϕ be two positive constants, with ξ ≤ ϕ. Without loss of generality, the entry
cutoff is z̄e = z̄ + ϕ. We want to show that when we increase the exit cutoff from z̄ to z̄ + ξ,

                                                    39
the exit probability increases more when sunk costs are zero—i.e., ϕ = 0,

        f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ = 0) − f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ = 0) > f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ > 0) − f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ > 0).

The first term is given by
                                                               Rc
                                                                    Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                                               z̄
    f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ = 0) − f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ = 0) =
                                                                               G(c) − G(z̄ − ρa)
                                                               Rc
                                                                    Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                                               z̄
                                                    −                                                     ,       (B.6)
                                                                             G(c) − G(z̄ − ρa)

while the second one is
                                                               Rc
                                                                     Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                                              z̄+ϕ
    f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ > 0) − f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ > 0) =
                                                                            G(c) − G(z̄ + ϕ − ρa)
                                                               Rc
                                                                     Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
                                                              z̄+ϕ
                                                   −                                                          .   (B.7)
                                                                          G(c) − G(z̄ + ϕ − ρa)

Rearranging, we get that

        f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ = 0) − f (a; ξ > 0; ϕ > 0) > f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ = 0) − f (a; ξ = 0; ϕ > 0),

which, after some algebra, yields
             Rc                                                     Rc
                  Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx −                Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
             z̄                                                z̄+ϕ
                                   (G(c) − G(z̄ − ρa))(G(c) − G(z̄ + ϕ − ρa))
             Rc                                          Rc
                  Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx −          Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
             z̄                                         z̄+ϕ
    >                                                                                                 .
                               (G(c) − G(z̄ − ρa))(G(c) − G(z̄ + ϕ − ρa))

Denominators are always positive and simplify. The numerators can be written as
       z̄+ϕ
       Z                                           Zc
           Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx +    Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx
       z̄                                                 z̄+ϕ


        Zc                                            z̄+ϕ
                                                      Z
   −          Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx =     Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx,
    z̄+ϕ                                                       z̄


                                                    40
and analogously for the numerator in the right-hand side of the inequality. Hence,
      z̄+ϕ
      Z                                                      z̄+ϕ
                                                             Z
          Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x)g(x − ρa)dx >                Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x)g(x − ρa)dx.
      z̄                                                      z̄

Because Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ + ξ | x) > Pr(ρx + σ  ≤ z̄ | x), we show that when we increase the
exit cutoff, the probability of exit upon entry increases by less with the presence of sunk
costs. 


B.4        Proof of Proposition 4
Let φ(·) and Φ(·) denote the p.d.f. and c.d.f., respectively, of a standard normal distribution.
Then,

       GL ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | zt > z, zt−1 = z) = E (zt | zt > z, zt−1 = z) − z
          = E (ρzt−1 + σ t | zt > z, zt−1 = z) − z = ρz + E (σ t | zt > z, zt−1 = z) − z
          = ρz + σ E (t | t > z(1 − ρ)/σ ) − z = σ E (t | t > c) − σ c
                               
                   φ(c)
          = σ              −c ,
                 1 − Φ(c)


where c ≡ (1 − ρ)z/σ . Similar calculations yield
                                                                                          
                    LR                                                      φ(c) − φ(c̄)
               G         ≡ E (zt − zt−1 | z < zt < z̄, zt−1 = z) = σ                    −c ,
                                                                            Φ(c̄) − Φ(c)


where c̄ ≡ (1 − ρ)z̄/σ .
Growth is higher with left (L) than with left and right (LR) truncation when

                                            φ(c)     φ(c) − φ(c̄)
                                                   >              ,
                                          1 − Φ(c)   Φ(c̄) − Φ(c)

or equivalently,

                                         Φ(c̄) − Φ(c)   φ(c) − φ(c̄)
                                                      >              .
                                          1 − Φ(c)         φ(c)

The expression on the left-hand side (l.h.s.) of the inequality has the following properties:

                    Φ(c̄) − Φ(c)                 Φ(c̄) − Φ(c)        dl.h.s.     φ(c̄)
             lim                 = 0;     lim                 = 1;           =          · > 0.
             c̄→c    1 − Φ(c)             c̄→∞    1 − Φ(c)             dc̄     1 − Φ(c)

With z̄ > z, and c̄ > 0, the expression on the right-hand side (r.h.s.) of the inequality has


                                                       41
the following properties:

                    φ(c) − φ(c̄)                 φ(c) − φ(c̄)               dr.h.s.      φ(c̄)
               lim               = 0;        lim              = 1;                  = c̄       > 0.
               c̄→c    φ(c)                 c̄→∞    φ(c)                      dc̄        φ(c)

Both functions have the same limits and both are increasing with c̄. The left-hand side,
however, grows faster than the right-hand side when

                                                            φ(c)
                                                   c̄ <            .
                                                          1 − Φ(c)

Therefore, there exits c̄∗ —and consequently, z̄ ∗ —such that for all c < c̄ < c̄∗ , GL > GLR ,
with GL = GLR for c̄ = c̄∗ .


C      Quantitative model
We extend the model in Section 4 to include sunk export costs, F x > 0, paid in units of
labor and F m > F x . Additionally, we assume that all fixed and sunk costs are heterogeneous
across firms, but fixed over time for each firm. Fixed and sunk costs distributions are
independent of the firm productivity distribution, and follow a log-normal distribution,

                       log(Fes ) ∼ N (µse , (σes )2 )     and    log(f s ) ∼ N (µs , (σ s )2 ),

where s = m, x.
Firms have three possible states: producing in the domestic market for home consumers
only(D); producing in the domestic market for home and foreign consumers (X); or
producing in the domestic market for home consumers and in the foreign market for
foreign consumers (M ).
The value of being an MNE with productivity φ is given by

                                    X d (φ)
                                                      m
                                                        X (φ)
       m    x    m    x
V (φ, Fe , Fe , f , f , M ) =                + max              − f m + βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , M | φ),
                                       σ                   σ
                                                   X x (φ)
      βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , D | φ),         − f x − Fex +βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , X | φ)} .
                                                     σ
An MNE chooses among continuing its operations abroad and incurring the per-period
fixed cost f m ; shutting down the affiliate and becoming an exporter into the foreign
market, incurring a per-period fixed cost f x and sunk cost F x ; or abandoning the foreign
market altogether.




                                                           42
The value of being an exporter with productivity φ is given by

                                     X d (φ)
                                                      x
                                                        X (φ)
       m    x     m    x
V (φ, Fe , Fe , f , f , X) =                 + max            − f x + βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , X | φ),
                                         σ               σ
                                                X m (φ)
   βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , D | φ),         − f m − Fem +βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , M | φ)} .
                                                  σ
An exporter can choose to become an MNE in the foreign market and pay the per-period
fixed cost f m and the entry sunk cost F m ; continue exporting to the foreign market, and
pay the per-period fixed cost f x ; or operate in and serve only its home market.
The value of being a domestic firm with productivity φ is given by

                                X d (φ)
                                                      m
                                                      X (φ)
       m    x    m   x
V (φ, Fe , Fe , f , f , D) =               + max               − f m − Fem + βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , M | φ),
                                    σ                    σ
                                                         X x (φ)
            βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , D | φ),         − f x − Fex +βEφ0 V (φ0 , Fem , Fex , f m , f x , X | φ)} .
                                                           σ
A domestic firm can choose to become an MNE in the foreign market and pay the per-
period fixed cost f m and the entry sunk cost F m ; export to the foreign market, and pay the
per-period fixed cost f x and sunk cost F x ; or operate in and serve only its home market.




                                                       43
D                                                            Additional figures

                                                                        Figure D.1: Life-cycle dynamics of exports for new MNEs.
                                                                 (a) Export-to-foreign sales ratio                (b) Share of exporters, MNEs with export experience
                                                        1




                                                                                                                                         1
   Exports to total foreign sales, firm-destination level




                                                                                                                   Share of exporters, firm-destination level
                                                                                                                                                      .97
                                             .8




                                                                                                                                           .94
                                  .6




                                                                                                                                .91
                        .4




                                                                                                                     .88
            .2




                                                                                                                                                                     Norway
                                                                           Median           Geometric mean                                                           France
                                                                                                                                         .85
  0




                                                            -1         0               1             2       3                                                  -1            0                          1   2
                                                                             Years from MNE entry                                                                                 Years from MNE entry



Notes: Data on MNE sales are available only for Norway. (D.1a): ratio of exports-to-foreign sales, by years
from MNE entry, at the firm-destination-year level, average over MNE-destination pairs with at least four
years in the market and with positive exports before MNE entry. (D.1b): share of exporters among MNEs
that export (to the market of the affiliate) in the year before MNE entry, by years from MNE entry, for
firm-destination pairs that survive at least four years as MNEs in a market.




                                                                                                             44
                                                                Figure D.2: Exit rates by age: MNEs versus exporters, OLS.
                                                                      (a) France                                                                                                        (b) Norway
                                                   .2




                                                                                                                                                                       .2
                                                                                                        95% CI                                                                                                         95% CI
  Difference in exit rates, base group = exporters




                                                                                                                      Difference in exit rates, base group = exporters
                                           .1




                                                                                                                                                               .1
                                   0




                                                                                                                                                       0
                          -.1




                                                                                                                                              -.1
                -.2




                                                                                                                                    -.2
        -.3




                                                                                                                            -.3
                             -.4




                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                        0   1    2        3         4               5   6         7                                                         0   1   2     3       4         5      6   7
                                                                     Mode-market-specific age                                                                                           Mode-market specific age



Notes: Difference in coefficients and 95%-confidence bands from estimating, by OLS,
                                       X                      X
     D(Exitinmta ) = β0 M N Einta +      β1a D(ageinmt = a) +   β2a M N Einta × D(ageinmt = a) + inmta ,
                                                                                                a                                                                           a

where D(Exitinmta ) is a dummy equal to one in the year t in which firm i of age a exits mode m in market n, and
zero otherwise; M N Einta is one if firm i at age a is active in market n and year t as an MNE, and zero otherwise;
and D(ageinmt = a) equals one if firm i in market n and mode m at time t is of age a, and zero otherwise. We
include year, industry, country fixed effects, and the log of home sales as a control. Standard errors are clustered
by industry. Exporters are the base group. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. Exporters refers
to non-MNE exporters.




                                                                                                                 45
                                                     Figure D.3: Exit rates by age: experienced versus non-experienced MNEs, OLS.
                                                                                        (a) France                                                                                                                                (b) Norway
                                             .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .3
                                                                                                                                                                   95% CI                                                                                                                                   95% CI




                                                                                                                                                                                                    .2
                                             .2
                                Difference in exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                       Difference in exit rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                       .1
                                                .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.1
                                             -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                    -.2
                                             -.2




                                                           0       1              2         3         4           5                                           6               7                                   0   1       2            3         4                                           5          6           7
                                                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                                                                       Mode-market specific age



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by mode-
market-specific age. Experienced MNEs are new affiliates of MNEs that exported to a foreign market for one or more
years before opening an affiliate there.Difference in coefficients and 95%-confidence bands from estimating, by OLS,
                                               X                        X
              D(Exitinmta ) = β0 M N Einta +      β1a D(ageinmt = a) +     β2a M N Einta × D(ageinmt = a)
                                                                                                                                                                        a                                                     a
                                                                                                              X
                                                                   +β3 exp.mneinmta +                                 β4a exp.mneinmta                                                 × D(ageinmt = a) + β5 exp.mneinmta × M N Einta
                                                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                              X
                                                                                                                         +                                                  β6a D(ageinmt = a) × M N Einta × exp.mneinmta + inmta ,
                                                                                                                                                                    a

where D(Exitinmta ) is a dummy equal to one in the year t in which firm i of age a exits mode m in market n, and
zero otherwise; M N Einta is one if firm i at age a is active in market n and year t as an MNE, and zero otherwise; and
D(ageinmt = a) equals one if firm i in market n and mode m at time t is of age a, and zero otherwise. exp.mneinmta
indicates the years of export experience before MNE entry in market n, for firm i at age a and year t. We include
year, industry, country fixed effects, and the log of home sales as a control. Standard errors are clustered by industry.
Non-experienced MNEs are the base group. Observations at the firm-destination-year level.

                                                                                                      Figure D.4: Sales growth by age and cohort.
                                                               (a) Exporters, France                                                                                         (b) Exporters, Norway                                                                                                   (c) MNEs, Norway
                      .6




                                                                                                                                              .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .6
 Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                         Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                      .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
                                                                                                                                                    .2
                            .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                            0
                    0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                 -.2
         -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           -.2
                                                                                                                         -.4
 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.4
                                                                                                                                              -.6
                      -.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -.6




                                            0                  1       2        3         4           5   6       7                                                 0        1     2            3         4               5       6         7                                                0   1      2        3         4           5   6   7
                                                                           Mode-market-specific age                                                                                        Mode-market-specific age                                                                                         Mode-market-specific age




Notes: Log of firm-destination export (affiliate) sales with respect to firm-destination export (MNE) sales in the year
after entry, firms with at least t years in the market, selected cohorts in each mode. Observations are at the firm-
destination-year level. We show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of export (MNE)
firms. Log of sales first demeaned by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. Exporters refers to non-MNE
exporters.


                                                                                                                                                                                  46
                                                   Figure D.5: Greenfield versus M&A FDI, Germany.
                                               (a) Exit rates by age                                                                                 (b) Sales growth by age
                    .6




                                                                                                                          .6
                                                                              M&A FDI




                                                                                                   -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                                                                              Greenfield FDI




                                                                                                       Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                  .5
  Mode-market-specific exit rates
       .2      .3   .1  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                         M&A FDI
                                                                                                                                                                                         Greenfield FDI
                    0




                                       0   1          2              3        4                5                                                 0    1             2                3                    4
                                                   Mode-market-specific age                                                                               Mode-market-specific age



Notes: (D.5a): number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market, by
mode-market-specific age. (D.5b): log of firm-destination MNE sales with respect to firm-destination MNE sales
in the year after entry, firms with five or more years in the market. Observations are at the firm-destination-year
level. We show averages across destinations weighted by each destination’s share of MNE firms. Log of sales
first demeaned by industry, year, and destination fixed effects. The sample period is 2005-2011 (no information
on FDI entry mode available before 2005). Source: Deutsche Bundesbank Research Data and Service Centre,
Microdatabase Direct investment, own calculations.




                                                                                          47
                                        Figure D.6: First-year exit rates and market characteristics, Norway.
                                          (a) Exporters – market size                                                                                     (b) MNEs – market size
             1




                                                                                                                                        1
                                              TG       RW
                                                  NE
                                     BZ
                                       ER
                                  AGGM                     GN
             .8




                                                                                                                                        .8
                              GD SC       SL     LA AF NIMU             UZ
                                 VC         MRBS TD     SNBOUG   ET
                                                              TZCI
                                      DJ           MWML
                                                    GA      PY
                                                             IQNP
                                  LR CVBM SRBB    BJMK
                                                     BW   PG
                                                            MZGH
                                                             AZ
                                                                 SDGT
                                             GQ
                                            FJ     ZMMO        SY      PR MA
                                                     BA GE TM  KE TN
  First-year exit rates




                                                                                                                             First-year exit rates
                                                                                      IR
                                           MNCG BN  JMHNLU       OM          NG CO
                                                                             VE
                                                                                  BDPK
                                         AN              JO
                                                          LB  CRCM CU PE DZ    CL    AR
                                                MT ALQA   PASV
                                                         YE
                                                             UYSI KW    IE VN UA            ID
                 .6




                                                                                                                                            .6
                                  LC MV              MG TT ZW
                                                     BH             DO
                                                                   SK
                                                       CY
                                                       AM  LV       EC NZ
                                                                       LK   KZ  AT
                                                                               CH  SA
                                                                                   EG TH CA IT
                                                IS      EECD        BGAE FIHU
                                                                          IL
                                                                           RO PT BE
                                                                                  MY TW
                                                                                    ZA  AU MX
                                                                                           ES BR DE IN
                                                                             CZ
                                                                            DK HK PH
                                                                              GR     NL        FR
                                                                                               RU             CN US
                                                    MD
                                                                LT
                                                                 HR      SGBY SE PL TR KR GB JP
                                                          CS
      .4




                                                                                                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BE    AU
                                                                                                                                                                                            AT        NL           DE
                                                                                                                                                                                   FI CZ
                                                                                                                                                                                   SG                       CA ITGB
             .2




                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BR             CN
                                                                                                                                                                                     DK SE                       RU JP             US
                                                                                                                                                                                                  PL
             0




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ES

                                 14               16            18            20                     22                24                            14   16               18            20                           22                 24
                                                              GDP, $1000 (logs)                                                                                            GDP, $1000 (logs)



                                             (c) Exporters – distance                                                                                          (d) MNEs – distance
             1




                                                                                                                                        1




                                                                                                 TGRW
                                                                                               NE
                                                                                                          BZ
                                                                                               ER
                                                                                               GMGN AG
             .8




                                                                                                                                        .8




                                                                                           UZAF SL GD
                                                                                             MR         LANIMU
                                                                                                        SC
                                                                                   LY          SN
                                                                                              TD  ET
                                                                                                  CIUGBS
                                                                                                      VC
                                                                                                       TZ     BO
                                                                              MK        IQ     ML
                                                                                              SD DJ
                                                                                                CV GA MW
                                                                                                   NP       MZPY
                                                                                     AZ          BJ
                                                                                                  LR
                                                                                                  GH
                                                                                                  BM   HT
                                                                                                      BB
                                                                                                       SR  GT
                                                                                                            BW    PGFJ
                                                                                    MASY          GQPR   ZM
                                                                                                         MO
                                                                           BA TN GE IR   TM PK        AO
                                                                                                     KE
  First-year exit rates




                                                                                                                             First-year exit rates




                                                                  LU                            MN
                                                                                               OMNGCGBD    HN
                                                                                                           COBN
                                                                                       JO               VE
                                                                                                        JM
                                                                                 MT LB KW         CM CU AN CRPEAR
                                                                                                           SV    CL
                                                                    IE SI     AL DZ          QAYE LC    VN PA IDUY
                 .6




                                                                                                                                            .6




                                                                      SK UA                 BH         MV
                                                                                                      DO
                                                                                                       TT  MG
                                                                                                          ZW
                                                             LV      ATCH IT        CYEG KZ SA CA CD      THEC
                                                            FI DEBE FR
                                                            EE         HU     BGES
                                                                          IS RO   PTAM
                                                                                 GR   IL     AEUSIN CNLK   MX
                                                                                                          TWMY
                                                                                                         HKPHBR
                                                                                                             ZA      AUNZ
                                                   DK         NLPL
                                                                 CZ      RU
                                                                LTGB
                                                                   BY HRMD TR                            JP
                                                 SE                                                   KR SG
                                                                           CS
      .4




                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                  FR
                                                                                                                                                                             BE                                                     AU
                                                                                                                                                                           NL
                                                                                                                                                                            DE   AT
                                                                                                                                                                      FI      GB
                                                                                                                                                                              CZ            IT                   CA          SG
             .2




                                                                                                                                        .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CN
                                                                                                                                                               SEDK                    RU                        US        JP BR

                                                                                                                                                                             PL
             0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                 ES

                          5                  6                 7              8                      9                 10                            5    6                 7              8                          9                  10
                                                              Distance, km (logs)                                                                                          Distance, km (logs)



Notes: Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms active in a mode-market,
for exporters and MNEs, in the first year upon market-mode entry. Destinations with ten or more firm-
year observations and with available GDP data. Exporters refers to non-MNE exporters. GDP data from
International Financial Statistics (IMF). Distance data from CEPII (Mayer and Zignago, 2011).




                                                                                                                        48
                                                   Figure D.7: Entry rates and market characteristics, Norway.
                                     (a) Exporters – market size                                                                                                                              (b) MNEs – market size




                                                                                                                                                              .001
                                                                                                     SE                                                                                                                                    SE
         .06




                                                                                                DK




                                                                                                                                                              .0008
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GB




                                                                                                                                                                .0006
            .04




                                                                                                                            DE
  Entry rates




                                                                                                                                                        Entry rates
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DE                     US
                                                                                                                       GB                                                                                                       DK


                                                                                                            NL




                                                                                                                                                      .0004
                                                                                           FI

                                                                                                                                           US                                                                                                                             FR
                                                                                                                       FR                                                                                                                        PL
         .02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FI
                                                                                                           PL     ES IT                                                                                                                                                                        CN
                                                                                                      BE                                                                                                                   SG
                                                       IS                                                                                                                                                                                             NL




                                                                                                                                                              .0002
                                                                                                     CH                                                                                                                                                    AU    ES     BR
                                                                                                                  CA                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                      AT                                                                                                                                      BE CZ                                                     IN
                                                                      EE     IE LT                                                                                                                                                                                      IT RU
                                                                              SG                         RU                      JP   CN                                                                                       MY                                                       JP
                                                                                    PT          AU
                                                                           LV      GR AE
                                                                                     HK            KR                                                                                                                              ZATH                         MX
                                                                                  CZ       ZA          BR                                                                                                                 IE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PT AT
                                                                                 RO CL MY
                                                                               ILHU
                                                                                           TR
                                                                                            TW
                                                                                             TH
                                                                                                                                 IN                                                    EE           LT                HU CLCHCO     AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KRID
                                                                  SIHRSK   NZ            SA
                                                                                          EG                                                                                                                            VE VN
                                              MT                        BG               UA AR
                                                                                             IR    MX                                                                                       LVZW
                                                                                                                                                                                               CR                 NZ       HK
                                                    BHCYQA LUPAAZ OM  KW   LK PE
                                                                                  NG VN  PH
                                                                                MAVE CO PK
                                                                                                    ID
                                                                                                                                                                            IS                                        RO GR
                                      AN CG BS BN   BA SN TT
                                                          MU
                                                            LB
                                                           JO
                                                            CS UY
                                                                TZ
                                                                GH
                                                                 SY
                                                                CR CI
                                                                  KE
                                                                   CM  ECTNPR
                                                                       DOCU       KZ                                                                                                                         SK AELK PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MA         SA
                      GD   VCLRGM
                            AG
                           SC   MV BM
                                   ER SL
                                   CV
                                  DJ
                                 BZ       MR
                                          GQ
                                         BB
                                       SRMN
                                         FJ
                                         TG     BJ
                                            SO LA
                                                  GA
                                                  MK
                                                 ZM
                                                 MW
                                                NE JM
                                                    MD
                                                     MO
                                                    BW
                                                    MGHN
                                                     ML
                                                      ALAF
                                                        NI
                                                       AM  YE
                                                           GEBO
                                                             GN
                                                            PG
                                                            CD ZW
                                                               SV
                                                               MZ
                                                              UG
                                                               IQTMET
                                                                  NPSDGT    UZBY DZ BD                                                                                                 CY                                         EG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR
         0




                            LC
                                                                                                                                                              0
                      DM          BT            RW
                                                TD   TJ
                                                      BF KH   PY


                           14                  16                            18            20                                22                 24                      16                               18                            20                                            22                           24
                                                                           GDP, $1000 (logs)                                                                                                                                    GDP, $1000 (logs)



                                         (c) Exporters – distance                                                                                                                                   (d) MNEs – distance
                                                                                                                                                              .001




                      SE                                                                                                                                                     SE
         .06




                           DK
                                                                                                                                                              .0008




                                                                                                                                                                                                              GB
                                                                                                                                                                .0006
            .04




                                               DE
  Entry rates




                                                                                                                                                        Entry rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE                                                                       US
                                                            GB                                                                                                                    DK


                                              NL
                                                                                                                                                      .0004




                                        FI

                                                                                                                 US                                                                                                 FR
                                                                 FR                                                                                                                                      PL
         .02




                                                                                                                                                                                             FI
                                                   PL                           IT   ES                                                                                                                                                                                            CN
                                                    BE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SG
                                                                           IS                                                                                                                      NL
                                                                                                                                                              .0002




                                                                  CH                                                                                                                                                                        ES                                                BR            AU
                                                                                                                 CA                                                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                              CZ
                                       EE          LT        IEAT                                                                                                                                            BE                       IT                                      IN
                                                                       RU                              CN JP SG               AU                                                                                               RU                                                      JP MY
                                         LV                                 GRPT             AE           KR HK                                                                                                                                                                           MX ZA
                                                       CZ                                                            BR
                                                                                                                    ZA                                                                                             IEAT                          PT                                     TH        CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AR
                                                                           TR                    IN                                                                                          EE                         HU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CH
                                                              HU      RO             IL    SA
                                                                                                              TW MY
                                                                                                              TH          CL     NZ                                                                      LT                                                                          KRVE CO ID
                                                            SK SI
                                                                HR
                                                                UA     BG    MT CY EGIR     QA   NG             MXPH  ID AR                                                                   LV                                                                                        HKCR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VN                        NZ
                                                        LU
                                                                            TN      AZ
                                                                                 MALB JO
                                                                                         KWBHPKOMGHCI  KE
                                                                                                         AO VN
                                                                                                            VE PA
                                                                                                            LK
                                                                                                           TT
                                                                                                          TZAN  CO     PEUY                                                                                          SK         IS RO            GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MA              SAAE           LKZW    PE
                                                         BY         BA
                                                                   CS        DZ LY  SY    KZMR SN
                                                                                                YE CM
                                                                                                   LR
                                                                                                   GQ
                                                                                                  ET GACG
                                                                                                       BDBS
                                                                                                         PR
                                                                                                          DO    CR EC
                                                                                                                  MU  BO
                                                                    MD MK
                                                                        AL       GE          SD
                                                                                          TJAF
                                                                                  AM IQTMUZ  NEML
                                                                                               ERGN
                                                                                                  BM
                                                                                                 BJ
                                                                                                CV
                                                                                                GMSL
                                                                                                  TG
                                                                                                 DJ NPUG
                                                                                                       CDBB
                                                                                                        AG CU
                                                                                                           JM
                                                                                                           SC
                                                                                                           SR
                                                                                                           MV
                                                                                                          VC
                                                                                                          HT
                                                                                                          GD ZM
                                                                                                             MW
                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                            GY ZW
                                                                                                              MOSV
                                                                                                                GT
                                                                                                                NI
                                                                                                                HN
                                                                                                               BZ MZ
                                                                                                                 BW
                                                                                                                 MG BN PY PG FJ                                                                                                                 TR     CY EG
         0




                                                                                                         LC
                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                          KG  TD
                                                                                              BF MN    RW
                                                                                                       SO
                                                                                                      BT DM     KH


                  6                                7                               8                                   9                        10                      6                                7                              8                                            9                            10
                                                                           Distance, km (logs)                                                                                                                                  Distance, km (logs)



Notes: Number of entries to a mode-market relative to the number of domestic firms (MNEs) active in the
home market. Destinations with ten or more firm-year observations and with available GDP data. Exporters
refers to non-MNE exporters. GDP data from International Financial Statistics (IMF). Distance data from CEPII
(Mayer and Zignago, 2011).




                                                                                                                                                 49
                                         Figure D.8: Exporters’ exit rates by age: calibrated models and data, by country.
                                             (a) Austria                                                                                         (b) Benelux                                                                          (c) Switzerland                                                                             (d) Germany
                 .5




                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                                                                            Data
                                                                            Model with MNEs
                                                                            Model without MNEs
                                .4




                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4
  Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                               Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mode-market-specific exit rates
                    .3




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
         .2




                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2
 .1




                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
                 0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     0   1   2   3     4       5        6      7      8          9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8    9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9
                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                             Mode-market-specific age                                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                Mode-market-specific age




                                             (e) Denmark                                                                                             (f) Spain                                                                        (g) Great Britain                                                                               (h) Italy
                 .5




                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                .4




                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
  Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                               Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mode-market-specific exit rates
                    .3




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
         .2




                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
 .1




                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                 0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     0   1   2   3     4       5        6      7      8          9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8    9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9
                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                             Mode-market-specific age                                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                Mode-market-specific age




                                             (i) Morocco                                                                                             (j) Poland                                                                           (k) Portugal                                                                            (l) Sweden
                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                 .5




                                                                                                                                    .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .4
   Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                               Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mode-market-specific exit rates
                              .4




                                                                                                                        .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         .3
                  .3




                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                      .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
         .2




                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                              .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
 .1              0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                     0   1   2   3     4       5        6      7      8          9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8    9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9
                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                             Mode-market-specific age                                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                Mode-market-specific age




                                             (m) Tunisia                                                                                     (n) United States                                                                                (o) China                                                                   (p) Rest of the World
                                                                                                                     .5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                              .5
                 .5
  Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                      Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                               Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Mode-market-specific exit rates
                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                              .4




                                                                                                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                                                                                                                                               .3
                 .3




                                                                                                             .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
        .2




                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .1
                                                                                                                                                                                              .1
 .1              0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0




                                     0   1   2   3     4       5        6      7      8          9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8    9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9                                       0   1   2    3     4       5        6   7   8   9
                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                             Mode-market-specific age                                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                Mode-market-specific age




Notes: Models calibrated to French data. Number of exits from a mode-market relative to the number of firms
active in a mode-market, for each destination. Rest of the World is a weighted average among the remaining
countries in the sample. Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters. Observations are at the firm-
destination-year level.




                                                                                                                                                                                         50
                                                Figure D.9: Exporters’ sales growth by age: calibrated models and data, by country.
                                                    (a) Austria                                                                                                   (b) Benelux                                                                                  (c) Switzerland                                                                              (d) Germany
                      .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .3
                                                                                                                                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
 Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2
                                                                                                                                                .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2
                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                                         .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                      0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                   0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
  -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.1
                                                                                                                          -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2
                                                                                                                    -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2
                                                                                    Data




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                                                                                             -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3
                                                                                    Model with MNEs
                      -.4




                                                                                    Model without MNEs




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                                                                                                  -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4
                                                0    1             2                 3                   4                                                  0      1              2                3    4                                                  0      1             2                3   4                                                  0    1              2                3   4
                                                         Mode-market-specific age                                                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                      Mode-market-specific age                                                                    Mode-market-specific age




                                                    (e) Denmark                                                                                                        (f) Spain                                                                               (g) Great Britain                                                                                 (h) Italy
                      .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4                 .3
                                                                                                                                                      .3
                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3
    Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                              Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                                                                                                                               .2
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                                                        .1
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                  0
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     -.1
                                                                                                                          -.1
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2
                                                                                                                   -.2
        -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                                                                                                             -.3
 -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                                                                                                                                  -.4
                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                0    1             2                 3                   4                                                  0      1              2                3    4                                                  0      1             2                3   4                                                  0    1              2                3   4
                                                         Mode-market-specific age                                                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                      Mode-market-specific age                                                                    Mode-market-specific age




                                                    (i) Morocco                                                                                                    (j) Poland                                                                                    (k) Portugal                                                                                (l) Sweden
                      .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                          .1 .2 .3
                                           .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .3
    Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                             Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                    .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .2
                             .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1
                                                                                                              -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0
                       0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
              -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.1
        -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                -.2
 -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
                      -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4




                                                0    1             2                 3                   4                                                  0      1              2                3    4                                                  0      1             2                3   4                                                  0    1              2                3   4
                                                         Mode-market-specific age                                                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                      Mode-market-specific age                                                                    Mode-market-specific age




                                                    (m) Tunisia                                                                                                 (n) United States                                                                                 (o) China                                                                             (p) Rest of the World
                      .4




                                                                                                                                  .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
                                         .3




                                                                                                                                                      .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .3
 Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                              Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          .2
                                  .2




                                                                                                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   .1
                           .1




                                                                                                                                       .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                     0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      -.1
             -.1




                                                                                                                          -.1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               -.2
      -.2




                                                                                                                   -.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -.3
 -.3




                                                                                                             -.3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -.4
                      -.4




                                                                                                                                  -.4




                                                0    1             2                 3                   4                                                  0      1              2                3    4                                                  0      1             2                3   4                                                  0    1              2                3   4
                                                         Mode-market-specific age                                                                                       Mode-market-specific age                                                                      Mode-market-specific age                                                                    Mode-market-specific age




Notes: Models calibrated to French data. Log of firm-destination export sales with respect to firm-destination
export sales in the year after entry, average over firms with five or more years in the market, by destination. Rest
of the World is a weighted average among the remaining countries in the sample. Exporters in the data refers to
non-MNE exporters. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level.




                                                                                                                                                                                                       51
                                                             Figure D.10: Exporters exit rates and sales growth, by age.
                     .5
                                                      (a) New exporters’ exit rates                                                                                                                                        (b) New exporters’ sales growth

                                                                                              Model with MNEs




                                                                                                                                               .3
                                                                                              Model without MNEs
                                                                                              Data




                                                                                                                             Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                                                                                                                                                  .2
                                 .4
   Mode-market-specific exit rates




                                                                                                                                                          .1
                     .3




                                                                                                                                           -.1     0
          .2




                                                                                                                                   -.2
  .1




                                                                                                                            -.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Data
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Model with MNEs
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Model without MNEs




                                                                                                                                               -.4
                     0




                                                  0    1         2         3            4              5           6                                                                 0                                           1              2                  3                  4
                                                                 Mode-market-specific age                                                                                                                                             Mode-market-specific age



Notes: Models calibrated to French data. (D.10a): number of exits from a mode-market relative to the
number of firms active in a mode-market, by mode-market-specific age. (D.10b): log of firm-destination
export sales with respect to firm-destination export sales in the year after entry, an average over firms
with five or more years in the market. In the data, log of sales are first demeaned by industry, year, and
destination fixed effects. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. We show averages across
destinations included in the calibration, weighted by each destination’s share of export firms. Weights are
data-based (model-based) for data (model) variables. Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters.



                                                                  Figure D.11: Sales growth, by age and exporter type.
                                                           (a) Never-MNE exporters                                                                                                                                                   (b) Ever-MNE exporters
                        .5




                                                                                                                                                                                             .5
                                             .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  .4
     Log sales, relative to year after entry




                                                                                                                                                                          Log sales, relative to year after entry
                                       .3




                                                                                                                                                                                                            .3
                                 .2




                                                                                                                                                                                                     .2
                           .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                .1
                     0




                                                                                                                                                                                         0
  -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                                                                       -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                     Model without MNEs (exports)                                                                                                                                                Model without MNEs (exports)
                                                                                     Model with MNEs (exports)                                                                                                                                                   Model with MNEs (exports)
                                                                                     Data (exports)                                                                                                                                                              Data (exports)
                        -.4




                                                                                                                                                                                             -.4




                                                  0          1                2                    3                    4                                                                                              0              1                 2                   3                   4
                                                                    Years from export entry                                                                                                                                                   Years from export entry



Notes: Models calibrated to French data. Log of firm-destination export sales with respect to firm-destination
export sales in the year after export entry, an average over firms with five or more years in the market as
exporters. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. We show averages across destinations included in
the calibration, weighted by each destination’s share of export firms. Never-MNE exporters are exporters that,
in our sample period, do not change to MNE status. Ever-MNE exporters are exporters that become MNEs after
export entry. Exports for ever-MNE exporters are computed for the years before MNE entry. Exporters in the
data refers to non-MNE exporters.



                                                                                                                       52
E    Additional tables

                                Table E.1: Summary statistics.

                                                          France
                      share of revenues   share of employment share of firm-year obs   firm-year obs

 Domestic firms             0.076                0.116                 0.697             671,283
 Non-MNE exporters          0.289                0.317                 0.287             276,499
 Non-exporter MNEs          0.005                0.010                 0.001               1,007
 Exporter MNEs              0.630                0.557                 0.015              14,589

                                                         Norway
                      share of revenues   share of employment share of firm-year obs   firm-year obs

 Domestic firms             0.153                0.235                 0.622              55,359
 Non-MNE exporters          0.625                0.630                 0.364              32,376
 Non-exporter MNEs          0.002                0.002                 0.002               136
 Exporter MNEs              0.220                0.133                 0.013               1,147

Notes: Non-MNE exporters are exporters that do not have MNE activities. Non-exporter MNEs are MNEs that are
not exporters. Exporter MNEs are MNEs that also export.




                                                53
                              Table E.2: Exit rates and growth rates, OLS.

Dep variable                 D(exit)                                                    Sales, relative to age one
                 market-mode    market market age    calendar yr                       12-mo yr "never MNEs"          "ever MNEs"
                 FRA     NOR     FRA     FRA      FRA (exp) NOR                        FRA (exp) FRA           NOR    FRA    NOR
                  (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)       (6)         (7)        (8)      (9)     (10)     (11)
MNE            -0.181***   -0.211***   -0.273***   -0.177***                -0.079**
                 (0.015)     (0.038)     (0.014)     (0.016)                 (0.045)
D(age = 0)     -0.172***   -0.218***   -0.171***   -0.172***     -0.436*** -0.686*** -0.109*** -0.436*** -0.683*** -0.448*** -2.540**
                 (0.003)     (0.008)     (0.003)     (0.003)      (0.011)    (0.045)  (0.010)   (0.011) (0.045) (0.089) (1.059)
    ×M N E      0.106***    0.116***    0.126***    0.106***               0.469***
                 (0.015)     (0.039)     (0.015)     (0.017)                 (0.109)
D(age = 1)     -0.246***      -0.270   -0.246***   -0.246***
                 (0.004)    (0.011))     (0.004)     (0.004)
    ×M N E      0.197***    0.257***    0.229***    0.198***
                 (0.029)     (0.045)     (0.029)     (0.025)
D(age = 2)     -0.283***   -0.316***   -0.283***   -0.283***     0.154***   0.178***    0.126***   0.154*** 0.179*** 0.204** 0.929
                 (0.004)     (0.016)     (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.008)    (0.024)     (0.009)    (0.008) (0.0249) (0.080) (0.972)
    ×M N E      0.171***    0.236***    0.207***    0.179***                  0.021
                 (0.019)     (0.044)     (0.018)     (0.020)                 (0.102)
D(age = 3)     -0.308***   -0.334***   -0.308***   -0.308***     0.209***   0.277***    0.164***   0.209*** 0.280*** 0.361*** 1.376
                 (0.006)     (0.013)     (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.012)    (0.042)     (0.014)    (0.012) (0.043) (0.086) (1.509)
    ×M N E      0.207***    0.250***    0.246***    0.214***                  0.071
                 (0.021)     (0.044)     (0.020)     (0.026)                 (0.140)
D(age = 4)     -0.316***   -0.343***   -0.316***   -0.317***     0.157***   0.241***    0.088***   0.157*** 0.245*** 0.460*** 2.671
                 (0.008)     (0.015)     (0.008)     (0.008)      (0.020)    (0.054)     (0.020)    (0.020) (0.055) (0.125) (2.166)
    ×M N E      0.214***    0.283***    0.248***    0.216***                  0.132
                 (0.025)     (0.050)     (0.024)     (0.026)                 (0.143)
                 (0.008)     (0.017)     (0.008)     (0.008)
                 (0.018)     (0.056)     (0.017)     (0.019)
                 (0.007)     (0.019)     (0.007)     (0.007)

Observations 1,044,855 74,119 1,044,855 1,044,855                405,009    25,887      297,896    405,009   24,902   2,632    104

Notes: Dummy equals one if firm i exits: cols 1-2: mode-market by mode-market age; col 3: market by mode-market
age; col 4: mode-market by market age. Cols 5-11: Log of firm-destination export sales with respect to firm-destination
export sales in the year after export entry, firms with five or more years in the market-mode. Col 7: adjusted by partial-
year effects. Cols 8-9: Never-MNE are exporters that, in our sample period, do not change to MNE status. Cols 10-11:
Ever-MNE are exporters that become MNEs after export entry. Exports for ever-MNE exporters computed for the years
before MNE entry. All regressions with year, industry, and country fixed effects. Regressions for exit rates include log
of Home sales and age dummies (and interactions) till age 6. Standard errors, clustered by industry, are in parentheses.
∗∗∗
    p < 0.01, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗ p < 0.1. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. Exporters refers to non-MNE
exporters.




                                                            54
                Table E.3: Foreign-to-domestic sales ratio, by country.

                                    France                                  Norway
                                  rnx    rnm                               rnx   rnm

            Austria             0.003     0.024*      Austria            0.009    0.432
            Benelux             0.068     0.135*      Belgium            0.029    0.086
            Switzerland         0.011     0.064       Canada             0.010    0.130
            China               0.014     0.213*      Germany            0.087    0.456
            Germany             0.123     0.181       Denmark            0.030    0.501
            Denmark             0.003     0.017*      Spain              0.031    0.051
            Spain               0.044     0.119       Finland            0.025    0.546
            Great Britain       0.040     0.181       France             0.045    0.231
            Italy               0.054     0.100       Great Britain      0.069    0.193
            Morocco             0.004     0.037       Italy              0.034    0.094
            Portugal            0.006     0.019*      Netherlands        0.031    0.178
            Poland              0.013     0.038       Poland             0.016    0.088
            Sweden              0.012     0.037*      Sweden             0.065    0.918
            Tunisia             0.004     0.008*      Singapore          0.018    0.382
            United States       0.038     0.427*      United States      0.056    0.749
            RoW                 0.067     0.074       RoW                0.009    0.110

Notes: rnx refers to the export-to-domestic sales ratio, while rnm refers to the MNE affiliate-to-
domestic sales ratio, for market n. (*) imputed values. RoW refers to the rest of the world, a
weighted average among the remaining countries in the sample. Observations are at the firm-
destination-year level.




        Table E.4: Targeted moments, model and data, summary statistics.

                                                  Data, avg                Model, avg
                                               France Norway            France Norway

      Share of MNEs                             0.003       0.003        0.003        0.003
      Share of exporters                        0.090       0.087        0.085        0.085
      First-year exit rate, MNEs                0.248       0.181        0.232        0.149
      First-year exit rate, exporters           0.462       0.528        0.410        0.417
      Average exit rate, MNEs                   0.182       0.149        0.194        0.169
      Average exit rate, exporters              0.316       0.313        0.254        0.252

Notes: Observations are at the firm-destination-year level. For each variable, we show an
unweighted averages across destinations included in the calibration. Share of exporters (MNEs)
to market n calculated relative to firms that do not export to (do not have affiliates in) destination
n. Exporter (MNE) exit rates are calculated relative to exporters (MNEs) that stay in the market.
Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters.



                                                 55
                  Table E.5: Targeted moments, model and data, by country.

                                       Data                                                  Model
                    shares        1st-yr exit rates   avg exit rates       shares       1st-yr exit rates   avg exit rates
                 exp    MNEs       exp     MNEs       exp    MNEs       exp    MNEs      exp     MNEs       exp    MNEs

 France
 Benelux         0.155   0.004    0.339     0.299     0.269   0.209    0.150   0.005    0.339     0.273     0.203   0.196
 Switzerland     0.133   0.003    0.501     0.223     0.354   0.166    0.141   0.003    0.501     0.214     0.291   0.185
 Germany         0.128   0.005    0.418     0.250     0.284   0.174    0.118   0.005    0.418     0.245     0.218   0.188
 Spain           0.118   0.005    0.416     0.249     0.285   0.187    0.114   0.005    0.416     0.250     0.231   0.188
 Italy           0.111   0.004    0.438     0.295     0.297   0.192    0.104   0.004    0.438     0.285     0.240   0.207
 G. Britain      0.105   0.004    0.429     0.297     0.291   0.194    0.105   0.004    0.429     0.276     0.263   0.212
 U. States       0.078   0.006    0.511     0.238     0.362   0.175    0.077   0.006    0.511     0.222     0.261   0.189
 Portugal        0.070   0.002    0.455     0.235     0.316   0.157    0.068   0.002    0.455     0.203     0.259   0.196
 Morocco         0.057   0.002    0.543     0.218     0.391   0.162    0.053   0.002    0.543     0.200     0.286   0.190
 Tunisia         0.052   0.001    0.529     0.298     0.379   0.213    0.049   0.001    0.529     0.273     0.274   0.246
 Austria         0.054   0.001    0.462     0.258     0.318   0.182    0.053   0.001    0.462     0.232     0.300   0.215
 Poland          0.051   0.003    0.455     0.223     0.307   0.185    0.048   0.003    0.455     0.221     0.265   0.192
 Sweden          0.049   0.001    0.445     0.235     0.307   0.154    0.048   0.001    0.445     0.193     0.273   0.200
 Denmark         0.050   0.001    0.452     0.195     0.311   0.137    0.047   0.001    0.452     0.154     0.277   0.186
 China           0.036   0.003    0.521     0.188     0.353   0.146    0.035   0.003    0.521     0.165     0.306   0.176
 RoW             0.194   0.008    0.488     0.273     0.327   0.188    0.181   0.008    0.488     0.253     0.220   0.201
 Norway
 Austria         0.031   0.001    0.527     0.263     0.282   0.180    0.031   0.001    0.527     0.201     0.298   0.229
 Belgium         0.055   0.001    0.552     0.214     0.313   0.129    0.060   0.001    0.552     0.186     0.240   0.169
 Canada          0.039   0.001    0.549     0.222     0.318   0.117    0.040   0.001    0.549     0.090     0.328   0.154
 Germany         0.135   0.004    0.541     0.182     0.285   0.166    0.121   0.005    0.541     0.090     0.258   0.137
 Denmark         0.193   0.004    0.511     0.163     0.270   0.139    0.175   0.004    0.511     0.150     0.232   0.166
 Spain           0.060   0.001    0.533     0.059     0.299   0.131    0.070   0.001    0.533     0.066     0.232   0.128
 Finland         0.099   0.002    0.544     0.192     0.273   0.141    0.095   0.002    0.544     0.151     0.264   0.187
 France          0.073   0.003    0.524     0.310     0.276   0.168    0.071   0.003    0.524     0.258     0.278   0.209
 G. Britain      0.123   0.006    0.506     0.179     0.268   0.131    0.114   0.006    0.506     0.158     0.251   0.165
 Italy           0.062   0.002    0.553     0.154     0.297   0.119    0.078   0.001    0.553     0.150     0.229   0.153
 Netherlands     0.100   0.002    0.528     0.238     0.274   0.136    0.100   0.002    0.528     0.180     0.280   0.188
 Poland          0.055   0.002    0.504     0.071     0.303   0.086    0.053   0.002    0.504     0.052     0.280   0.137
 RoW             0.005   0.000    0.572     0.204     0.364   0.168    0.005   0.000    0.572     0.171     0.372   0.240
 Sweden          0.249   0.007    0.484     0.158     0.239   0.151    0.226   0.007    0.484     0.154     0.199   0.160
 Singapore       0.035   0.002    0.505     0.150     0.280   0.120    0.035   0.002    0.505     0.118     0.298   0.167
 U. States       0.077   0.004    0.519     0.130     0.262   0.128    0.077   0.004    0.519     0.116     0.270   0.157

Notes: Share of exporters (MNEs) to market n calculated relative to firms that do not export to (do not have affiliates in)
destination n. Exporter (MNE) exit rates are calculated relative to exporters (MNEs) that stay in the market. First-year
exit rate refers to exit at age zero. RoW refers to the rest of the world, a weighted average among the remaining countries
in the sample. Exporters in the data refers to non-MNE exporters. Observations are at the firm-destination-year level.




                                                      56
                           Table E.6: Calibrated parameters, by country.

                                     Model with MNEs                               Model without MNEs
                    log(fnx )     log(fnm )    log(Fnx )           log(Fnm )      log(fnx )    log(Fnx )

  France
  Benelux         -1.53 (1.93)   0.11 (0.07)    -25.78 (32.56)     8.55 (5.61)   -1.71 (0.80)    -28.02 (13.15)
  Switzerland     -2.43 (3.16)   -0.01 (0.00)   -12.40 (16.17)    15.50 (9.34)   -2.87 (1.53)   -104.54 (55.59)
  Germany         -0.98 (0.44)   0.15 (0.10)     -19.97 (9.00)    13.17 (8.28)   -0.94 (0.42)    -27.19 (12.03)
  Spain           -1.91 (0.65)   0.06 (0.04)     -15.77(5.40)     12.13 (7.59)   -1.75 (0.80)    -31.04 (14.25)
  Italy           -1.09 (1.89)   0.09 (0.06)    -30.03 (52.16)     6.59 (4.58)   -1.52 (0.67)    -25.76 (11.40)
  Great Britain   -1.18 (2.19)   1.10 (0.64)    -13.79 (25.46)    14.51 (8.42)   -1.72 (0.79)    -30.81 (14.19)
  United States   -1.62 (0.56)   1.82 (0.93)    -29.09 (10.14)     9.17 (4.66)   -1.45 (0.66)    -32.77 (14.98)
  Portugal        -3.16 (0.84)   -0.81 (0.51)   -41.73 (11.09)    13.96 (8.82)   -2.72 (1.41)    -77.87 (40.42)
  Morocco         -2.89 (1.35)   -0.13 (0.08)   -36.41 (17.00)    11.11 (6.77)   -2.82 (1.44)    -69.49 (35.62)
  Tunisia         -2.81 (1.32)   -1.01 (0.72)   -37.41 (17.61)    8.59 (6.10)    -2.72 (1.43)    -85.20 (44.63)
  Austria         -2.73 (2.01)   -0.01 (0.01)   -25.44 (18.74)    11.85 (7.21)   -2.96 (1.56)    -95.74 (50.36)
  Poland          -2.29 (0.04)   -0.51 (0.32)    -44.48 (0.83)   17.33 (10.78)   -1.97 (0.85)    -25.90 (11.20)
  Sweden          -2.06 (0.83)   0.21 (0.12)    -34.11 (13.73)    11.25 (6.60)   -2.01 (0.87)    -26.16 (11.34)
  Denmark         -3.37 (0.91)   -0.43 (0.27)    -28.19 (7.59)     6.98 (4.32)   -2.86 (1.54)   -125.00 (67.38)
  China           -1.79 (0.54)   1.54 (0.76)     -30.73 (9.35)     9.38 (4.61)   -1.61 (0.73)    -28.59 (12.95)
  RoW             -1.61 (2.71)   -0.86 (0.55)   -14.00 (23.58)   18.70 (11.93)   -1.95 (0.84)    -25.42 (10.95)

  Norway
  Austria         -3.07 (0.86)   1.51 (0.78)     -27.32 (7.60)     8.57 (4.41)   -3.03 (0.88)     -22.87 (6.65)
  Belgium         -2.79 (0.13)   2.62 (2.37)     -28.26 (1.36)     4.70 (4.24)   -2.17 (0.99)    -27.01 (12.34)
  Canada          -3.14 (0.88)   0.35 (0.45)     -15.16 (4.25)     2.33 (2.99)   -2.81 (1.14)     -22.20 (9.04)
  Germany         -1.69 (1.55)   0.24 (0.14)    -43.01 (39.47)     5.22 (2.98)   -1.94 (0.89)    -30.79 (14.04)
  Denmark         -3.00 (1.57)   0.58 (0.33)    -85.72 (44.90)    9.60 (5.52)    -2.97 (1.61)   -143.57 (77.86)
  Spain           -2.79 (0.27)   2.03 (2.39)     -19.38 (1.84)     2.61 (3.08)   -2.23 (0.95)     -23.27 (9.85)
  Finland         -2.71 (1.18)   1.21 (0.63)    -29.55 (12.89)     8.74 (4.55)   -2.74 (1.12)     -23.12 (9.47)
  France          -2.11 (0.88)   -0.11 (0.07)    -22.05 (9.20)     8.83 (5.97)   -2.03 (0.94)    -32.66 (15.07)
  Great Britain   -2.10 (0.93)   -0.66 (0.42)   -51.29 (22.66)   16.40 (10.27)   -2.08 (0.91)    -25.91 (11.35)
  Italy           -2.78 (0.28)   3.09 (2.67)     -42.35 (4.27)     5.04 (4.35)   -2.18 (0.93)    -24.67 (10.54)
  Netherlands     -2.36 (1.62)   -0.17 (0.11)   -24.63 (16.94)   10.02 (6.31)    -2.57 (1.08)    -24.87 (10.44)
  Poland          -2.97 (0.80)   -0.86 (0.51)    -24.50 (6.56)   18.13 (10.70)   -2.45 (1.30)   -103.41 (54.75)
  RoW             -2.19 (0.62)   1.06 (0.58)     -31.01 (8.74)    10.32 (5.64)   -2.00 (0.79)    -27.29 (10.78)
  Sweden          -2.94 (0.84)   0.94 (0.52)     -25.94 (7.40)     9.25 (5.14)   -2.66 (1.41)   -105.98 (56.35)
  Singapore       -2.74 (0.55)   0.67 (0.36)     -39.35 (7.97)     8.15 (4.44)   -2.41 (0.90)    -27.83 (10.43)
  United States   -2.19 (0.55)   1.07 (0.56)     -36.72 (9.23)     9.38 (4.91)   -1.94 (0.85)    -26.35 (11.48)

Notes: We report the mean across firms and the standard deviation in parenthesis. fnx are per-period fixed
export costs; fnm are per-period fixed MNE costs; Fnx are sunk export costs; and Fnm are sunk MNE costs.
RoW refers to the rest of the world, a weighted average among the remaining countries in the sample.
Observations are at the firm-destination-year level.




                                                      57
                       Table E.7: The size of calibrated costs, by country.

                       as % of sales, for median firm           in U.S. dollars, for median firm
                        fnx    fnm     Fnx     Fnm                fnx      fnm     Fnx    Fnm

    France
    Benelux            15.09    8.71     0.00      2.40          2,818    230,473      0      63,629
    Switzerland        24.51    11.84    0.00      6.10           641     33,279      0       17,150
    Germany            12.11    6.32     0.06      1.67          4,319     99,775     22      26,360
    Spain              12.72     9.59    0.02      3.24          7,693    144,395     11      48,768
    Italy              15.80     9.15    0.00      2.19          1,375    242,682      0      57,994
    Great Britain      16.58    12.03    0.00      3.03          1,186     13,930     0        3,503
    United States      13.30    13.08    0.00      4.15          4,111     22,638     0        7,175
    Portugal           14.17    10.40    0.00      5.45         10,552    71,844      0       37,651
    Morocco            15.56    12.40    0.02      7.53          6,098     52,811     8       32,075
    Tunisia            15.48     8.93    0.02      2.61          6,466     82,339     9       24,107
    Austria            17.51    12.88    0.00      6.91          2,516     79,248     0       42,519
    Poland             13.37    10.38    0.00      4.27          8,257     63,511     0       26,159
    Sweden             14.67    10.29    0.00      6.97          4,126     78,653     0       53,248
    Denmark            14.92    11.47    0.00      10.31        11,645    93,852      0       84,357
    China              14.54    12.95    0.00      8.36          5,380     30,661     0       19,777
    RoW                16.78    2.49     0.00      0.72           735     26,913      0        7,782
    Norway
    Austria            18.27    17.20    0.00       7.12        16,692     42,167      0      17,457
    Belgium            16.11    14.15    0.00       4.41        14,354    223,242      0      69,587
    Canada             18.83    11.99    0.02      62.59        17,744     65,864     21     343,909
    Germany            18.65    13.95    0.00      11.62         2,862    120,806      0     100,606
    Denmark            18.28    15.20    0.01       8.39         6,336    131,619      3      72,675
    Spain              15.99    11.62    0.00       6.35        19,336    213,711      0     116,753
    Finland            18.02    15.93    0.02       9.17         9,466     50,191     10      28,891
    France             17.57    15.09    0.04       3.67         8,938    130,652     20      31,828
    Great Britain      16.94    12.68    0.00       5.67         8,761    152,299      0      68,038
    Italy              15.90    13.63    0.00       5.21        19,179    593,834      0     226,801
    Netherlands        19.45    14.98    0.00       7.03         5,718    191,689      0      90,032
    Poland             17.62    13.24    0.00      18.49        21,330    132,818      0     185,505
    Sweden             19.07    15.81    0.00      10.88         6,871     65,530      0      45,103
    Singapore          15.44    15.02    0.00       7.26        12,632     54,242      0      26,217
    United States      17.58    15.35    0.00      11.61        19,631    119,927      0      90,765
    RoW                16.81    15.06    0.00      10.66        11,171     89,324      0      63,235

Notes: fnx are per-period fixed export costs; fnm are per-period fixed MNE costs; Fnx are sunk export costs;
and Fnm are sunk MNE costs. The fixed and sunk export (MNE) cost values are conditional means across
random draws, conditional on positive measure of exporters (MNEs). Median firm refers to the firm with
median export (MNE) sales in destination n. RoW refers to the rest of the world, a weighted average among
the remaining countries in the sample.



                                                    58
