                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO HOUSEHOLD WEALTH SHOCKS AFFECT PRODUCTIVITY? EVIDENCE
         FROM INNOVATIVE WORKERS DURING THE GREAT RECESSION

                                       Shai Bernstein
                                     Timothy McQuade
                                    Richard R. Townsend

                                     Working Paper 24011
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24011


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2017, Revised April 2018




Previously circulated as "Does Economic Insecurity Affect Employee Innovation?" We are
grateful to Elizabeth Berger, Nick Bloom, Hans Hvide, Sabrina Howell, Hyunseob Kim, Josh
Lerner, Hanno Lustig, William Mann, Ramana Nanda, Hoai-Luu Nguyen, Luigi Pistaferri as well
as seminar participants at Boston College, London Business School Summer Symposium, Bergen
Innovation Workshop, NBER SI Innovation, HULM Conference, Notre Dame, Stanford (GSB),
Tuck Private Equity and Entrepreneurship Conference, University of British Columbia,
University of Colorado Boulder, University of Texas Austin, and Western Finance Association
for helpful comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Shai Bernstein, Timothy McQuade, and Richard R. Townsend. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Household Wealth Shocks Affect Productivity? Evidence from Innovative Workers During
the Great Recession
Shai Bernstein, Timothy McQuade, and Richard R. Townsend
NBER Working Paper No. 24011
November 2017, Revised April 2018
JEL No. G01,O3,O31,O32

                                          ABSTRACT

We investigate how the deterioration of household balance sheets affects worker productivity,
and whether such effects mitigate or amplify economic downturns. To do so, we compare the
output of innovative workers who experienced different declines in housing wealth, but who were
employed at the same firm and lived in the same area at the onset of the 2008 crisis. We find that,
following a negative wealth shock, innovative workers become less productive, and generate
lower economic value for their firms. Consistent with a debt-related channel, the effects are more
pronounced among those with little home equity before the crisis and those with fewer outside
labor market opportunities.

Shai Bernstein                                              Richard R. Townsend
Stanford Graduate School of Business                        University of California, San Diego
655 Knight Way                                              Rady School of Management
Stanford, CA 94305                                          9500 Gilman Drive
and NBER                                                    La Jolla, CA 92093
shaib@stanford.edu                                          rrtownsend@ucsd.edu

Timothy McQuade
Stanford Graduate School of Business School
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
tmcquade@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

Over the past several decades, the annual proportion of households in the U.S. experiencing a

severe economic loss has been steadily increasing, peaking with the recent financial crisis (Hacker

et al., 2014). The deterioration of household balance sheets during the Great Recession due to the

collapse of the housing market led to severe consequences, as consumers cut back significantly on

their spending (Mian et al., 2013). This reduction in aggregate demand, in turn, led to a significant

decrease in employment by non-tradable firms, further amplifying the severity of the crisis (Mian

and Sufi, 2014). While a number of papers have examined these demand-side eﬀects, it is possible

that housing wealth shocks might not only aﬀect the consumption patterns of households but might

also impact their labor productivity, leading to additional supply-side channels through which the

collapse of the housing market aﬀected firms during the crisis.

    In this paper, we investigate what impact, if any, the deterioration of household balance sheets

has on worker productivity, and whether such eﬀects mitigate or amplify the impact of economic

downturns. To study this question, we examine the output of innovative workers employed within

firms during the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.

    We focus on the output of innovative workers, as innovation has long been recognized to be a

critical driver of economic growth (Solow, 1957). In the context of the Great Recession, Hall (2015)

shows that technological advancement slowed down significantly following the crisis, and suggests

that this slowdown likely had long-lasting eﬀects on the overall economy, even after consumer

demand recovered. In addition to being important, innovative output is advantageous to study, as

unlike most forms of worker output, measures of innovative output are available at the individual

level. In particular, innovative output can be measured through patents, which credit individuals as

inventors, even when the patent is assigned to a firm. Using patent-based measures, we can not only

observe the quantity of a worker’s innovative output but also characterize the quality and nature

of this output in a very detailed manner. It is even possible to quantify this output in terms of its

value to a worker’s firm, as shown by Kogan et al. (2017). This allows us to explicitly link housing



                                                  1
wealth shocks to the economic value workers generate for their firms.

    Theory provides little guidance on whether household wealth shocks would either increase or

decrease worker productivity. On the one hand, negative wealth shocks, and the resulting potential

for financial distress, may lead individuals to work harder so as to increase job security or to make

up for lost wealth (Rizzo and Zeckhauser, 2003; Goette et al., 2004; Disney et al., 2010; Cesarini et

al., 2017). If these forces dominate, supply-side eﬀects would help mitigate the impact of economic

downturns. On the other hand, such shocks have also been shown to lead to declines in household

spending, which may include spending on things that allow a worker to be more productive at work

(Mian et al., 2013). For example, negative wealth shocks may cause workers to allocate more time

and to home production as a substitute for purchasing market goods, leaving less time and energy

for productivity in wage employment.1 Workers may also cut back spending on health, education,

and professional development. More generally, dealing with the consequences of negative wealth

shocks may be both time consuming and stressful, making workers less productive (Deaton, 2012;

Currie and Tekin, 2015; Dobbie and Song, 2015; Engelberg and Parsons, 2016). If these forces

dominate, supply-side eﬀects would amplify the impact of economic downturns. Ultimately, the

question is an empirical one.

    To study this question, we construct a novel dataset that links the output of innovative workers,

as measured by their patents, with deed records. This allows us to examine the productivity response

of individual workers who experienced major declines in housing wealth during the crisis.

    It is important that our analysis is at the individual level rather than the firm level. Firms

located in regions in which housing prices collapsed may produce less innovative output for reasons

unrelated to the financial circumstances of their employees. For example, firms in crisis-aﬀected

areas may experience a decline in demand (Mian et al., 2013), or a tightening of financial constraints

   1
     The idea that individuals substitute home production for market goods goes back to Becker (1965). Examples
of goods where it may be possible to substitute home production for market purchase include child care, home/auto
maintenance (housecleaning, lawn mowing, painting, repairs, and the like), food preparation, and financial services
such as preparation of income tax returns. A large literature explores the link between home production and the
business cycle (See, e.g., Benhabib et al., 1991; Greenwood and Hercowitz, 1991; Baxter and Jermann, 1999; Campbell
and Ludvigson, 2001). More recently, Aguiar et al. (2013) show that time spent on home production increased during
the Great Recession.


                                                        2
stemming from the decline in the value of their real estate collateral (Chaney et al., 2012). It is also

possible that firms located in crisis-aﬀected areas simply tend to be ones that had worse innovative

opportunities during this time period.

    By conducting the analysis at the individual level, we are able to compare employees working

at the same firm—who are therefore similarly aﬀected by firm-level changes in demand, borrowing

capacity, or innovative opportunities—but who are exposed to diﬀerent house price shocks. Since

some firms may have multiple divisions scattered across diﬀerent geographies, we apply an even

stricter analysis, by comparing only employees who both work at the same firm and also live in

the same metropolitan area, as defined by a census Core Based Statistical Area (CBSA).2 Despite

the fact that we compare employees living in the same metropolitan area, there remains substantial

variation in the house price shocks that they experience, because we exploit house price shocks at

the zip code level.

    Using this empirical approach, we find that negative shocks to housing wealth during the crisis

significantly aﬀect the output of innovative workers. We find that workers who experience a neg-

ative housing wealth shock produce fewer patents and patents of lower quality based on citations.

Such workers are also less likely to patent in technologies that are new to their firm, and, more

generally, their patents are less likely to draw upon information from outside their firm’s existing

knowledge base. Finally, these workers also produce narrower innovations, combining information

from fewer disparate fields. These eﬀects are strongest among those who suﬀer the largest housing

price declines. Overall, the evidence suggests that, following a housing wealth shock, workers are

less likely to successfully pursue innovative projects, particularly ones that are high impact, com-

plex, or exploratory. These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that negative wealth shocks

may lead workers to become more productive.

    To explore the robustness of these findings, we conduct even narrower comparisons within firms.

For example, we compare the relative response of individuals who, in addition to working at the


   2
     This also implies that these employees reside within the same labor market, and thus likely face similar outside
opportunities.


                                                         3
same firm and living in the same area, specialized in the same technology at the onset of the crisis.

Furthermore, we complement the patent data with data from LinkedIn, and compare workers within

the same firm and metropolitan area, who are also similar in terms of other characteristics such as

age, educational attainment, job title, house type, or neighborhood type. In all these cases, our key

results remain remarkably stable. Therefore, our findings are unlikely to be explained by sorting

of certain types of workers within a firm into more crisis-aﬀected zip codes of a given metropolitan

area.

   To evaluate whether our estimated eﬀects on patenting are economically meaningful, we use

the methodology of Kogan et al. (2017) to assign a value to each patent that workers in our data

produce. This measure is based on the stock market’s reaction to the announcement of a particular

patent grant. Using this measure, we find that workers who experience a negative housing wealth

shock do indeed produce less value for their firm during the crisis than others working at the same

firm who do not experience such a shock. Specifically, workers in the bottom quartile of house price

changes produce 15% less economic value than workers in the top quartile.

   A further question is whether the declines in individual-level output that we document translate

into declines in firm-level output. For example, firm-level output might be unaﬀected if firms were

able to simply shift work from individuals who had house price declines to those who did not.

In our view, though, such perfect substitutability is unlikely given the high degree of specialized

knowledge and expertise required for innovative work (Hall and Lerner, 2010). To tackle this

question empirically, we conduct an analysis at the firm level, comparing firms located in the

same CBSA but with diﬀerent employee-related exposure to the collapse of the housing market,

generated by diﬀerences in where firms’ employees live. We find that firms whose employees live

in more impacted zip codes have more substantial declines in innovative output than firms located

within the same CBSA whose employees live in less impacted zip codes. As discussed earlier, such

firm-level analysis suﬀers from more potential endogeneity concerns. However, these results are at

least suggestive that our well-identified individual-level results do aggregate to the firm level.

   As far as we are aware, this paper is the first to illustrate that household balance sheet shocks


                                                   4
aﬀect worker productivity. Understanding the existence and direction of this link is critical to

understanding the full scope of the eﬀects of such shocks on the economy. While determining the

precise mechanism underlying these results is more diﬃcult, we conclude by exploring this question.

In particular, we investigate whether our results appear to be driven purely by declines in household

wealth or whether debt and related financial distress issues appear to play an important role.

    The literature on housing-related financial distress shows that financial distress is usually trig-

gered by the combination of two conditions: negative home equity and a prolonged unemployment

spell (Foote et al., 2008, 2010). Therefore, individuals who are more likely to become underwater

or to become unemployed for an extended period of time are at greater risk. We find that the eﬀect

of negative housing shocks on worker productivity is stronger, precisely for those at greater risk

along either of these dimensions. In particular, we find stronger declines in innovative productivity

among workers with less accumulated home equity prior to the crisis and among workers with fewer

outside labor market opportunities based on their field of expertise.3

    There are at least two ways in which the risk of financial distress may aﬀect productivity. First,

Mian et al. (2013) show that highly levered individuals at risk of financial distress cut back on

spending. This may include decreased spending on things that allow workers to be productive in

wage employment, such as market goods that substitute for home production (Becker, 1965; Baxter

and Jermann, 1999; Aguiar et al., 2013). Second, individuals at risk of financial distress may

experience increased stress, anxiety, and distraction, which in turn may make them less productive

(Deaton, 2012; Engelberg and Parsons, 2016; Currie and Tekin, 2015; Dobbie and Song, 2015).

    As a final way of exploring the mechanism underlying our main results, we also examine whether

positive wealth shocks increase productivity in the same way that negative wealth shocks decrease

productivity. To examine the impact of positive wealth shocks, we repeat our analysis during the

boom period leading up to the crisis, between 2002 and 2007. We find no statistically significant
   3
     While the innovative workers in our sample are unlikely to be poor, they still face the possibility of financial
distress. The expansion of credit in the run-up to the crisis was not solely confined to the poorest households (e.g.,
Mian and Sufi, 2016; Foote et al., 2016; Adelino et al., 2016). As a result, higher income households also became
underwater during the crisis and were subject to the associated risk of financial distress. Foote et al. (2016) and
Adelino et al. (2016) argue that, in percentage terms, the increase in the rate of foreclosures was actually highest
among high income households.


                                                          5
relation between house price changes and innovative output during the boom. While by no means

definitive, this asymmetry is again consistent with an underlying debt-related mechanism, as neg-

ative shocks might trigger financial distress, while positive shocks lead to no change in financial

distress.

   This paper relates to several strands of the literature. A handful of recent papers have examined

the impact of local house price movements on firm investment. Chaney et al. (2012) show that

negative real estate shocks decrease collateral value and reduce the investment of public firms.

Adelino et al. (2015) show that the collateral channel is particularly important for small businesses.

Our channel is diﬀerent. We control for the collateral channel at the firm level with firm fixed eﬀects

and instead illustrate that house price movements also aﬀect worker productivity within firms.

   Another line of research explores the relationship between household leverage and labor supply

(as in Bernstein, 2015; Mulligan 2008, 2010, 2009; Herkenhoﬀ and Ohanian, 2011; and Donaldson

et al., 2015). In that literature, the focus is largely on how the decision of whether to be in the

labor force is impacted by means-tested mortgage modification programs. These programs implicitly

decrease work incentives, as those with higher income end up having higher mortgage payments.

Our focus is on individuals who are already employed and the impact of household leverage on

worker productivity within firms.

   Finally, this paper also relates to a large literature on the determinants of firm innovation,

originated by Schmookler (1962), Griliches (1957), Nelson (1959), and Arrow (1962). That literature

highlights a “top-down” view, in which firms’ profit-driven objectives determine innovation policy,

which is then implemented by employees. Accordingly, most of the work in this area has focused on

firm-level and market-level factors to explain variation in innovation levels across firms (see, e.g.,

Harhoﬀ, 1999; Aghion et al., 2005; Lerner et al., 2011; Manso, 2011; Aghion et al., 2013; Ferreira et

al., 2014; Seru, 2014; and Bernstein, 2015). In contrast, our findings also highlight the possibility

that firm innovation may follow a “bottom-up” process, wherein innovative workers are not merely

interchangeable parts, but play an important role in producing innovative.

   The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data. Section 3 details our


                                                  6
empirical strategy. Section 4 presents our results. Section 5 investigates heterogeneity and Section

6 discusses potential channels. Section 7 concludes.



2        Data

2.1       Data Sources and Sample Selection

We obtain data on all U.S. patents granted from 1976 through 2015 directly from the United States

Patent and Trademark Oﬃce (USPTO). The USPTO data provide information on the date a patent

was applied for and ultimately granted, the individual(s) credited as the patent’s inventor(s), the

firm to which the patent was originally assigned, and other patents cited as prior work. One chal-

lenge the data presents is that it lacks consistent identifiers for patent inventors and firms. In order

to identify inventors and firms over time, we rely on two large-scale disambiguation eﬀorts. The first

is an inventor disambiguation provided by Balsmeier et al. (2015). Their algorithm combines inven-

tor names, locations, co-authors, associated firms, and patent classifications to create an inventor

identifier. While Balsmeier et al. (2015) also provide a firm identifier, they state that it is much less

accurate and mainly created as a crude input for the inventor disambiguation. Therefore, for firm

disambiguation, we instead rely on the NBER patent data project. The NBER firm identifier is

based on a word frequency algorithm that ranks matches more highly if they share unusual words.

Because the NBER data end in 2006, we extend it forward based on code that they provide.4

    The USPTO patent data contain the city and state of residence for patent inventors. Inventors

also provide the USPTO with their full residential address on a signed oath as well as a patent

application data sheet (ADS). Images of at least one of these forms are generally available starting

in 2001 via the USPTO’s Patent Application Information Retrieval (PAIR) portal. We download

all of the relevant image files and apply optical character recognition (OCR) to make the text

machine-readable. Addresses are too irregular to extract consistently, however we are able to parse

out zip codes coinciding the inventor’s city of residence. To identify property owned by a patent

    4
        https://sites.google.com/site/patentdataproject/


                                                           7
inventor, we combine the patent data with CoreLogic, which tracks housing transactions in the

United States based on deed records as well as other sources. This makes it possible to construct

the full ownership history of a given house. We match inventors to houses based on first name,

last name, middle initial, city, zip code, and patent application date. This procedure yields a 52%

unique match rate. The unmatched inventors either did not own a house, purchased a house before

CoreLogic’s coverage of their county, or were unmatchable due to name spelling irregularities (e.g.,

nicknames) on their patent application and/or deed. For matched inventors, we can observe detailed

house characteristics.

   Having matched inventors to houses, we next add in data on house price movements. Most house

price indices aggregate at the city level due to the large volume of transactions needed to construct

a constant-quality index. This allows for high-frequency measurement, but at the cost of smoothing

the considerable variation that is present within a city. We are interested in comparing individuals

who work at the same establishment of a firm, but who own houses in diﬀerent local areas. Therefore,

we use a zip code level price index constructed by Bogin et al. (2016), which overcomes the volume

issue by reducing to an annual frequency. The index is based on the repeat-sales methodology and

thus measures house price movements unrelated to changes in house quality. For robustness, we

also use a similar index constructed by Zillow, which makes use of their proprietary house price

estimates for non-traded houses.5

   Together, we construct an annual worker-level panel. In each year we observe a worker’s inno-

vative output along with the location of the worker’s house and a price index associated with that

location. It should be noted that one shortcoming of the data is that we are unable to observe

certain worker characteristics during years in which the worker has zero patents. For example, if a

worker changes firms, we can only observe the change the next time the worker patents. In order

to ensure that we are studying workers who are still active and that our information about them

is not too stale, we limit our sample to individuals who, during the three years preceding the 2008

financial crisis, applied for at least one patent that was assigned to a firm. There are 321,837 such

   5
       http://www.zillow.com/research/data/


                                                 8
individuals in the USPTO data. Of these, we are able to identify a house in CoreLogic for 166,421

(52%). After requiring that other key variables are non-missing (e.g., zip code, house price index,

etc.), we are left with a final sample of 162,011 workers, working at 31,327 firms.

    Neither the USPTO data, nor the CoreLogic data, give us detailed demographic characteristics

for the workers in our sample. Therefore, we augment these data with information from LinkedIn.

Among other things, LinkedIn provides information on educational background, work history, and

job titles, even in non-patenting years. In order to match a worker in our sample with the worker’s

LinkedIn profile, we first find a set of potential profile URLs by using Google to search LinkedIn

for profiles containing the worker’s name in conjunction with variations of the names of each firm

the worker’s patents have been assigned to, keeping only top ranked-results. We then visit those

LinkedIn profile URLs and determine based on further information whether the profile appears to

be a match.6 Using this procedure, we are able to find a LinkedIn profile for 72,681 (45%) of the

workers in our sample.


2.2    Key Variables

We use patent-based measures of an individual’s innovative output that have been widely adopted

over the past two decades (Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 2002; Lanjouw et al., 1998).7 Our primary measure

of the quantity of an individual’s innovative output is the number of granted patents the individual

applied for in a given period of time. Our primary measure of the quality of a worker’s innovative

output is the number of citations the worker’s patents receive on a per patent basis. Patent citations

are important in patent filings since they serve as “property markers” delineating the scope of the

granted claims. Hall et al. (2005) illustrate that citations are a good measure of innovation quality

and economic importance. Specifically, they find that an extra citation per patent boosts a firm’s

market value by 3%. Moreover, Kogan et al. (2012) show that the stock market reaction to patent
   6
      A profile is considered a match if it was a top-ranked Google result and contains the name of the inventor and
one of the inventor’s firms. When an inventor name matches to multiple profiles based on diﬀerent firms he worked
at, firm names are prioritized as follows: (1) Multiple non-dictionary words, (2) a single non-dictionary word, (3)
acronyms (e.g. IBM), (4) a single dictionary word. We only use data from public profiles, which we view as a
non-logged-in user.
    7
      Recent examples include Lerner et al. (2011); Aghion et al. (2013); Seru (2014).


                                                         9
approvals is a strong predictor of the number of future citations a patent receives. One challenge in

measuring patent citations is that patents granted at the end of the sample period have less time to

garner citations than those granted at the beginning. In addition, citation rates vary considerably

over time and across technologies. To address both of these issues, we normalize each patent’s

citation count by the average citation count for all other patents granted in the same year and

3-digit technology class. We also construct a simple indicator variable equal to one if a patent was

in the top 10% of patents from the same year and technology class in terms of citations received.

    We further characterize the nature of a worker’s innovative output by computing patent “Orig-

inality” and “Generality” scores. We define these variables following Trajtenberg et al. (1997). In

particular:
                                                                 ni
                                                                 X
                                           Generalityi = 1             s2ij ,
                                                                   j

where sij denotes the percentage of citations received by patent i that belong to patent class j, out

of ni patent classes. Note, the sum is the Herfindahl concentration index. Thus, if a patent is cited

by subsequent patents that belong to a wide range of fields, the measure will be high, whereas if

most citations are concentrated in a few fields the measure will be low. A high generality score thus

suggests that the patent had a widespread impact, in that it influenced subsequent innovations in

a variety of fields. “Originality” is defined the same way, except that it refers to citations made.

Thus, if a patent cites previous patents that belong to a narrow set of technologies the originality

score will be low, whereas citing patents in a wide range of fields would lead to a high score. These

measures tend to be positively correlated with the number of citations made or received.8 As before,

we also normalize each patent’s generality or originality by the mean generality or originality for all

other patents granted in the same year and 3-digit technology class.

    In addition, we attempt to measure the extent to which innovative output represents explo-

ration versus exploitation from the perspective of the firm. Exploratory innovation requires new

knowledge, whereas exploitative innovation builds upon a firm’s existing knowledge (Manso, 2011).

    8
      When there are more citations, there is a mechanical tendency to cover more patent classes. To correct for this
tendency we apply a bias adjustment suggested by Hall et al. (2001).


                                                         10
To operationalize this concept more directly, we follow Brav et al. (2016), and define a patent as

“exploratory” if less than 20% of the patents it cites are not existing knowledge from the point of

view of the worker’s firm. Existing knowledge is defined as all patents the firm was granted in the

past five years as well as all patents the firm cited in the same time frame. We also follow Chen

Lin et al. (2016) and define a simple “New class” indicator variable equal to one if a patent is in a

technology class the worker’s firm has never patented in before.

   In general, projects that result in patents that are highly cited, original/general, or exploratory

are likely harder for workers to execute. Therefore, one could think of all of the measures above as

measures of project diﬃculty.


2.3   Summary Statistics

Panel A of Table 1 shows summary statistics for the various patent measures described in Section

2.2. Observations are at the worker level, and the patent measures for a given worker are based on

the worker’s output during the five years following the onset of the crisis (2008–2012). A patent is

associated with a year based on its application date, not the date it was ultimately granted. Panel

B shows the correlation between the diﬀerent measures of innovative worker productivity. In almost

all cases the correlations between the diﬀerent measures are fairly low, and this is not surprising

given the diﬀerent approaches taken to construct them. There are a few exceptions, however. For

example, as expected, a top patent is also a highly cited patent, and a top patent is also likely to be

a very general one as well, that is, cited by a broad set of technologies. This confirms the intuition

that highly cited patents are also broad patents, as measured by generality and originality, and also

likely to be defined as exploratory patents, as discussed above.

   Panel C shows summary statistics for characteristics of workers in our sample as of 2007. As

one might expect, we find that patent inventors are highly educated with 97% holding a bachelor’s

degree, 30% holding a master’s degree, and 28% holding a PhD. The average worker in our sample is

approximately 41 years old, with 16 years of work experience, 6 years of which was at their pre-crisis




                                                  11
(2007) firm. Approximately 48% held a senior position prior to the crisis.9

    Panel D shows summary statistics for characteristics of the houses owned by workers in our

sample as of 2007. The average house in our sample is nearly 30 years old, three thousand square

feet in size, and had been purchased just less than 8 years ago. In terms of price movements, the

average house was in a zip code where prices went up 22% from the end of 2004 to the end of

2007, and down 16% from the end of 2007 to the end of 2012. Panel E shows the distribution of

workers across the top 20 most populated fields in our sample. Workers are assigned to a field using

the modal NBER technology subcategory for the patents they applied for from 2005 through 2007.

The most common field is computer hardware and software, representing 11.8% of the workers in

our sample. Communications is in the second most common category with 10.21% of the workers.

Other common fields include drugs, chemicals, and semi-conductor devices.



3    Empirical Strategy

Our primary interest is in how changes in house prices associated with the 2008 financial crisis

aﬀect the innovative output of workers. Because the 2008 crisis is a one-time event that aﬀects all

individuals in our sample simultaneously, we rely on cross-sectional variation in which we compare

innovative output across workers living in zip codes that experienced diﬀerential house price shocks.

To fix ideas, we begin by considering the following estimating equation:



                                    yi,post = 4%HP z,post + yi,pre + ✏,                                       (1)



where i indexes individuals, and z indexes zip codes. The pre-period is defined as 2005–2007 and

the post period is defined as 2008–2012. The variable yi,post represents the various patent-based

measures of innovative output discussed in Section 2.2, including the total number of patents pro-

duced by individual i, the number of citations per patent, etc. The variable 4%HP z,post represents


    9
      We define a worker to have a senior position if the worker’s title contains any of the following words: CEO,
chair, chairman, chief, CTO, director, executive, head, management, manager, partner, president, principal, VP.


                                                       12
the percent change in the house price index during the post period for zip code z in which individual

i owned a house as of 2007.

    Equation 1 poses several potential concerns, as the location of a worker’s house is not randomly

assigned. For example, it may be that those who live in harder hit areas tend to work at firms

that are more aﬀected by the crisis. One might naturally expect that to be the case as firms in

crisis-aﬀected areas are likely to experience a decline in local demand. It should be noted, however,

that the innovative firms we study generally serve a national or global market. Another reason

local house prices could aﬀect firm innovation is that a decline in local house prices may reduce

borrowing capacity for firms that rely on real estate collateral (Chaney et al., 2012). Finally, it is also

possible that firms located in crisis-aﬀected areas simply tend to be ones that had worse innovative

opportunities during this time period for reasons unrelated to the decline in local house prices.

To address these various issues, we begin by including firm fixed eﬀects in all of our estimations.

With the inclusion of firm fixed eﬀects, we are identifying oﬀ of individuals who worked at the

same firm but lived in areas with diﬀerential house price declines during the crisis. Such individuals

are arguably similarly aﬀected by firm level changes in demand, borrowing capacity, or innovative

opportunities.

    However, it remains possible that firms have divisions in multiple regions. In this case, divisions

of the same firm that are in harder hit regions may tend to be the ones that are aﬀected by

changes in local demand or changes in innovative opportunities. To address this issue, we refine our

specification even further by including firm by core based statistical area (CBSA) fixed eﬀects.10

Assuming that the firms in our sample have only one establishment in the area surrounding a given

city, these fixed eﬀects will be equivalent to establishment fixed eﬀects. Note that, with firm by

CBSA fixed eﬀects, we are identifying oﬀ of workers who worked at the same firm and owned a

house in the same general area, but who experienced diﬀerential price declines in their respective
   10
     CBSAs are comprised of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSA) and Micropolitan Statistical Areas (µSAs).
Essentially they are counties surrounding urban clusters both large (>50,000) and small (10,000–50,000). Not every
county in the United States is located within a CBSA, as CBSAs do not include rural areas situated far from a
significant urban cluster. Most of the individuals in our sample do reside in a Metropolitan or Micropolitan Statistical
Area, however for those who do not, we define their local area simply by county. Thus, for rural individuals, our
CBSA fixed eﬀects are eﬀectively county fixed eﬀects.


                                                          13
zip codes.

   This approach provides several advantages. First, the workers we compare are likely to be

similar, as they operate in the same labor market, and are facing similar employment opportunities

outside of their firm. These workers are also likely to be similar given that they chose to live in the

same general area. Finally, since they likely work in the same establishment of the same firm, they

will likely be subject to the same division-level innovation shocks. Following the discussion above,

in our baseline analysis we estimate equations of the form:



                             yi,post = 4%HP z,post + yi,pre + ⌘f,c + ✏,                            (2)



where the key change relative to Equation 1 above is the addition of ⌘f,c , which represents firm by

CBSA fixed eﬀects. Note that with firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects, we will only have power to estimate

the key coeﬃcient,    , if there is suﬃcient variation in house price shocks experienced by workers

in the same firm and CBSA. We estimate that roughly 50% of the zip code level price variation

during the crisis occurred within CBSA. Figure 1 provides evidence that such variation is indeed

present in the data. Panel A shows the distribution of housing price dispersion across diﬀerent

metropolitan areas. Darker areas represent CBSAs with higher price dispersion. Moreover, Panel B

shows that the workers in our sample also tend to live in such metropolitan areas with high housing

price dispersion.

   Even under this specification, however, one may worry that firms may have multiple establish-

ments within a metropolitan area, perhaps focusing on diﬀerent technologies. While this is unlikely

to be the case, we can provide a further refinement to our specification. In robustness tests, we show

that all our results hold with firm by CBSA by technology class fixed eﬀects. By including these

fixed eﬀects, we essentially compare the innovative output of two workers who work at the same

firm, reside in the same CBSA, and patent in the same technologies, but who experience diﬀerent

house price shocks during the crisis. The technology classes are based on the USPTO classification

scheme. This classification scheme is comprised of approximately 400 diﬀerent categories and is


                                                  14
thus very detailed. For example, just within the “Data Processing” area, there are diﬀerent classes

that capture “Artificial Intelligence,” “Vehicles and Navigation,” “Generic Control Systems,” and

“Database and File Management.”

   Still, it remains possible that even within the same firm and CBSA, diﬀerent types of workers sort

into neighborhoods that are diﬀerentially exposed to the crisis. Such sorting could bias our results

to the extent that those individuals selecting into neighborhoods that were hardest hit by the crisis,

were also those who decreased (or increased) their innovative output during the crisis for reasons

unrelated to their house price decline. To address these concerns, we run a battery of robustness tests

controlling for additional fixed eﬀects which address potential selection stories. These additional

fixed eﬀects reflect both worker characteristics as well as zip code level neighborhood characteristics.

As an example, to address the concern that younger workers tend to systematically live in the city

center, while older workers live in the suburbs, we include firm by CBSA by age cohort fixed eﬀects.

To address the concern that higher-wage earners sort into richer neighborhoods, we include firm by

CBSA by zip code income fixed eﬀects. Section 4.3 provides greater detail on these specifications

and discusses a variety of other such robustness tests. Our results remain unchanged with the

inclusion of these controls.

   Finally, to further address the concern that our results are driven by sorting of diﬀerent types

of workers into diﬀerent zip codes within a CBSA, we take advantage of the fact that, within a

zip code, the eﬀect of the same house price shock on innovative output may be larger for some

subgroups relative to others. For example, the literature on housing-related financial distress shows

that distress is usually triggered by the combination of two conditions: negative home equity and a

prolonged unemployment spell (Foote et al., 2008, 2010). Therefore, individuals who are more likely

to become underwater or to become unemployed for an extended period of time are at greater risk.

Following this reasoning, the same house price shock may be more important for those who bought

their house during the boom and thus accumulated less home equity prior to the crisis. Similarly,

the same shock may be more important for workers who face a thin outside labor market based on




                                                  15
their field of expertise. Motivated by these observations, we estimate variants of Equation 2:



       yi,post = 4%HP z,post ⇥ Characteristici + Characteristici + yi,pre + ⌘f + ⌘z + ✏,          (3)



where Characteristic is a worker level characteristic such as an indicator for whether the worker

bought their house during the boom, or an indicator for whether the worker specialized in a tech-

nology that is not widely-used. This specification allows us to test for heterogeneity in the eﬀect

of house price shocks. An important additional benefit of this specification is that it also allows

us to include zip code fixed eﬀects, ⌘z , which controls for diﬀerences among workers who choose

to live in diﬀerent zip codes. While the main eﬀect of 4%HP is subsumed by the zip code fixed

eﬀects, we can estimate the coeﬃcient       on the interaction term. In this case,    represents the

diﬀerential eﬀect of house price shocks for those with Characteristic = 1 relative to those with

Characteristic = 0. Thus, we can control for unobservable diﬀerences among workers who choose

to live in diﬀerent zip codes by examining whether workers who live in the same zip code respond

diﬀerently to the same house price shock.



4     Results

4.1   Main Findings

We begin in Table 2 by estimating variants of Equation 2. Standard errors are double clustered by

firm and zip code. One is added to all logged variables that include zeros. In columns (1)–(2), we

first examine the eﬀect of changes in local house prices on the number of patents a worker produces.

We include the number of patents produced in the pre-crisis period as a control to capture changes

in productivity relative to the pre-crisis baseline. In addition, we also include firm by CBSA fixed

eﬀects, meaning that we identify oﬀ of variation from workers who work at the same firm and own

a house in the same area, but live in diﬀerent zip codes. Comparing such workers further helps to

minimize selection concerns, as these individuals are likely to be similar. In column (1) we estimate



                                                 16
a positive coeﬃcient that is statistically significant at the 1% level. This indicates that a greater

decline in local house prices where a worker lives is strongly associated with lower patenting output.

In column (2) we also include as an additional control the change in house prices that a worker’s

zip code experienced leading up to the crisis. Our main coeﬃcient of interest changes little when

controlling for house price appreciation during the run up to the crisis, and in fact, we find that

pre-crisis price changes have no statistically significant relation to patenting during the post-crisis

period. Therefore, our results do not seem to be driven by selection of certain types of workers

into more “bubbly” areas within a CBSA. The diﬀerences we find only coincide with ex-post price

movements, which were presumably hard to predict and thus to select on ex-ante. As will be shown

in Section 4.3, we also find that our estimates remain similar after controlling for additional worker

and house characteristics, which further cuts against a selection story.

   In columns (3)–(4) of Table 2 we examine the eﬀect of house price declines on patent quality

as captured by citations per patent. We again estimate a positive coeﬃcient on the change in local

house prices in a worker’s zip code, significant at the 1% level. Thus, not only do house price

declines lead to a reduction in the quantity of patents produced, but the quality of those patents

also appears to be lower. Finally, in columns (5)–(6) we find very similar results when patent quality

is instead measured simply as the number of patents produced that are in the top 10% in terms of

citations relative to other patents granted in the same year and technology class.

   To explore how the eﬀects change with the intensity of the house price declines, in Figure 2 we

separate our house price change variable into ten decile indicator variables and repeat the analysis,

letting the top decile (highest percentage change) be the omitted category. For context, mean

percentage changes in house price by decile are shown in Appendix Figure A.1. Figure 2 shows

that the results are strongest in the hardest hit areas and that the eﬀect monotonically declines,

for the most part, as the size of the housing price decline decreases. This figure also demonstrates

that the eﬀects are economically as well as statistically significant. For example, workers in the

bottom quartile of house price changes are approximately 6% less productive in terms of patent

output than workers in the top quartile, while workers in the bottom decile are approximately 9%


                                                  17
less productive. Similarly, those in the bottom quartile or decile are also less productive in terms

of citations, experiencing a 5% or 7% larger decline, respectively.

   In Table 3 we begin to investigate the nature of innovations produced by workers living in areas

diﬀerentially aﬀected by the crisis, focusing first on generality and originality. As discussed in

Section 2.2, a high generality score indicates that the patent influenced subsequent innovations in a

variety of fields; a high originality score indicates that the patent made use of prior knowledge from

a wide variety of fields. We find that workers in zip codes with larger price declines also produce

less general and less original patents in the post-crisis period.

   Finally, in Table 4 we further investigate whether the patents of workers that experience larger

house price declines during the crisis become less exploratory in the sense that they rely more heavily

on the existing knowledge of their firm. In columns (1)–(2) we find that larger house price declines

are associated with a reduction in the tendency to patent in a technology class that is new to a

worker’s firm. As discussed in Section 2.2, we define a patent to be exploratory if less than 20%

percent of the patent’s citations are to other patents granted to their firm or cited by their firm in

recent years. Consistent with the idea that workers pursue less exploration when they experience

a negative shock to their outside wealth, we find in columns (3)–(4) that those living in harder hit

zip codes produce fewer exploratory patents. Since all of the results are within firm, they cannot be

driven simply by a change in firm policy away from exploration during the crisis for firms located

in harder hit regions.

   As illustrated in Panels (c) through (f) of Figure 2, the eﬀect of housing prices on originality,

generality, and exploration is again strongest in the hardest hit areas and is economically significant.

Moreover, the eﬀect monotonically declines, for the most part, as the size of the housing price decline

decreases.

   Overall, the results suggest that following a housing wealth shock, workers become less produc-

tive, particularly with respect to projects that are high impact, complex, or exploratory in nature.

Moreover, workers who are most severely aﬀected by the housing shock adjust their innovative

projects most strongly. These results are inconsistent with the hypothesis that negative wealth


                                                  18
shocks may lead workers to become more productive.


4.2    Individuals Remaining at the Same Firm

One potential explanation is that the changes in innovative output that we document arise from

periods of unemployment, or transitions to diﬀerent firms. In fact, it might be the case that those

who experience a negative house price shock move to less innovative firms. To explore whether our

results are driven by individuals who separate from their pre-crisis employer, we repeat our baseline

analysis among individuals who remain at the same firm. We identify workers as “stayers” if either

(1) they are observed patenting at the same firm following the end our sample period, or (2) they

were still employed at that firm following the end of our sample period according to their LinkedIn

profile.

    If our baseline results are driven by workers who separate from their pre-crisis employer and

potentially sort into diﬀerent types of new firms, we would expect to find no eﬀect among stayers.

However, in contrast to this view, we find that our main results hold for the workers that remained

in the same firm in the post-crisis period as well. The results of this exercise are presented in Table

5. We find that stayers who experienced a decline in housing prices produce fewer patents as well

as patents that are less cited, less original, less general, and less exploratory in nature. Thus, the

changes in productivity occur for workers who remain at the same firm and are not due to transitions

to unemployment or to less innovative firms.11


4.3    Selection Concerns

As discussed in Section 3, concerns about selection issues motivate our empirical design. Specifically,

potential unobservable diﬀerences between firms, and across geographic regions, lead us to include

firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects in the baseline specifications. With these fixed eﬀects, we are eﬀectively

comparing individuals who work at the same firm and reside in the same metropolitan area. In this

  11
      In a related test, we also find similar results when we condition on patenting at any firm after the onset of the
crisis. That is, even among those who continued patenting, those who experienced a larger house price decline were
less productive.


                                                          19
section, we explore the possibility that diﬀerent types of workers within the same firm select into

diﬀerent types of neighborhoods within the same CBSA. Importantly, even if workers do select into

neighborhoods based on their characteristics, this would not necessarily explain our results. It would

also have to be the case that, among those with similar productivity in the pre-crisis period, the

types who select into neighborhoods that declined also had lower productivity during the crisis for

reasons unrelated to house prices. Nonetheless, we attempt to address such concerns by conducting

even narrow comparisons among workers within firms.


4.3.1   Technology

One potential concern is that we might be comparing individuals who work at the same firm and live

in the same CBSA, but who do not work in the same division of the firm. If, for some reason, those

who live in more crisis-aﬀected areas also tend to work in divisions experiencing greater declines

in innovation for unrelated reasons, that would bias our estimates. To address this possibility, we

include firm by CBSA by worker technology class fixed eﬀects in our regressions. The results are

shown in Row 2 of Table 6, Panel A. We define a worker’s technology class to be the modal 3-

digit class of the worker’s patents in the pre-crisis period (2005–2007). This specification is very

conservative in that it only identifies oﬀ of variation from individuals who work at the same firm,

specialize in the same narrow technology class, and live in the same CBSA. Even under this very

stringent specification, we estimate similar eﬀects as before, which are presented in Row 1 for

convenience.


4.3.2   Neighborhood Characteristics

Next, we compare workers who not only work at the same firm and live in the same CBSA, but who

also live in neighborhoods with similar characteristics. The advantage of narrowing the comparison

group in this way is that workers who live in similar neighborhoods are also more likely to be similar

along other dimensions we cannot observe. The first neighborhood characteristic we consider is

average income in a worker’s zip code, based on the 2000 census. In Row 3 of Table 6, Panel A, we


                                                 20
sort workers into zip code income quartiles within each CBSA, and then include firm by CBSA by

zip code income quartile fixed eﬀects in our regressions. These regressions compare two individuals

who work at the same firm, live in the same CBSA, and live in zip codes within that CBSA with

similar mean income levels. The next neighborhood characteristic we consider is the average number

of children per household in the worker’s zip code, again based on the 2000 census. In Row 4, we

include firm by CBSA by zip code family size quartile fixed eﬀects. The census also categorizes

zip codes in terms of how urban they are. In Row 5, we include firm by CBSA by zip code urban

measure quartile fixed eﬀects.

   Finally, we also make use of the fact that we observe the square footage of a worker’s home from

CoreLogic. In Row 6, we include firm by CBSA by square-footage quartile fixed eﬀects. In all cases,

we find similar results, even in these narrower comparison groups. These results help to address

potential concerns that workers who diﬀered in terms of income or family size may have selected

into harder hit zip codes and may also have been less productive during the crisis for unrelated

reasons.


4.3.3      Worker Characteristics

Next, we directly explore various worker characteristics that may be associated with selection into

diﬀerent zip codes within a CBSA. First, for each worker, we calculate experience as the number of

years, as of 2007, since the worker’s first patent. In Row 7 of Table 6, Panel A, we include firm by

CBSA by experience quartile fixed eﬀects in our regressions.

   Our patent data does not provide information regarding other worker characteristics such as age,

education, or job title. We therefore use the data from LinkedIn described earlier to compare workers

who are similar along these dimensions. While we only have LinkedIn data for approximately half

our sample, our baseline results remain similar in this subsample, a shown in Row 1 of Table 6,

Panel B. In Row 2 of Table 6, Panel B, we in include firm by CBSA by age quartiles fixed eﬀects in

our regressions. In Row 3 we include firm by CBSA by education fixed eﬀects. In Row 4 we include

firm by CBSA by senior position fixed eﬀects.


                                                 21
    In all specifications, the estimated eﬀects are similar to the baseline results. Again, these results

help to address potential concerns that workers who diﬀered in terms of experience, age, education,

or job seniority, may have selected into harder hit zip codes and may also have been less productive

during the crisis for unrelated reasons. While we do not argue that workers select into neighborhoods

randomly, the above analysis suggests that such sorting is unlikely to explain our results.


4.4    Robustness Tests

In this section, we perform a number of additional tests to further explore the robustness of the

results.


Excluding 2008-2009 Patent Grants

One potential concern is that the patenting process takes time and our results may, therefore, reflect

research initiated and/or completed prior to the start of the crisis. It should be noted that we base

the timing of patents on their application date, not their grant date. Thus, the time it takes to

process a patent application should not aﬀect our results. It is possible though that there is a

lag between when a project is completed and when a patent associated with the project is applied

for. However, it would not be in a firm’s interest to delay applying for a patent associated with

a completed project, as competitors may patent the same innovation during the period of delay.

Another possibility is that some patents applied for after the onset of the crisis were associated with

projects that were completed during that time period, but which were initiated earlier. However, to

the extent that these projects were not completed prior to the onset of the crisis, they may still have

been aﬀected by wealth shocks to individuals leading the projects. Moreover, past work provides

evidence that it generally takes less than a year for a project to result in a patent application (Hall

et al., 1986).

   Perhaps more importantly, even if there is measurement error in our measures of post-crisis

innovative output, this would not explain our results, as such measurement error would likely be

uncorrelated with house price movements of workers within the same firm and CBSA. Nonetheless,


                                                   22
we also re-run our main specification only including patents in the post-crisis period that were

applied for after 2009. The results are reported in Appendix Table A.1. As can be seen, all of our

results remain similar.


Shorter Time Horizons

We also verify that our baseline results are driven by the declines in housing prices during the

crisis rather than by the subsequent recovery. We do this by changing the time horizon over which

house prices changes are measured. In our baseline specification, we define post-crisis house price

movements based on changes from the end of 2007 to the end of 2012. In Appendix Table A.2 we

instead define post-crisis house price movements based on changes from the end of 2007 to the end

of 2010. In Appendix Table A.3 we only consider price movements through the end of 2008. In

both cases, we find similar results. Moreover, in Appendix Table A.4, we also find similar results

when we examine the eﬀect of price movements through the end of 2008 on patent applications after

2009.


Alternative Price Measures

Another possible concern is that our results may be sensitive to how we define zip code level house

price changes. To address this, in addition to the house price index provided by Bogin et al. (2016),

we also use a zip code level price index provided by Zillow. The results are reported in Appendix

Table A.5. All of our results remain similar.


Firm Size

It is also possible that our results are driven by individuals working at only a few large firms. To

explore whether this is the case, in Appendix Table A.6, we split the sample based on firm size.

In particular, we run our main specification for only individuals working at firms with less than

1000 innovative workers, at firms with less than 100 innovative workers, at firms with less than 50

innovative workers, at firms with less than 30 innovative workers, and at firms with less than 10


                                                 23
innovative workers. In all of these subsamples, we continue to find similar results.


4.5    Innovative Output and Firm Value

Our evidence thus far illustrates that workers who experience significant housing price declines

are less likely to successfully pursue innovative projects, particularly ones that are high impact,

complex, or exploratory in nature. We have shown these eﬀects using a variety of detailed patent-

based measures. However, a natural question is whether such eﬀects translate into an impact on

firm value. Kogan et al. (2017) illustrate that the median patent value to firms is substantial ($3.2

million in 1982 dollars) and its economic value is strongly correlated with its scientific value, as

measured by patent citations. Given that we find that workers aﬀected by the collapse of the

housing market produce fewer patents, and also patents that are less cited, it is plausible that they

create less value for their firms as well.

    To explore this question more directly, we use a measure of patent value developed by Kogan

et al. (2017). This measure is based on the stock market reaction to the announcement of a patent

grant. While the Kogan et al. (2017) measure has been made publicly available for patents granted

through 2010, it does not cover all the patents underlying our outcome variables (i.e., patents applied

for through 2012 and eventually granted). We therefore extend the Kogan et al. (2017) measure

through the end our sample period using the same methodology.12

    In Table 7 we repeat our baseline analysis using the Kogan et al. (2017) measure. Specifically,

the outcome variable that we examine is the log of the total value of the patents a worker applied

for in the post-crisis period. Of course, because we only observe a stock price reaction for publicly

traded firms, we must restrict the sample to employees of such firms for this analysis.13 As can

be seen in columns (1) and (2), we find similar results for patent value. Workers who experience a

significant decline in housing wealth produce less value for their firms compared to peers in the same

firm and metropolitan area. Moreover, for a given decline in housing wealth, the percentage decline

  12
     We verify that in the overlapping sample, we are able to replicate the Kogan et al. (2017) measure closely.
Regressing our version on the original yields a coeﬃcient of 0.99.
  13
     Appendix Table A.7 shows that our baseline results remain similar in this subsample.


                                                      24
in the value of a worker’s output is larger than the percentage decline in our other measures. Thus,

if anything, our baseline results appear to understate the value implications of house price declines.

In columns (3) and (4) we repeat the analysis, but now include Firm by CBSA by Technology class

fixed eﬀects. The results remain similar even when comparing workers within the same firm that

specialized in the same technology at the onset of the crisis. Finally, Figure 3 shows graphically

that the eﬀect of house price declines on the value of a worker’s output is also monotonic, as with

our other measures, and economically meaningful. For example, workers in the bottom quartile of

house price changes produce output worth approximately 15% less than workers in the top quartile.


4.6   Aggregation to the Firm Level

Given that workers who suﬀer declines in the value of their house also produce less innovative

output, a further question is whether such declines in worker-level output translate into declines in

firm-level innovative output. It is possible that firm-level output would be unaﬀected if firms were

able to simply shift work from individuals who had house price declines to individuals who did not.

On the other hand, it may be diﬃcult to eﬀectively shift work among employees, particularly due

to the high degree of specialized knowledge and expertise required for the type of innovative work

that we study (Hall and Lerner, 2010).

   Ideally, we would like to explore whether our baseline results aggregate to the firm level. Un-

fortunately, there is a trade-oﬀ between aggregation and identification in this setting. That is,

firm-level analysis suﬀers from more severe endogeneity issues than worker-level analysis that com-

pares productivity within firms. As discussed earlier, firms located in more crisis-aﬀected areas may

produce less innovative output for reasons unrelated to the house price declines of their employees.

For example, such firms may suﬀer greater declines in demand, borrowing capacity, or innovative

opportunities.

   Nonetheless, to the extent possible, we attempt to shed light on whether our baseline results

are likely to aggregate. To do so, we measure a firm’s employee-related exposure to the crisis as

the average house price decline of a firm’s pre-crisis innovative employees, based on where those


                                                 25
employees owned houses in 2007. From the patent data, we can observe the location of firms

separately from that of their employees. We therefore compare firms located in the same CBSA,

but with diﬀerent employee-related exposure to the crisis.

    Specifically, we estimate firm-level regressions analogous to Equation 1, with CBSA fixed eﬀects

based on firm locations. The outcome variables in this analysis represent the innovative output of the

entire firm, regardless of the worker credited with the output. In particular, these outcome variables

include the output of all innovative workers in a firm, including those who were not matched to a

house prior to the crisis, as well as those who joined the firm after the crisis. Thus, if firms’ existing

(or new) employees are able to compensate for those suﬀering from house price declines, we would

not expect to find an eﬀect at the firm level. However, as shown in Appendix Table A.8, we do

continue to find similar results at the firm level.

    Of course, one could argue that, even among firms located within the same CBSA, those with

employees residing in more crisis-aﬀected zip codes may be diﬀerent in other ways that account for

their lower innovative output during the crisis. Nonetheless, we view these results as quite suggestive

that our baseline results do likely aggregate to the firm level.



5    Heterogeneity

In this section, we explore whether the eﬀects we have documented vary with how much home

equity workers had accumulated prior to the onset of the crisis. We also explore whether the

eﬀects vary with workers’ outside labor market opportunities. We have several motivations for

this analysis. First, as discussed in Section 3, studying heterogeneity allows us to include zip code

fixed eﬀects, which provides yet another way to control for worker sorting within metropolitan

areas and the resulting selection concerns. Second, studying heterogeneity allows us to document

various ameliorating factors for the impact of housing price declines on worker output, which may

be of interest to both market participants and policymakers. Finally, the heterogeneity analysis

provides evidence on the channel through which our results operate, particularly given that both



                                                      26
housing equity and employment opportunities are highlighted in the mortgage default literature as

two prominent factors aﬀecting household financial distress (e.g., Foote et al., 2008, 2010).


5.1    The Impact of Housing Equity

We begin by investigating whether the strength of our baseline results varies with the amount of

housing equity the worker entered the crisis with. We proxy for this by exploiting the timing of

when workers bought their houses. Workers who bought their house during the boom (just before

the crisis) are more likely to have ended up with low or negative home equity after the crash, since

they had little time to accumulate equity and prices were likely to have been particularly inflated

(while leverage was cheap). In contrast, those who bought earlier are more likely to have retained

and accumulated significant equity.14

    We estimate Equation 3, this time interacting house price shocks with an indicator equal to one

if the worker bought their house prior to 2004. As highlighted in Section 3, we are also able to

include zip code fixed eﬀects in this specification, which further helps to address selection concerns.

Essentially, we can control for unobservable diﬀerences among workers who choose to live in diﬀerent

zip codes by taking advantage of the fact that two workers who live in the same zip code may respond

diﬀerently to the same house price shock, due to having diﬀerent accumulated home equity.15 Table

8 shows that across almost all of our outcomes, we estimate a significant negative coeﬃcient on

the interaction term. This indicates that the eﬀect of house price movements is indeed smaller for

workers who bought their house earlier, and thus were likely to have accumulated more equity.




  14
      We do not observe home equity in the CoreLogic data. Moreover, even if we could observe home equity, it would
partly reflect the down payment (and accelerated payment) decisions of home owners, which are endogenous. For
example, loan-to-value at origination may be correlated with unobserved factors, such as risk aversion, which may
also impact innovative output. Therefore, we prefer to simply proxy for home equity with the timing of the purchase.
   15
      Note that this is a more demanding specification than the one used in previous results where we incorporate
firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects. We can control for zip code fixed eﬀects in this specification because we estimate the
interaction of housing price changes with home ownership duration. We cannot control for zip code fixed eﬀects to
estimate the direct eﬀect of housing prices changes. The results in this section hold also when we simply control for
firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects. However, due to power limitations, we are not able to include firm by zip code fixed
eﬀects. However, we are able to include separate firm fixed eﬀects and zip code fixed eﬀects.


                                                         27
5.2    The Impact of Outside Labor Market Opportunities

Next, we examine how our results depend on workers’ outside labor market opportunities. To do

this, we classify workers as specializing in widely-used technologies or narrowly-used technologies.

Presumably, there is a thicker labor market for innovative workers specializing in widely-used tech-

nologies, making it easier for them to find another job if necessary. Specifically, we define a worker’s

field of specialty based on the modal technology class of the worker’s patents in the three years

leading up to the crisis. We classify a technology class as popular if it is in the top quartile in terms

of the total number of innovative workers in the population specializing in that technology over the

same time period.16

    We then estimate Equation 3, which interacts house price shocks with the popular technology

indicator, which proxies for labor market thickness. Again, we are also able to include zip code

fixed eﬀects in this specification, which further helps to address selection concerns. Table 9 shows

the results. Across almost all of our outcomes, we estimate a significant negative coeﬃcient on

the interaction term. This indicates that the eﬀect of house price movements is indeed smaller

for workers who are facing a greater set of outside labor market opportunities. We discuss the

implications of both of these heterogeneity results in the following section.



6     Discussion of Potential Channels

The primary contribution of this paper is to show a link between household balance sheet shocks

and worker productivity. Understanding the existence and direction of this link is critical to under-

standing the full scope of the eﬀects of such shocks on firms and the economy as a whole. While

determining the precise channel through which the eﬀects that we document operate is more diﬃcult,

we conclude with a discussion of potential channels that appear to fit with our findings.

    It is possible that the declines in productivity that we observe are driven purely by declines in

household wealth. Alternatively, debt and associated financial distress issues may play an important
   16
      We find similar results if we classify a technology class as popular based on the number of patents in that
technology class or the number of firms with any patents in that technology class.


                                                       28
role in driving the results. Our heterogeneity results appear more consistent with the presence of

a debt-related channel. The literature on housing-related financial distress shows that distress is

usually triggered by two conditions in combination: negative home equity and a prolonged unem-

ployment spell (Foote et al., 2008, 2010). Therefore, individuals who are more likely to become

underwater or to become unemployed for an extended period of time are at greater risk. Our het-

erogeneity results show that the eﬀect of negative housing shocks on worker productivity is stronger

precisely for those at greater risk of financial distress along either of these dimensions.

    While the innovative workers in our sample are unlikely to be poor, they still face the possibility

of financial distress. The expansion of credit in the run-up to the crisis was not solely confined to

the poorest households (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2016; Foote et al., 2016; Adelino et al., 2016). The

mortgage debt of high-income households also significantly expanded between the years 2001–2007.

As a result, high-income households also became underwater during the crisis and were subject to

the associated risk of financial distress. Indeed, while empirical work has shown that the level of

foreclosures was highest among low-income, subprime borrowers, the rate of foreclosures increased

substantially for both low-income and high-income households during the crisis. Foote et al. (2016)

and Adelino et al. (2016) argue that, in percentage terms, the increase in the rate of foreclosures

was actually highest among high-income households.

    There are at least two ways in which the risk of financial distress may aﬀect productivity. First,

highly levered individuals at risk of financial distress may cut back on spending, as shown by Mian

et al. (2013). This may include decreased spending on things that are important for productivity in

wage employment, such as market goods that substitute for home production. In addition, beyond

home production, workers may also cut back spending on other inputs into their productivity, such

as health, education, and professional development. The idea that individuals substitute home

production for market goods goes back to Becker (1965).17 A large literature explores the link

between home production and the business cycle (See, e.g., Benhabib et al., 1991; Greenwood and

  17
     Examples of goods where it may be possible to substitute home production for market purchase include child
care, home/auto maintenance (housecleaning, lawn mowing, painting, repairs, and the like), food preparation, and
financial services such as preparation of income tax returns.


                                                      29
Hercowitz, 1991; Baxter and Jermann, 1999; Campbell and Ludvigson, 2001). More recently, Aguiar

et al. (2013) show that time spent on home production increased during the Great Recession.

    Moreover, there is substantial empirical evidence that mortgage default is costly for households.

A family experiencing foreclosure likely has to incur significant moving costs due to the forced

relocation. Children may be uprooted from their current school and could suﬀer educationally

(Been et al., 2011). Credit scores are negatively and persistently impacted by a foreclosure, which

can adversely aﬀect future employment outcomes (Brevoort and Cooper, 2013). Finally, households

may wish to avoid default to the extent that they view it as a significant personal failing or immoral,

or to the extent that there is a social stigma attached to defaulting on one’s debt obligations.18

    Given such costs, a second possible channel is that individuals at risk of financial distress may

experience increased stress, anxiety, and distraction, which in turn may make them less productive.

Indeed, Currie and Tekin (2015) find that the risk of housing-related financial distress during the

crisis is associated with declines in health. Dobbie and Song (2015) also finds that, in general,

financial distress has negative health consequences. Using daily survey data from Gallup, Deaton

(2012) finds that Americans reported sharp increases in worry and stress, and sharp decreases in their

life evaluation and positive aﬀect during the financial crisis. Engelberg and Parsons (2016) show

that there is a strong inverse link between daily stock returns and hospital admissions, particularly

for psychological conditions such as anxiety, panic disorder, and major depression. Given the above

evidence, it is plausible that the risk of financial distress may directly lead workers to become less

productive, especially on new, highly exploratory projects which are cognitively intensive. This is

exactly what we find.

    As a final way of exploring the mechanism underlying our main results, we also examine whether

positive wealth shocks increase productivity in the same way that negative wealth shocks decrease

productivity. To examine the impact of positive wealth shocks, we repeat our analysis during the

boom period leading up to the crisis, between 2002 and 2007. As shown in Table 10, we find no


   18
      Using survey data, Guiso et al. (2009) find that, after relocation costs, the most important determinants of
strategic default are moral and social considerations.


                                                       30
statistically significant relation between house price changes and innovative output during the boom.

While by no means definitive, this asymmetry is again consistent with an underlying debt-related

mechanism, as negative shocks might trigger financial distress, while positive shocks lead to no

change in financial distress.



7    Conclusion

In this paper, we investigate whether household level shocks impact worker output in firms through

the lens of technological innovation. The household level shocks that we focus on are changes in

housing wealth experienced by innovative workers during the financial crisis. Throughout the paper,

we compare individuals who worked at the same firm and lived in the same metropolitan area, but

experienced diﬀerent housing wealth declines during the crisis. Using this empirical strategy, we find

that workers who experience a negative shock to housing wealth are less likely to successfully pursue

innovative projects, particularly ones that are high impact, complex, or exploratory in nature. Using

the methodology of Kogan et al. (2017), we show that these declines in innovative output translate

into lower economic value for the firm.

    Our findings are most consistent with the hypothesis that negative housing wealth shocks lead

to decreased innovative output due to heightened concerns among workers about the possibility

of mortgage default. Consistent with this hypothesis we find that the eﬀects are less pronounced

among workers that are at a lower risk of facing mortgage default. That is, we find that housing

wealth shocks particularly aﬀect the productivity of workers who had little equity in their house

before the crisis and workers with fewer outside labor market opportunities. These results may

also be of interest to policymakers concerned with macro-prudential policy related to the housing

market, such as the appropriate level of loan-to-value requirements.

    Finally, our results also shed light on the origins of innovation within firms. While much of the

innovation literature emphasizes the importance of firm level factors along with the strategy set by

top executives, the evidence presented here suggests that shocks to individual workers also have a



                                                 31
significant impact on the types of innovative projects a firm successfully pursues, highlighting the

role of lower ranked workers in influencing firm innovation.




                                                 32
References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino, “House prices, collateral, and
 self-employment,” Journal of Financial Economics, August 2015, 117 (2), 288–306.

  , , and , “Loan Originations and Defaults in the Mortgage Crisis: The Role of the Middle
  Class,” The Review of Financial Studies, July 2016, 29 (7), 1635–1670.

Aghion, Philippe, John Van Reenen, and Luigi Zingales, “Innovation and institutional
 ownership,” American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (1), 277–304.

  , Nick Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griﬃth, and Peter Howitt, “Competition and
  Innovation: An Inverted-U Relationship,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2005, 120 (2),
  701–728.

Aguiar, Mark, Erik Hurst, and Loukas Karabarbounis, “Time use during the great recession,”
 American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (5), 1664–96.

Arrow, Kenneth, “Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention,” in “The rate
 and direction of inventive activity: Economic and social factors,” Princeton University Press,
 1962, pp. 609–626.

Balsmeier, Benjamin, Alireza Chavosh, Guan-Cheng Li, Gabe Fierro, Kevin Johnson,
 Aditya Kaulagi, Doug O’Reagan, Bill Yeh, and Lee Fleming, “Automated disambiguation
 of us patent grants and applications,” Working Paper, 2015.

Baxter, Marianne and Urban J Jermann, “Household production and the excess sensitivity of
 consumption to current income,” American Economic Review, 1999, 89 (4), 902–920.

Becker, Gary S, “A Theory of the Allocation of Time,” The economic journal, 1965, pp. 493–517.

Been, Vicki, Ingrid Gould Ellen, Amy Ellen Schwartz, Leanna Stiefel, and Meryle
 Weinstein, “Does losing your home mean losing your school?: Eﬀects of foreclosures on the
 school mobility of children,” Regional Science and Urban Economics, 2011, 41 (4), 407–414.

Benhabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson, and Randall Wright, “Homework in Macroeconomics:
 Household Production and Aggregate Fluctuations,” Journal of Political Economy, 1991, 99 (6),
 1166–1187.

Bernstein, Shai, “Does going public aﬀect innovation?,” The Journal of Finance, August 2015, 70
 (4), 1365–1403.

Bogin, Alexander N., William M. Doerner, and William D. Larson, “Local house price
 dynamics: New indices and stylized facts,” Working Paper, 2016.

Brav, Alon, Wei Jiang, Song Ma, and Xuan Tian, “How does hedge fund activism reshape
 corporate innovation?,” Working Paper, 2016.

Brevoort, Kenneth P and Cheryl R Cooper, “Foreclosure’s wake: The credit experiences of
 individuals following foreclosure,” Real Estate Economics, 2013, 41 (4), 747–792.

Campbell, John Y. and Sydney Ludvigson, “Elasticities of Substitution in Real Business Cycle
 Models with Home Protection,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 2001, 33 (4), 847–875.


                                              33
Cesarini, David, Erik Lindqvist, Matthew J Notowidigdo, and Robert Östling, “The
 eﬀect of wealth on individual and household labor supply: evidence from Swedish lotteries,”
 American Economic Review, 2017, 107 (12), 3917–46.

Chaney, Thomas, David Sraer, and David Thesmar, “The collateral channel: How real
 estate shocks aﬀect corporate investment,” The American Economic Review, October 2012, 102
 (6), 2381–2409.

Chen Lin, Sibo Liu, and Gustavo Manso, “Shareholder litigation and corporate innovation,”
 Working Paper, 2016.

Currie, Janet and Erdal Tekin, “Is there a link between foreclosure and health?,” American
 Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2015, 7 (1), 63–94.

Deaton, Angus, “The financial crisis and the well-being of Americans 2011 OEP Hicks Lecture,”
 Oxford economic papers, 2012, 64 (1), 1–26.

Disney, Richard, John Gathergood, and Andrew Henley, “House price shocks, negative
 equity, and household consumption in the United Kingdom,” Journal of the European Economic
 Association, 2010, 8 (6), 1179–1207.

Dobbie, Will and Jae Song, “Debt relief and debtor outcomes: Measuring the eﬀects of consumer
 bankruptcy protection,” The American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (3), 1272–1311.

Donaldson, Jason, Giorgia Piacentino, and Anjan Thakor, “Bank capital, bank credit and
 unemployment,” Working Paper, 2015.

Engelberg, Joseph and Christopher A Parsons, “Worrying about the stock market: Evidence
 from hospital admissions,” The Journal of Finance, 2016.

Ferreira, Daniel, Gustavo Manso, and André C. Silva, “Incentives to innovate and the
  decision to go public or private,” Review of Financial Studies, January 2014, 27 (1), 256–300.

Foote, Christopher, Kristopher Gerardi, Lorenz Goette, and Paul Willen, “Reducing
 foreclosures: No easy answers,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 2010, 24 (1), 89–138.

Foote, Christopher L, Kristopher Gerardi, and Paul S Willen, “Negative equity and fore-
 closure: Theory and evidence,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 64 (2), 234–245.

Foote, Christopher L., Lara Loewenstein, and Paul S. Willen, “Cross-Sectional Patterns of
 Mortgage Debt during the Housing Boom: Evidence and Implications,” Working Paper, December
 2016.

Goette, Lorenz, David Huﬀman, and Ernst Fehr, “Loss aversion and labor supply,” Journal
 of the European Economic Association, 2004, 2 (2-3), 216–228.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Zvi Hercowitz, “The Allocation of Capital and Time over the Business
 Cycle,” Journal of Political Economy, December 1991, 99 (6), 1188–1214.

Griliches, Zvi, “Hybrid corn: An exploration in the economics of technological change,” Econo-
 metrica, Journal of the Econometric Society, 1957, pp. 501–522.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, “Moral and social constraints to strategic
 default on mortgages,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2009.

                                              34
Hacker, Jacob S., Gregory A. Huber, Austin Nichols, Philipp Rehm, Mark Schlesinger,
 Rob Valletta, and Stuart Craig, “The economic security index: A new measure for research
 and policy analysis,” Review of Income and Wealth, May 2014, 60, S5–S32.

Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam Jaﬀe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER patent citations data
 file: Lessons, insights and methodological tools,” Working Paper, 2001.

  , , and , “Market value and patent citations,” RAND Journal of Economics, April 2005, 36
  (1), 16–38.

   and Josh Lerner, “The financing of R&D and innovation,” Handbook of the Economics of
  Innovation, 2010, 1, 609–639.

  , Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman, “Patents and R and D: Is there a lag?,” International
  economic review, 1986, pp. 265–283.

Hall, Robert E, “Quantifying the lasting harm to the US economy from the financial crisis,” NBER
 Macroeconomics Annual, 2015, 29 (1), 71–128.

Harhoﬀ, Dietmar, “Firm formation and regional spillovers-evidence from germany,” Economics
 of Innovation and New Technology, 1999, 8 (1-2), 27–55.

Herkenhoﬀ, Kyle F. and Lee E. Ohanian, “Labor market dysfunction during the great reces-
 sion,” Working Paper, March 2011.

Jaﬀe, Adam B. and Manuel Trajtenberg, Patents, citations, and innovations: A window on
  the knowledge economy, Cambridge and London: MIT Press, 2002.

Kogan, Leonid, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Amit Seru, and Noah Stoﬀman, “Technological
 innovation, resource allocation, and growth,” Working Paper, January 2012.

  , , , and , “Technological innovation, resource allocation, and growth,” The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2017, 132 (2), 665–712.

Lanjouw, Jean O., Ariel Pakes, and Jonathan Putnam, “How to count patents and value
 intellectual property: The uses of patent renewal and application data,” Journal of Industrial
 Economics, 1998, 46 (4), 405–432.

Lerner, Josh, Morten Sorensen, and Per Strömberg, “Private equity and long-run investment:
 The case of innovation,” Journal of Finance, April 2011, 66 (2), 445–477.

Manso, Gustavo, “Motivating innovation,” Journal of Finance, October 2011, 66 (5), 1823–1860.

Mian, Atif and Amir Sufi, “What explains the 2007–2009 drop in employment?,” Econometrica,
 2014, 82 (6), 2197–2223.

  , Kamalesh Rao, and Amir Sufi, “Household balance sheets, consumption, and the economic
  slump,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2013, 128 (4), 1687–1726.

Mian, Atif R. and Amir Sufi, “Household Debt and Defaults from 2000 to 2010: The Credit
 Supply View,” Working Paper, June 2016.

Mulligan, Casey B., “A depressing scenario: Mortgage debt becomes unemployment insurance,”
 Working Paper, November 2008.

                                              35
  , “Means-tested mortgage modification: Homes saved or income destroyed?,” Working Paper,
  August 2009.

  , “Foreclosures, enforcement, and collections under the federal mortgage modification guidelines,”
  Working Paper, February 2010.

Nelson, Richard R, “The simple economics of basic scientific research,” Journal of political econ-
 omy, 1959, 67 (3), 297–306.

Rizzo, John A and Richard J Zeckhauser, “Reference incomes, loss aversion, and physician
 behavior,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2003, 85 (4), 909–922.

Schmookler, Jacob, “Economic sources of inventive activity,” The Journal of Economic History,
  1962, 22 (1), 1–20.

Seru, Amit, “Firm boundaries matter: Evidence from conglomerates and R&D activity,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, February 2014, 111 (2), 381–405.

Solow, Robert M., “Technical change and the aggregate production function,” The Review of
 Economics and Statistics, 1957, 39 (3), 312–320.

Trajtenberg, Manuel, Rebecca Henderson, and Adam Jaﬀe, “University versus corporate
 patents: A window on the basicness of invention,” Economics of Innovation and New Technology,
 January 1997, 5 (1), 19–50.




                                                36
                                                Figure 1
                       House Price Variation and Innovative Worker Location
Panel (a) of this figure shows quartiles of zip code level price variance by CBSA. Panel (b) shows quartiles
of the number of innovative workers by CBSA, based on residence.

                                   (a) Local House Price Variation




      4th Quartile
      3rd Quartile
      2nd Quartile
      1st Quartile
      No Data



                           (b) Number of Innovative Workers by Location




      4th Quartile
      3rd Quartile
      2nd Quartile
      1st Quartile




                                                    37
                                                                 Figure 2
                                           Treatment Intensity
This figure repeats the analysis of Tables 4-6, but separating the variable % House Price to 10 decile
dummy variables, and plots these estimates. The specification includes firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects, and
graphs report estimates of the 9 house price change deciles, relative to the omitted category. The omitted
category is the 10th decile (highest percentage change). Confidence intervals are at the 5% level.

                     (a) Number of Patents                                             (b) Citations per Patent
       .05




                                                                          0
                                                                          -.02
       0




                                                                          -.04
       -.05




                                                                          -.06
       -.1




                                                                          -.08
       -.15




                                                                          -.1
              10%   20%    30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%               10%   20%   30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%




                            (c) Originality                                                   (d) Generality
       .02




                                                                          0
       0




                                                                          -.02
       -.02
       -.04




                                                                          -.04
       -.06
       -.08




                                                                          -.06




              10%   20%    30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%               10%   20%   30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%




                          (e) New Technology                                           (f) Exploratory Patents
       .01




                                                                          0
       0
       -.01




                                                                          -.05
       -.02
       -.03




                                                                          -.1




              10%   20%    30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%               10%   20%   30%   40%   50%   60%   70%   80%   90%




                                                                     38
                                                  Figure 3
                                       Value of Innovative Output

This figure repeats the analysis of Table 7, but separating the variable % House Price to 10 decile dummy
variables, and plots these estimates. The dependent variable is the log of firm value associated with all patents
produced by a worker during the crisis. The value of each patent is estimated following the methodology
of Kogan et al. (2017). This measure is based on the stock market’s reaction to the announcement of a
particular patent grant. The specification includes firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects, and controls for the value of
a worker’s output in the pre-period. The graph reports estimates of the 9 house price change deciles, relative
to the omitted category. The omitted category is the 10th decile (highest percentage change). Confidence
intervals are at the 5% level.
           .1
           0
           -.1
           -.2
           -.3




                  10%      20%       30%      40%       50%      60%       70%       80%      90%




                                                       39
                                                  Table 1
                                             Summary Statistics
    Panel A of this table shows summary statistics for patent measures used in the analysis. The patent
variables are measured over the years 2008–2012. Number of Patents is defined as the number of eventually
  granted patents applied for by a worker during the period. Normalized Citations Per Patent is the total
 number of normalized citations received by a worker’s patents, divided by Number of Patents. A patent’s
  normalized citations are its total citations received divided by the mean number of citations received by
patents granted in the same year and technology class. Number of Top Cited Patents counts the number of
a worker’s patents that were in the top 10% of all patents granted in the same year and technology class in
 terms of citations. New Class Indicator is an indicator variable equal to one if any of the worker’s patents
 were in a technology class the worker’s firm has never patented in before. Number of Exploratory Patents
counts the number of a worker’s patents that are exploratory in the sense that less than 20% of the patents
they cite are existing knowledge from the point of view of the worker’s firm. Existing knowledge is defined
  as all patents the firm was granted in the past five years as well as all patents the firm cited in the same
     time frame. Normalized Generality Per Patent is defined as the average normalized generality for a
   worker’s patents. Normalized generality scales generality by the mean value of generality for all patents
granted in the same year and technology class. Generality is equal to one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman
  Index (HHI) of forward citations across technology classes. Normalized Originality Per Patent is defined
    analogously to Normalized Generality Per Patent but with respect to backward citations rather than
         forward citations. Panel B shows the correlation among the patent measures from Panel A.

                                Panel A: Patent Measures (2008-2012)
                Variables                                        Obs      Mean        Std Dev
                Log(Number of Patents)                         162,011       0.64      0.80
                Log(Normalized Citations Per Patent)           162,011       0.27      0.50
                Log(Number of Top Cited Patents)               162,011       0.17      0.44
                Log(Normalized Generality Per Patent)          162,011       0.15      0.33
                Log(Normalized Originality Per Patent)         162,011       0.35      0.38
                New Technology Indicator                       162,011       0.09      0.28
                Log(Number of Exploratory Patents)             162,011       0.23      0.47

                     Panel B: Patent Measure Correlation Matrix (2008-2012)


                                                    Cites    Top       Gen     Orig     New     Explore
     Log(Normalized Citations Per Patent)             1
     Log(Number of Top Cited Patents)               0.737      1
     Log(Normalized Generality Per Patent)          0.834    0.617     1
     Log(Normalized Originality Per Patent)         0.545    0.406   0.471       1
     New Technology Indicator                       0.231    0.255   0.191     0.295      1
     Log(Number of Exploratory Patents)             0.317    0.448   0.257     0.425    0.410      1




                                                     40
                                                  Table 1
                                                 (Continued)
Panel C shows summary statistics for characteristics of workers in our sample as of 2007. The Degree variables
are dummy variables equal to one if the worker holds the stated degree (workers can have multiple degrees).
The variable Age is defined as 2007 minus the year the worker first obtained a degree plus twenty-two.
The variable Work Experience is equal to 2007 minus the start year of the worker’s first work position. The
variable Tenure at Firm is equal to 2007 minus the start year of the worker’s 2007 work position. The variable
Senior Position is an indicator equal to one if the worker’s position title includes managerial keywords (CEO,
chair, chairman, chief, CTO, director, executive, head, management, manager, partner, president, principal,
VP). Panel D shows summary statistics for house characteristics of workers in our sample as of 2007. The
variable Years Owned House is the years the worker had owned the house as of 2007, Square footage is the
size of the worker’s house as of 2007, Age of House is the age of the house in years as of 2007, % House
Price Pre is the percent change in house prices in the zip code of the worker’s house from the end of 2004 to
the end of 2007, % House Price Post is the percent change in house prices in the zip code of the worker’s
house from the end of 2007 to the end of 2012.

                               Panel C: Worker Characteristics (2007)
                              Variables             Obs      Mean     Std Dev
                              BA Degree            58,750     0.97      0.17
                              MA Degree            58,750     0.30      0.46
                              PhD Degree           58,750     0.28      0.45
                              MBA Degree           58,750     0.09      0.29
                              JD Degree            58,750     0.01      0.09
                              MD Degree            58,750     0.01      0.09
                              Age                  49,077    41.14      8.93
                              Work Experience      61,180    15.60      8.37
                              Tenure at Firm       57,892     6.47      6.86
                              Senior Position      69,930    0.48       0.50

                           Panel D: Worker House Characteristics (2007)
                  Variables                                  Obs       Mean      Std Dev
                  Years Owned House                         157,194     7.66      5.91
                  Square Footage                            107,074   2952.73    1919.70
                  Age of House                              144,747    29.77      26.85
                  % House Price Pre (2004-2007)             162,011    0.22       0.15
                  % House Price Post (2007-2012)            162,011    -0.16      0.13




                                                     41
                                               Table 1
                                              (Continued)
Panel E shows the distribution of workers across fields. Workers are categorized using their modal NBER
technology subcategory for patents applied from 2005–2007.

                     Panel E: Distribution of Workers Across Fields (2007)
                  NBER subcategory                                Freq    Percent
                  Computer Hardware & Software                   19,153     11.82
                  Communications                                 16,530     10.21
                  Drugs                                          13,445      8.30
                  Chemical (miscellaneous)                        8,889      5.49
                  Electronic Business Methods and Software       8,081      4.99
                  Surgery and Medical Instruments                 7,542      4.66
                  Semiconductor Devices                           7,380      4.56
                  Information Storage                             6,457      3.99
                  Power Systems                                   5,861      3.62
                  Measuring & Testing                             5,424      3.35
                  Mechanical (miscellaneous)                      4,696      2.90
                  Transportation                                 3,890      2.40
                  Electrical Devices                              3,765      2.32
                  Computer Peripherals                            3,419      2.11
                  Materials Processing and Handling              3,251      2.01
                  Motors, Engines and Parts                       3,173      1.96
                  Electrical and Electronics (miscellaneous)     2,976      1.84
                  Resins                                          2,813      1.74
                  Nuclear, X-rays                                2,497      1.54
                  Organic compounds                               2,253      1.39




                                                  42
                                                                           Table 2
                                                            Quantity and Quality of Innovation
     This table estimates the eﬀect of changes in zip code level house prices on the quantity and quality of innovative output for patent inventors who own
     a house. The pre-period is defined as 2005–2007. The post-period is defined as 2008–2012. The sample consists of US patent inventors within firms
     who are research-active as of onset of the crisis in 2008 (i.e., were credited on at least one assigned patent in the pre-period). All variables are as
     defined in Table 1. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                     Log(Number of Patents Post)              Log(Citations Per Patent Post)             Log(Top Cited Patents Post)
                                      (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                  (5)                 (6)




43
      %    House Price Post        0.218⇤⇤⇤             0.219⇤⇤⇤             0.172⇤⇤⇤              0.172⇤⇤⇤            0.135⇤⇤⇤            0.135⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.0317)             (0.0316)             (0.0240)              (0.0239)            (0.0190)            (0.0189)
      %    House Price Pre                               -0.0310                                   0.00866                                 0.00904
                                                        (0.0523)                                   (0.0432)                                (0.0343)
      Pre-2008 Measure             0.789⇤⇤⇤             0.789⇤⇤⇤             0.212⇤⇤⇤              0.212⇤⇤⇤            0.416⇤⇤⇤            0.416⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.0205)             (0.0205)            (0.00895)             (0.00896)            (0.0138)            (0.0138)
      Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes
      R2                             0.290               0.290                0.048                 0.048                0.157               0.157
      Observations                  162,011             162,011              162,011               162,011              162,011             162,011
                                                 Table 3
                                        Originality and Generality
This table estimates the eﬀect of changes in zip code level house prices on the originality and generality
of innovative output for patent inventors that own a house. The pre-period is defined as 2005–2007. The
post-period is defined as 2008–2012. The sample consists of US patent inventors within firms who are
research-active as of onset of the crisis in 2008 (i.e., were credited on at least one assigned patent in the
pre-period). All variables are as defined in Table 1. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered
by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% level, respectively.

                                       Log(Generality Post)                     Log(Originality Post)
                                       (1)                   (2)               (3)                  (4)
 %    House Price Post             0.0922⇤⇤⇤              0.0921⇤⇤⇤          0.156⇤⇤⇤             0.156⇤⇤⇤
                                    (0.0163)               (0.0163)          (0.0195)             (0.0194)
 %    House Price Pre                                      0.00317                                -0.00821
                                                           (0.0277)                               (0.0328)
 Pre-2008 Measure                   0.123⇤⇤⇤               0.123⇤⇤⇤          0.192⇤⇤⇤             0.192⇤⇤⇤
                                   (0.00479)              (0.00479)         (0.00754)            (0.00754)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                       Yes                   Yes                Yes                  Yes
 R2                                  0.023                 0.023              0.010                0.010
 Observations                       162,011               162,011            162,011              162,011




                                                     44
                                                    Table 4
                                                   Exploration
This table estimates the eﬀect of changes in zip code level house prices on the exploratory nature of innovative
output for patent inventors that own a house. The pre-period is defined as 2005–2007. The post-period is
defined as 2008–2012. The sample consists of US patent inventors within firms who are research-active as of
onset of the crisis in 2008 (i.e., were credited on at least one assigned patent in the pre-period). All variables
are as defined in Table 1. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker
residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                New Technology Indicator Post              Log(Exploratory Patents Post)
                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                   (4)
 %    House Price Post         0.0486⇤⇤⇤             0.0489⇤⇤⇤            0.188⇤⇤⇤              0.188⇤⇤⇤
                                (0.0118)              (0.0118)            (0.0237)              (0.0236)
 %    House Price Pre                                  -0.0265                                   0.0309
                                                      (0.0186)                                  (0.0399)
 Pre-2008 Measure              0.0756⇤⇤⇤             0.0756⇤⇤⇤            0.277⇤⇤⇤              0.277⇤⇤⇤
                               (0.00431)             (0.00431)            (0.0105)              (0.0105)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 R2                              0.008                 0.008                0.077                0.077
 Observations                   162,011               162,011              162,011              162,011




                                                       45
                                                                            Table 5
                                                               Workers Remaining at Same Firm
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, limiting the sample to workers who are observed patenting at their pre-crisis firm or who list themselves
     as still employed at their pre-crisis firm on LinkedIn after our estimation period ends in 2012. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered
     by firm and inventor residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                         (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                        Num               Cites             Top               Gen               Orig              New             Explore




46
      %    House Price Post           0.296⇤⇤⇤          0.246⇤⇤⇤         0.223⇤⇤⇤           0.131⇤⇤⇤          0.181⇤⇤⇤         0.0637⇤⇤⇤          0.240⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.0562)          (0.0364)         (0.0338)           (0.0268)          (0.0269)          (0.0177)          (0.0401)
      Pre-2008 Measure                0.757⇤⇤⇤          0.263⇤⇤⇤         0.465⇤⇤⇤           0.162⇤⇤⇤          0.257⇤⇤⇤         0.0986⇤⇤⇤          0.310⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.0225)          (0.0120)         (0.0149)          (0.00727)          (0.0116)         (0.00664)          (0.0128)
      Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                     Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes                Yes               Yes
      R2                               0.308             0.066             0.178              0.033             0.020             0.012             0.088
      Observations                     77,942            77,942           77,942             77,942            77,942            77,942            77,942
                                                                            Table 6
                                                                  Alternative Specifications
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3 but allowing the firm by CBSA fixed eﬀects to interact with various other 2007 characteristics. For
     brevity, only the main coeﬃcient on %D House Price Post is shown, but other controls remain similar. Tech Class is the modal 3-digit technology
     class of the worker’s patents in the pre-period. The variables Neighborhood Income Q., Square Footage Q., Urban Neighborhood Q., and Family
     Neighborhood Q are quartiles of the respective variables. Patent Experience Q. are quartiles based on the number of years since the worker’s first
     patent (as of 2007). Age Q. are quartiles based on the number of years since the worker’s first degree (as of 2007), plus twenty-two. Education
     represent the worker’s highest degree as defined in Panel A of Table 1. Senior Position is an indicator equal to one if the worker’s position title
     includes managerial keywords (CEO, chair, chairman, chief, CTO, director, executive, head, management, manager, partner, president, principal,
     VP). Panel A specifications use the full sample, while Panel B specifications use only workers with available information on LinkedIn. Standard errors
     are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                    (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
      Fixed Eﬀects Specification                                   Num          Cites        Top          Gen          Orig          New        Explore
      Panel A: Full Sample
      (1) Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                                         0.218⇤⇤⇤     0.172⇤⇤⇤     0.135⇤⇤⇤     0.0922⇤⇤⇤    0.156⇤⇤⇤     0.0486⇤⇤⇤     0.188⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0317)     (0.0240)     (0.0190)     (0.0163)     (0.0195)     (0.0118)      (0.0237)
      (2) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Tech Class FE                            0.181⇤⇤⇤     0.137⇤⇤⇤     0.127⇤⇤⇤     0.0941⇤⇤⇤    0.128⇤⇤⇤     0.0330⇤⇤      0.168⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0366)     (0.0274)     (0.0234)     (0.0183)     (0.0203)     (0.0133)      (0.0287)
      (3) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Neighborhood Income Q. FE                0.201⇤⇤⇤     0.143⇤⇤⇤     0.107⇤⇤⇤     0.0819⇤⇤⇤    0.147⇤⇤⇤     0.0464⇤⇤⇤     0.183⇤⇤⇤




47
                                                                 (0.0398)     (0.0332)     (0.0265)     (0.0220)     (0.0231)     (0.0152)      (0.0312)
      (4) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Family Neighborhood Q. FE                0.198⇤⇤⇤     0.166⇤⇤⇤     0.127⇤⇤⇤     0.0870⇤⇤⇤    0.143⇤⇤⇤     0.0561⇤⇤⇤     0.184⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0401)     (0.0309)     (0.0239)     (0.0226)     (0.0239)     (0.0145)      (0.0320)
      (5) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Urban Neighborhood Q. FE                 0.232⇤⇤⇤     0.186⇤⇤⇤     0.142⇤⇤⇤     0.0936⇤⇤⇤    0.170⇤⇤⇤     0.0600⇤⇤⇤     0.199⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0334)     (0.0285)     (0.0212)     (0.0201)     (0.0224)     (0.0138)      (0.0264)
      (6) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Square Footage Q. FE                     0.193⇤⇤⇤     0.160⇤⇤⇤     0.124⇤⇤⇤     0.0876⇤⇤⇤    0.138⇤⇤⇤     0.0382⇤⇤⇤     0.162⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0334)     (0.0273)     (0.0212)     (0.0185)     (0.0201)     (0.0128)      (0.0269)
      (7) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Experience Q. FE                         0.191⇤⇤⇤     0.142⇤⇤⇤     0.111⇤⇤⇤     0.0741⇤⇤⇤    0.115⇤⇤⇤     0.0480⇤⇤⇤     0.151⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0325)     (0.0246)     (0.0201)     (0.0172)     (0.0176)     (0.0126)      (0.0256)
      Panel B: LinkedIn Sample
      (1) Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                                         0.270⇤⇤⇤     0.238⇤⇤⇤     0.174⇤⇤⇤     0.135⇤⇤⇤     0.198⇤⇤⇤      0.0402⇤⇤     0.233⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0498)     (0.0372)     (0.0317)     (0.0253)     (0.0278)      (0.0171)     (0.0359)
      (2) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Age Q. FE                                0.309⇤⇤⇤     0.241⇤⇤⇤     0.181⇤⇤⇤     0.146⇤⇤⇤     0.202⇤⇤⇤       0.0332      0.295⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0721)     (0.0563)     (0.0532)     (0.0361)     (0.0441)      (0.0255)     (0.0505)
      (3) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Education FE                             0.224⇤⇤⇤     0.186⇤⇤⇤     0.128⇤⇤⇤     0.118⇤⇤⇤     0.174⇤⇤⇤      0.00618      0.180⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0549)     (0.0415)     (0.0375)     (0.0290)     (0.0287)      (0.0186)     (0.0424)
      (4) Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Senior Position FE                       0.284⇤⇤⇤     0.231⇤⇤⇤     0.176⇤⇤⇤     0.131⇤⇤⇤     0.199⇤⇤⇤      0.0335⇤⇤     0.237⇤⇤⇤
                                                                 (0.0530)     (0.0412)     (0.0367)     (0.0285)     (0.0283)      (0.0169)     (0.0412)
                                                                            Table 7
                                                                   Value of Innovative Output
     This table estimates the eﬀect of changes in zip code level house prices on the value of workers’ innovative output for workers that own a house. The
     value of each patent is estimated following the methodology of Kogan et al. (2017). This measure is based on the stock market’s reaction to the
     announcement of a particular patent grant. The pre-period is defined as 2005–2007. The post-period is defined as 2008–2012. The sample consists of
     US patent inventors within publicly-traded firms who are research-active as of onset of the crisis in 2008 (i.e., were credited on at least one assigned
     patent in the pre-period). All variables are as defined in Table 1. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker
     residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                                                                   Log(Value Post)
                                                                (1)                         (2)                          (3)                         (4)




48
      %    House Price Post                                  0.525⇤⇤⇤                     0.525⇤⇤⇤                    0.441⇤⇤⇤                    0.439⇤⇤⇤
                                                             (0.0843)                     (0.0836)                    (0.0921)                    (0.0918)
      %    House Price Pre                                                               0.0000579                                                 0.0819
                                                                                           (0.163)                                                 (0.166)
      Pre-2008 Measure                                       0.678⇤⇤⇤                     0.678⇤⇤⇤                    0.703⇤⇤⇤                    0.703⇤⇤⇤
                                                             (0.0270)                     (0.0270)                    (0.0262)                    (0.0262)
      Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                                           Yes                          Yes                          No                          No
      Firm ⇥ CBSA ⇥ Tech Class FE                              No                           No                           Yes                         Yes
      R2                                                       0.137                       0.137                        0.146                       0.146
      Observations                                            85,362                      85,362                       85,362                      85,362
                                                                         Table 8
                                                               House Ownership Duration
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, now allowing %D House Price Post to interact a Purchased before 2004 indicator equal to one if the
     worker’s house was purchased prior to 2004. Standard errors are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                           (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)              (7)
                                          Num              Cites            Top             Gen              Orig             New            Explore
      %                                -0.0985⇤⇤⇤        -0.0636⇤⇤        -0.0361⇤       -0.0341⇤⇤        -0.0407⇤⇤         0.00348          -0.00889




49
          House Price Post ⇥
         Purchase before 2004           (0.0370)          (0.0257)        (0.0191)        (0.0163)         (0.0200)         (0.0129)         (0.0265)
      Pre-2008 Measure                  0.790⇤⇤⇤          0.217⇤⇤⇤        0.413⇤⇤⇤        0.126⇤⇤⇤         0.193⇤⇤⇤        0.0763⇤⇤⇤         0.270⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0181)         (0.00818)        (0.0120)       (0.00445)        (0.00725)        (0.00377)        (0.00926)
      Zip Code FE                         Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
      Firm FE                             Yes               Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
      R2                                 0.473             0.314           0.370           0.279            0.264            0.328            0.277
      Observations                      162,011           162,011         162,011         162,011          162,011          162,011          162,011
                                                                            Table 9
                                                                        Labor Market
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, now allowing %D House Price Post to interact a Popular Technology indicator. To define the Popular
     Technology indicator, we classify workers to a technology class based on the modal technology class they patented in during the three years before
     the crisis (2005–2007). A worker is considered to specialize in a popular technology if the worker’s technology class is in the top quartile in terms of
     number of total workers. Standard errors are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
     10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                           (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)               (6)               (7)
                                          Num              Cites             Top              Gen               Orig              New             Explore




50
      %   House Price Post ⇥            -0.114⇤⇤        -0.0862⇤⇤⇤        -0.0585⇤⇤         -0.0509⇤⇤        -0.0718⇤⇤⇤          0.0207            -0.0419
         Popular Technology             (0.0514)         (0.0306)          (0.0245)          (0.0203)         (0.0271)          (0.0140)          (0.0291)
      Pre-2008 Measure                  0.789⇤⇤⇤         0.218⇤⇤⇤          0.413⇤⇤⇤          0.126⇤⇤⇤         0.191⇤⇤⇤         0.0760⇤⇤⇤          0.271⇤⇤⇤
                                        (0.0183)        (0.00819)          (0.0120)         (0.00447)        (0.00719)         (0.00378)         (0.00935)
      Zip Code FE                          Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
      Firm FE                              Yes              Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes               Yes              Yes
      R2                                 0.470             0.313            0.369             0.279            0.263             0.328             0.275
      Observations                      162,011           162,011          162,011           162,011          162,011           162,011           162,011
                                                                           Table 10
                                                               Housing Prices Eﬀects in 2002
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, but estimates the eﬀect of changes in zip code level house prices on innovative output for an earlier
     period. The pre-period is defined as 1999–2001. The post-period is defined as 2002–2006. The sample consists of US patent inventors within firms
     who are research-active as of onset of the crisis in 2008 (i.e., were credited on at least one assigned patent in the pre-period). All variables are as
     defined in Table 1. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical
     significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                         (1)              (2)               (3)              (4)               (5)                (6)              (7)
                                        Num              Cites              Top              Gen               Orig               New            Explore




51
      %    House Price Post            -0.0233          0.00971          -0.00680          -0.00349            -0.0153           -0.0130          -0.0228
                                      (0.0463)          (0.0261)         (0.0235)          (0.0219)           (0.0222)          (0.0140)         (0.0327)
      Pre-2002 Measure                0.539⇤⇤⇤          0.154⇤⇤⇤         0.252⇤⇤⇤          0.118⇤⇤⇤           0.163⇤⇤⇤         0.0442⇤⇤⇤         0.178⇤⇤⇤
                                      (0.0247)         (0.00680)         (0.0113)         (0.00575)          (0.00808)         (0.00387)         (0.0102)
      Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                    Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes               Yes
      R2                               0.105             0.028             0.061            0.009              0.005             0.003            0.029
      Observations                    161,887           161,887           161,887          161,887            161,887           161,887          161,887
Appendix


A       Supplemental Figures and Tables

                                                                Figure A.1
                               Distribution of House Price Changes
This figure shows the mean percentage change in house price by decile for workers in our sample.
                      0      -.1
            House Price Change
                  -.2 -.3
                      -.4




                                   10%     20%      30%     40%     50%       60%     70%    80%      90%   100%



                                                                Table A.1
                                       Excluding 2008-2009 Patents
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, now excluding patents applied for in 2008-2009 from the
outcome variables. Standard errors are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and ***
denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                           (1)         (2)          (3)             (4)       (5)           (6)       (7)
                                          Num         Cites         Top             Gen       Orig          New     Explore
 %      House Price Post                 0.149⇤⇤⇤    0.136⇤⇤⇤     0.0915⇤⇤⇤    0.0694⇤⇤⇤     0.128⇤⇤⇤   0.0317⇤⇤⇤    0.109⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.0249)    (0.0215)      (0.0141)     (0.0135)     (0.0183)   (0.00874)    (0.0167)
 Pre-2008 Measure                        0.544⇤⇤⇤    0.161⇤⇤⇤     0.265⇤⇤⇤     0.0784⇤⇤⇤     0.143⇤⇤⇤   0.0380⇤⇤⇤    0.145⇤⇤⇤
                                         (0.0137)   (0.00769)     (0.0104)     (0.00452)    (0.00692)   (0.00305)   (0.00612)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE                            Yes        Yes           Yes             Yes       Yes           Yes       Yes
 R  2
                                          0.223       0.033        0.112        0.013        0.006       0.004       0.044
 Observations                            162,011     162,011      162,011      162,011      162,011     162,011     162,011



                                                                     52
                                                  Table A.2
                                  Three-Year House Price Changes
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, redefining % House Price to represent the zip code level
change in house prices from 2007 to 2010, rather than 2007 to 2012. Standard errors appear in parentheses
and are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                            Num         Cites        Top         Gen          Orig        New        Explore
 %     House Price Post   0.264⇤⇤⇤     0.192⇤⇤⇤    0.154⇤⇤⇤    0.100⇤⇤⇤     0.177⇤⇤⇤    0.0489⇤⇤⇤    0.203⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0378)     (0.0282)    (0.0238)    (0.0194)     (0.0237)     (0.0147)    (0.0292)
 Pre-2008 Measure         0.789⇤⇤⇤     0.212⇤⇤⇤    0.416⇤⇤⇤    0.123⇤⇤⇤     0.192⇤⇤⇤    0.0756⇤⇤⇤    0.277⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0204)    (0.00894)    (0.0138)   (0.00479)    (0.00755)    (0.00431)    (0.0105)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 R 2
                            0.290       0.048       0.157       0.023        0.010        0.008       0.077
 Observations              161,971     161,971     161,971     161,971      161,971      161,971     161,971


                                                  Table A.3
                                   One-Year House Price Changes
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, redefining % House Price to represent the zip code level
change in house prices from 2007 to 2008, rather than 2007 to 2012. Standard errors appear in parentheses
and are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                            Num         Cites        Top         Gen          Orig        New        Explore
 %     House Price Post   0.292⇤⇤⇤     0.230⇤⇤⇤    0.200⇤⇤⇤    0.116⇤⇤⇤     0.213⇤⇤⇤    0.0700⇤⇤⇤    0.237⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0534)     (0.0379)    (0.0305)    (0.0257)     (0.0355)     (0.0210)    (0.0445)
 Pre-2008 Measure         0.789⇤⇤⇤     0.212⇤⇤⇤    0.416⇤⇤⇤    0.123⇤⇤⇤     0.192⇤⇤⇤    0.0756⇤⇤⇤    0.277⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0205)    (0.00894)    (0.0138)   (0.00478)    (0.00754)    (0.00431)    (0.0105)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 R 2
                            0.290       0.048       0.157       0.023        0.010        0.008       0.077
 Observations              161,989     161,989     161,989     161,989      161,989      161,989     161,989




                                                      53
                                                 Table A.4
                 One-Year House Price Changes and Excluding 2008-2009 Patents
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, redefining % House Price to represent the zip code level
change in house prices from 2007 to 2008, and also excluding patents applied for in 2008-2009 from the
outcome variables. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker residential
zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                           Num         Cites        Top        Gen         Orig        New       Explore
 %     House Price Post   0.194⇤⇤⇤    0.179⇤⇤⇤    0.131⇤⇤⇤   0.0831⇤⇤⇤    0.171⇤⇤⇤   0.0446⇤⇤⇤    0.141⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0443)    (0.0337)    (0.0224)    (0.0210)    (0.0335)    (0.0158)    (0.0314)
 Pre-2008 Measure         0.544⇤⇤⇤    0.161⇤⇤⇤    0.265⇤⇤⇤   0.0785⇤⇤⇤    0.143⇤⇤⇤   0.0381⇤⇤⇤    0.145⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0137)   (0.00769)    (0.0104)   (0.00452)   (0.00693)   (0.00305)   (0.00612)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE             Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 R 2
                           0.223      0.033        0.112      0.013       0.006       0.004       0.044
 Observations             161,989    161,989      161,989    161,989     161,989     161,989     161,989


                                                 Table A.5
                             Alternative House Prices Measure (Zillow)
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, using an alternative zip code level price index from Zillow.
Standard errors are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)
                           Num         Cites        Top         Gen         Orig        New       Explore
 %     House Price Post   0.188⇤⇤⇤    0.129⇤⇤⇤    0.105⇤⇤⇤   0.0665⇤⇤⇤    0.135⇤⇤⇤   0.0426⇤⇤⇤    0.162⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0283)    (0.0224)    (0.0166)    (0.0140)    (0.0155)   (0.00956)    (0.0185)
 Pre-2008 Measure         0.787⇤⇤⇤    0.213⇤⇤⇤    0.418⇤⇤⇤    0.124⇤⇤⇤    0.193⇤⇤⇤   0.0773⇤⇤⇤    0.278⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.0198)   (0.00893)    (0.0143)   (0.00477)   (0.00781)   (0.00439)    (0.0105)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE             Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 R 2
                           0.290       0.048       0.159       0.023       0.011       0.008       0.078
 Observations             153,169     153,169     153,169     153,169     153,169     153,169     153,169




                                                     54
                                                                        Table A.6
                                                                           Firm Size
     This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, successively limiting the sample to firms with less than 1000, 100, 50, 30 and 10 innovative workers
     in the sample, respectively. Standard errors appear in parentheses and are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and *** denote
     statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)            (5)            (6)             (7)
                                                      Num           Cites          Top            Gen            Orig           New           Explore

      Less than 1000 inventors (N=138564)
      %    House Price Post                         0.206⇤⇤⇤       0.173⇤⇤⇤      0.142⇤⇤⇤       0.0886⇤⇤⇤      0.146⇤⇤⇤       0.0502⇤⇤⇤      0.179⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.0357)       (0.0275)      (0.0210)       (0.0183)       (0.0221)       (0.0138)       (0.0271)

      Less than 100 inventors (N=87355)
      %    House Price Post                         0.161⇤⇤⇤       0.151⇤⇤⇤      0.122⇤⇤⇤       0.0833⇤⇤⇤      0.125⇤⇤⇤       0.0761⇤⇤⇤      0.156⇤⇤⇤




55
                                                    (0.0477)       (0.0375)      (0.0284)       (0.0249)       (0.0286)       (0.0221)       (0.0329)

      Less than 50 inventors (N=71843)
      %    House Price Post                          0.117⇤⇤       0.149⇤⇤⇤      0.123⇤⇤⇤       0.0733⇤⇤       0.105⇤⇤⇤       0.0824⇤⇤⇤      0.150⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.0556)       (0.0457)      (0.0352)       (0.0290)       (0.0325)       (0.0280)       (0.0400)

      Less than 30 inventors (N=61366)
      %    House Price Post                          0.0835        0.147⇤⇤⇤      0.115⇤⇤⇤       0.0833⇤⇤       0.108⇤⇤⇤       0.0772⇤⇤       0.119⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.0604)       (0.0512)      (0.0393)       (0.0337)       (0.0364)       (0.0338)       (0.0443)

      Less than 10 inventors (N=43944)
      %    House Price Post                          0.121          0.145⇤⇤       0.117⇤⇤        0.104⇤⇤       0.119⇤⇤⇤        0.116⇤⇤       0.162⇤⇤⇤
                                                    (0.0741)       (0.0630)      (0.0494)       (0.0418)       (0.0459)       (0.0506)       (0.0570)
                                                  Table A.7
                                             Public Subsample
This table repeats the analysis of Tables 2–3, now limiting the sample to workers who worked at a public
firm during the pre-period. Standard errors are clustered by firm and worker residential zip code. *,**, and
*** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

                             (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)
                            Num         Cites        Top         Gen          Orig        New        Explore
 %     House Price Post    0.224⇤⇤⇤   0.182⇤⇤⇤     0.137⇤⇤⇤     0.105⇤⇤⇤     0.172⇤⇤⇤   0.0343⇤⇤⇤    0.185⇤⇤⇤
                           (0.0389)   (0.0295)     (0.0223)     (0.0208)     (0.0240)    (0.0121)    (0.0282)
 Pre-2008 Measure          0.803⇤⇤⇤   0.210⇤⇤⇤     0.419⇤⇤⇤     0.122⇤⇤⇤     0.182⇤⇤⇤   0.0776⇤⇤⇤    0.289⇤⇤⇤
                           (0.0270)   (0.0125)     (0.0185)    (0.00642)    (0.00934)   (0.00618)    (0.0130)
 Firm ⇥ CBSA FE              Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
 R2                          0.308      0.048       0.163        0.022        0.009       0.008        0.086
 Observations               85,362     85,362      85,362       85,362       85,362      85,362       85,362


                                                  Table A.8
                                         Firm-Level Aggregation
This table estimates firm-level regressions analogous to Equation 1, with CBSA fixed eﬀects based on firm
locations. We observe the location of firms separately from that of their employees. We measure a firm’s
employee-related exposure to the crisis as the average house price decline of a firm’s pre-crisis innovative
employees, based on where those employees owned houses in 2007. The outcome variables in this analysis
represent the innovative output of the entire firm, regardless of the worker credited with the output. Standard
errors are clustered by firm CBSA. *,**, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level,
respectively.

                              (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)          (7)
                             Num         Cites        Top         Gen          Orig       New        Explore
 %     House Price Post    0.250⇤⇤⇤     0.0256      0.0516⇤⇤      0.0292      -0.0107   0.0827⇤⇤⇤   0.0894⇤⇤
                           (0.0425)    (0.0240)     (0.0241)     (0.0187)    (0.0219)   (0.0281)    (0.0398)
 Pre-2008 Measure          1.041⇤⇤⇤    0.282⇤⇤⇤     0.796⇤⇤⇤     0.173⇤⇤⇤    0.282⇤⇤⇤    0.441⇤⇤⇤   0.794⇤⇤⇤
                          (0.00682)    (0.0100)    (0.00814)    (0.00751)    (0.0107)   (0.0106)    (0.0126)
 CBSA FE                     Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
 R 2
                             0.589       0.148       0.519        0.102        0.072      0.192       0.460
 Observations               31,327      31,327      31,327       31,327       31,327     31,327      31,327




                                                      56
