                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       NOWCASTING THE LOCAL ECONOMY:
                USING YELP DATA TO MEASURE ECONOMIC ACTIVITY

                                       Edward L. Glaeser
                                         Hyunjin Kim
                                         Michael Luca

                                      Working Paper 24010
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24010


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




Byron Perpetua provided excellent research assistance. Glaeser thanks the Taubman Center for
financial support. Kim and Luca have done consulting for tech companies including Yelp, but
their compensation and ability to publish are not tied to the results of this paper. All remaining
errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Edward L. Glaeser, Hyunjin Kim, and Michael Luca. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Nowcasting the Local Economy: Using Yelp Data to Measure Economic Activity
Edward L. Glaeser, Hyunjin Kim, and Michael Luca
NBER Working Paper No. 24010
November 2017
JEL No. E17,O33,R11

                                          ABSTRACT

Can new data sources from online platforms help to measure local economic activity?
Government datasets from agencies such as the U.S. Census Bureau provide the standard
measures of local economic activity at the local level. However, these statistics typically appear
only after multi-year lags, and the public-facing versions are aggregated to the county or ZIP
code level. In contrast, crowdsourced data from online platforms such as Yelp are often
contemporaneous and geographically finer than official government statistics. In this paper, we
present evidence that Yelp data can complement government surveys by measuring economic
activity in close to real time, at a granular level, and at almost any geographic scale. Changes in
the number of businesses and restaurants reviewed on Yelp can predict changes in the number of
overall establishments and restaurants in County Business Patterns. An algorithm using
contemporaneous and lagged Yelp data can explain 29.2 percent of the residual variance after
accounting for lagged CBP data, in a testing sample not used to generate the algorithm. The
algorithm is more accurate for denser, wealthier, and more educated ZIP codes.

Edward L. Glaeser                                Michael Luca
Department of Economics                          Harvard Business School
315A Littauer Center                             Soldiers Field Road
Harvard University                               Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02138                              mluca@hbs.edu
and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu

Hyunjin Kim
Harvard Business School
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
hkim@hbs.edu
1. Introduction


         Public statistics on local economic activity, provided by the Census Bureau’s County
Business Patterns, the Bureau of Economic Analysis, the Federal Reserve System and state
agencies, provide invaluable guidance to local and national policy-makers. Whereas national
statistics, such as Bureau of Labor Statistics’ monthly job report are reported in a timely manner,
local data sets are often published only after long lags. They are also aggregated to coarse
geographic areas, which impose practical limitations on their value. For example, as of August
2017, the latest available County Business Patterns data was from 2015, aggregated to the zip code
level, and much of the zip code data is suppressed for confidentiality reasons. Similarly, the Bureau
of Economic Analysis’ metropolitan area statistics have limited value to the leaders of smaller
communities within a large metropolitan area.
         Data from online platforms such as Yelp, Google, and LinkedIn raise the possibility of
enabling researchers and policy-makers to supplement official government statistics with crowd-
sourced data at the granular level, provided years before statistics become available. A growing
body of research has demonstrated the potential of digital exhaust to predict economic outcomes
of interest (e.g. Choi and Varian 2012, Cavallo 2012, Einav and Levin 2014, Kang et al. 2013, Wu
and Brynjolfsson 2015, Goel et al 2010, Guzman and Stern 2016). Online data sources also make
it possible to measure new outcomes that were never included in traditional data sources (Glaeser
et al. 2017).
         In this paper, we explore the potential for crowdsourced data from Yelp to measure the
local economy. Relative to the existing literature on various forecasting activities, our key
contribution is to evaluate whether online data can forecast government statistics that provide
traditional measures of economic activity, at geographic scale. Previous related work has been less
focused on how predictions perform relative to traditional data sources, especially for core local
data sets, like County Business Patterns (Goel et al 2010). We particularly focus on whether Yelp
data predicts more accurately in some places than in others.
         By the end of 2016, Yelp listed over 3.7 million businesses with 65.4 million recommended
reviews. 2 This data is available on a daily basis and with addresses for each business, raising the


2
 Yelp algorithmically classifies reviews, flagging reviews that appear to be fake, biased, unhelpful, or posted by less
established users as “not recommended.” Recommended reviews represent about three quarters of all reviews, and

                                                          2
possibility of measuring economic activity day-by-day and block-by-block. At the same time, it is
a priori unclear whether crowdsourced data will accurately measure the local economy at scale,
since changes in the number of businesses reflect both changes in the economy and changes in the
popularity of a given platform. Moreover, to the extent that Yelp does have predictive power, it
is important to understand the conditions under which Yelp is an accurate guide to the local
economy.
         To shed light on these questions, we test the ability of Yelp data to predict changes in the
number of active businesses as measured by the County Business Patterns. We find that changes
in the number of businesses and restaurants reviewed on Yelp can help to predict changes in the
number of overall establishments and restaurants in County Business Patterns, and that predictive
power increases with zip-code level population density, wealth, and education level.
         In Section II, we discuss the data. We use the entire set of businesses and reviews on Yelp,
which we merged with CBP data on the number of businesses open in a given ZIP code and year.
We first assess the completeness of Yelp data relative to County Business Patterns, beginning with
the restaurant industry where Yelp has significant coverage. In 2015, CBP listed 542,029
restaurants in 24,790 ZIP codes, and Yelp listed 576,233 restaurants in 22,719 ZIP codes. Yelp
includes restaurants without paid employees that may be overlooked by the Census’ Business
Register. There are 4,355 ZIP codes with restaurants in County Business Patterns that do not have
any Yelp restaurants. Similarly, there are 2,284 ZIP codes with Yelp restaurants and no CBP
restaurants.
         We find that regional variation in Yelp coverage is strongly associated with the underlying
variation in population density. There are more Yelp restaurants than CBP restaurants in New York
City. Rural areas like New Madison, Ohio have limited Yelp coverage. In 2015, 95% of the U.S.
population lived in ZIP codes in which Yelp counted at least 50% of the number of restaurants that
CBP recorded. This cross-sectional analysis suggests that Yelp data is likely to be more useful to
policy analyses in areas with higher population density.
         In Section III, we turn to the predictive power of Yelp for overall ZIP code-level economies
across all industries, across all geographies. We look both at restaurants and, more importantly,



the remaining reviews are accessible from a link at the bottom of each business's page but do not factor into a
business's overall star rating or review count.


                                                          3
establishments across all industries.     Lagged and contemporaneous Yelp measures appear to
predict annual changes in CBP’s number of establishments, even when controlling for prior CBP
measures. We find similar results when restricting the analysis to the restaurant sector.
       To assess the overall predictive power of Yelp, we use a random forest algorithm to predict
the growth in CBP establishments. We start by predicting the change in CBP establishments with
the two lags of changes in CBP establishments, as well as ZIP code and year fixed effects. We
then work with the residual quantity. We find that contemporaneous and lagged Yelp data can
generate an algorithm that is able to explain 21.4 percent of the variance of residual quantity using
an out-of-bag estimate in the training sample, which represents 75 percent of the data. In a testing
sample not used to generate the algorithm, our prediction is able to explain 29.2 percent of the
variance of this residual quantity.
       We repeat this exercise using Yelp and CBP data at the restaurant level. In this case, the
basic Yelp prediction is able to explain 21.2 percent of variance out of the training sample, using
an out-of-bag estimate. The augmented Yelp prediction can explain 26.4 percent of the variance
in the testing sample.
       In Section IV, we look at the conditions under which Yelp is most effective at predicting
local economic change. First, we examine the interaction between growth in Yelp and
characteristics of the locale, including population density and income. We find that Yelp has more
predictive power in denser, wealthier, and more educated areas. Second, we examine whether Yelp
is more predictive in some industries than others using a regression framework. We find that Yelp
is more predictive in retail, leisure, and hospitality industries, as well as professional and business
services industries. We then reproduce our random forest approach using geographic and industry
sub-groups. Overall, this suggests that Yelp can help to complement more traditional data sources,
especially in more urban areas and in industries with better coverage.
       Our results highlight the potential for using Yelp data to complement CBP by nowcasting
– in other words, by shedding light on recent changes in the local economy that have not yet
appeared in official statistics due to long reporting lags. A second potential use of crowdsourced
data is to measure the economy at a more granular level than can be done in public facing
government statistics. For example, it has the potential to shed light on variation in economic
growth within a metropolitan area. In Section V, we turn to New York City to see how Yelp does



                                                  4
at measuring the micro-geography of a municipality. Yelp does seem capable of tracking the
evolution of neighborhoods even below the ZIP code level.
        Section VI concludes that Yelp data can provide a useful complement to government
surveys by measuring economic activity in close to real time, at a granular level, and with data
such as prices and reputation that are not contained in government surveys. Yelp’s value for
nowcasting is greatest in higher density, income, and education areas and in the retail and
professional services industry. Data from online platforms such as Yelp are not substitutes for
official government statistics. To truly understand the local economy it would be better to have
timelier and geographically fine official data, but as long as that data doesn’t exist, Yelp data can
complement government statistics by providing data that are more up to date, granular, and broader
in metrics than would otherwise be available.


2. Data


        County Business Patterns (CBP) is a program of the Census Bureau that publishes annual
statistics for businesses with paid employees within the United States, Puerto Rico, and Island
Areas. Statistics include the number of businesses, employment during the week of March 12, first
quarter payroll, and annual payroll, and are available by state, county, metropolitan area, ZIP code,
and congressional district levels. It has been published annually since 1964, and covers most North
American Industry Classification System (NAICS) industries excluding a few categories. 3 CBP’s
data are extracted from the Business Register, a database of all known single and multi-
establishment employer companies maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau; the annual Company
Organization Survey; and various Census Bureau Programs including the Economic Census,
Annual Survey of Manufactures, and Current Business Surveys. County-level statistics for a given
year are available approximately 18 months later, and slightly later for ZIP code-level data.
        As an online platform that publishes crowdsourced reviews about local businesses, Yelp
provides a quasi-real-time snapshot of retail businesses that are open (see Figure 1 for a screenshot
of the Yelp website). As of spring 2017, Yelp was operating in over 30 countries, with over 127


3
 Excluded categories include crop and animal production; rail transportation; National Postal Service; pension,
health, welfare, and vacation funds; trusts, estates, and agency accounts; private households; and public
administration. CBP also excludes most establishments reporting government employees.

                                                         5
million reviews written and 84 million unique desktop visitors on a monthly average basis (Yelp
2017). Business listings on Yelp are continually sourced from Yelp’s internal team, user
submissions, business owner reports of their own business, and partner acquisitions, and then
checked by an internal data quality team. Businesses on Yelp span many categories beyond
restaurants, including shopping, home services, beauty, and fitness. Each business listing reports
various attributes to the extent that they are available, including location, business category, price
level, opening and closure dates, hours, and user ratings and reviews. The data begin in 2004 when
Yelp was founded, which enables U.S. business listings to be aggregated at the ZIP code, city,
county, state, and country level for any given time period post-2004.
        For our analysis, we merge these two sources of data at the ZIP code level from 2004 to
2015. We create two data sets: one on the total number of businesses listed in a given ZIP code
and year, and another focusing on the total number of restaurants listed in a given ZIP code and
year. For the latter, we use the following NAICS codes to construct the CBP number of restaurants,
in order to pull as close as close a match as possible to Yelp’s restaurant category: 722511 (full-
service restaurants), 722513 (limited-service restaurants), 722514 (cafeterias, grill buffets, and
buffets), and 722515 (snack and nonalcoholic beverage bars) restaurants. 4
        The resulting data set shows that in 2015, Yelp listed a total number of 1,436,442 U.S.
businesses across 25,820 unique ZIP codes, representing approximately 18.7% of CBP’s
7,663,938 listings across 38,748 ZIP codes. 5 In terms of restaurants, CBP listed 542,029
restaurants in 24,790 ZIP codes, and Yelp listed 576,233 restaurants in 22,719 ZIP codes, for an
overall Yelp coverage of 106.3%. Across the U.S., 33,120 ZIP Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs)
were reported by the 2010 Census, and over 42,000 ZIP codes are currently reported to exist, some
of which encompass non-populated areas.
        Yelp data also has limitations that may reduce its ability to provide a meaningful signal of
CBP measures. First, while CBP covers nearly all NAICS industries, Yelp focuses on local
businesses. Since retail is a small piece of the business landscape, the extent to which Yelp data
relates to the overall numbers of CBP businesses or growth rates in other industries depends on
the broader relationship between retail and the overall economy. Even a comparison to the


4
  Some notable exclusions are 722330 (mobile food services), 722410 (drinking places), and all markets and
convenience stores.
5
  These numbers exclude any businesses in Yelp that are missing a ZIP code, price range, or any recommended
reviews.

                                                       6
restaurant-only CBP data has challenges, as CBP’s industry classification is derived from the
Economic Census or other Census surveys. In contrast, Yelp’s classification is assigned through
user and business owner reports, as well as Yelp’s internal quality check. As a result, some
businesses may not be categorized equivalently across the two data sets (e.g. a bar that serves snack
food may be classified as a “drinking place” in CBP, while Yelp may classify it as both a bar and
a restaurant). Furthermore, Yelp includes restaurants with no employees, while CBP does not
count them. Second, the extent of Yelp coverage also depends on the number of Yelp users, which
has grown over time as the company has become more popular. In areas with thicker users bases,
one might expect business openings and closings to be more quickly reported by users, allowing
Yelp to maintain a fairly real-time snapshot of the local economy. However, in areas with low
adoption, businesses may take longer to be flagged as closed or open, adding noise to the true
number of businesses currently open in the economy. As Section 3 will further discuss, Figures 2
and 3 display a snapshot of Yelp coverage of CBP businesses and restaurants across the U.S. in
2015, showing that coastal and more highly populated areas are more likely to have reliable Yelp
data. Third, businesses with no reviews may receive less attention from users – and therefore may
be less likely to be flagged as open or marked as closed even after they close, since this relies on
user contributions.
       To account for these limitations, we only count businesses as open if they have received at
least one recommended Yelp review. In the ZIP codes covered by both CBP and Yelp, Yelp’s
mean and median number of restaurants has steadily increased over the past ten years (see Figures
4 and 5). This increase reflects steadily increasing Yelp usage. We limit our sample to after 2009,
because the mean number of restaurants per ZIP code between CBP and Yelp becomes comparable
around 2009. The mean number of restaurants in Yelp actually surpassed the mean number of
restaurants in CBP in 2013, which may be explained by differences in accounting such as industry
category designations and Yelp counts of businesses with no employees. Finally, we limit our
analysis to ZIP codes with at least one business in CBP and Yelp in 2009, and examine a balanced
sample of ZIP codes from 2009 to 2015. Table 1 shows summary statistics of all variables in our
data set across this time period.
       In the sections that follow, we use this data set to describe Yelp’s coverage over time and
geography in greater detail, as well as the findings of our analyses.



                                                 7
Comparing Restaurant Coverage on Yelp and County Business Patterns


        We first compare Yelp and CBP restaurant numbers to paint a more detailed picture of
Yelp coverage across geography. In 2015 (the last year of CBP data available), 27,074 ZIP codes
out of 33,120 ZCTAs listed in the U.S. in 2010 had at least one restaurant in either CBP or Yelp. 6
CBP listed 542,029 restaurants in 24,790 ZIP codes, and Yelp listed 576,233 restaurants in 22,719
ZIP codes. There were 2,284 ZIP codes with at least one Yelp restaurant but no CBP restaurants,
and 4,355 ZIP codes with at least one CBP restaurant and no Yelp restaurants.
        We focus on Yelp coverage ratios, which are defined as the ratio of Yelp restaurants to
CBP restaurants. Since we match the data by geography, not by establishment, there is no
guarantee that the same establishments are being counted in the two data sources. Nationwide, the
Yelp coverage ratio is 106.3%, meaning that Yelp captures more establishments, presumably
disproportionately smaller ones, than it misses.
        Figure 3 shows a map of Yelp coverage across the U.S. in 2015, highlighting the high
coverage in coastal and high population density areas. Approximately, 95 percent of the population
in our sample live in ZIP codes where the number of Yelp restaurants is at least 50% of the number
of CBP restaurants, and over 50 percent of the population in our ZIP code sample live in ZIP codes
with more Yelp restaurants than CBP restaurants. (see Figure 6).
         7
             Yelp coverage of CBP restaurants is strongly correlated with population density. In the
1000 most sparsely populated ZIP codes covered by CBP, mean Yelp coverage is 88% (median
coverage = 67%), while in the 1000 densest ZIP codes, mean coverage is 126% (median coverage
= 123%). Figure 7 shows the relationship between Yelp coverage of CBP restaurants and
population density across all ZIP codes covered by CBP, plotting the average Yelp/CBP ratio for
each equal-sized bin of population density. The relationship is at first negative and then positive
for population density levels above 50 people per square mile.




6
  We note that ZCTAs are only revised for the decennial census.
7
  These ratios refer to the total counts of CBP and Yelp restaurants; we can make no claims about whether the two
sources are counting the same businesses.

                                                        8
       The non-monotonicity may simply reflect a non-monotonicity in the share of restaurants
with no employees, which in turn reflects offsetting supply and demand side effects. In ZIP codes
with fewer than 50 people per square mile, Yelp tends to report one or two restaurants in many of
these areas where CBP reports none. Extremely low density levels imply limited restaurant
demand, which may only be able to support one or two small establishments. High density levels
generate robust demand for both large and small establishments, but higher density areas may also
have a disproportionately abundant supply of small-scale, often immigrant entrepreneurs. High
density levels may also have greater Yelp usage, which helps explain the upward sloping part of
the curve.
       ZIP code 93634 in Lakeshore, California exemplifies low density America. The total
population is 33 people, over an area of 1,185 square miles that is mountainous (see Figure 8a).
Yelp lists two restaurants, while CBP lists zero. The two restaurants are associated with a resort
that may be counted as part of lodging establishments in CBP. ZIP Code 45346 in New Madison,
Ohio is near the threshold of 50 people per square mile. This large rural area includes 42 square
miles and a small village with 2,293 people (see Figure 8b). Both Yelp and CBP track exactly one
restaurant, which is a snack shop in the Yelp data. A very dense ZIP code like 10128 in Manhattan,
New York City’s Upper East Side, with a population of 60,453 in an area of 0.471 square miles
(see Figure 8c), lists 177 Yelp restaurants and 137 CBP restaurants, for a Yelp coverage ratio of
129%. While this neighborhood contains many large eating establishments, it also contains an
abundance of smaller eateries, including food trucks, that are unlikely to be included in County
Business Patterns.




III. Nowcasting CBP


       We now evaluate the potential for Yelp data to provide informative measures of the local
economy by exploring its relationship with CBP measures, first using regression analysis and then
turning to a more flexible forecasting exercise.


Regression Analysis



                                                   9
       Table 2 shows results from regressing changes in CBP business numbers on prior CBP
and Yelp measures. Column (1) regresses changes in CBP’s number of businesses in year t on two
lags of CBP. The addition of one CBP establishment in the previous year is associated with an
increase in 0.3 businesses in year t, showing that there is positive serial correlation in the growth
of businesses at the ZIP code level. The correlation is also strongly positive with a two-year lag
of CBP business openings. Together, the two lags of changes in CBP establishments explain 14.8%
of the variance (as measured by adjusted r-squared).
       Column 2 of Table 2 regresses changes in CBP business numbers in year t on two lags of
CBP and the contemporaneous change in Yelp business numbers. Adding contemporaneous Yelp
business numbers increases the variance explained to 22.5%. A one-unit change in the number of
Yelp businesses in the same year is associated with increase in the number of CBP businesses of
six-tenths. This coefficient is fairly precisely estimated, so that with 99 percent confidence, a one
unit increase in the number of Yelp establishments is associated with between .55 and .66 CBP
establishments in the same year, holding two years of lagged CBP establishment growth constant.
       The prediction of a purely accounting model of establishments is that the coefficient should
equal one, but there are at least two reasons why that prediction will fail. First, if there is
measurement in the Yelp variable, that will push the coefficient below one due to attenuation bias.
Second, Yelp doesn’t include many CBP establishments, especially in industries other than retail.
If growth in retail is associated with growth in other industries, then the coefficient could be greater
than one, which we term spillover bias and expect to be positive. The estimated coefficient of .61
presumably reflects a combination of attenuation and spillover bias, with spillover bias
dominating.
       Columns 3 and 4 show that lagged Yelp data, as well as other Yelp variables including the
number of closures and reviews, are only mildly informative in explaining the variance of CBP
business number growth. Growth in CBP establishments is positively associated with one-year lag
in the growth in the number of Yelp establishments, and including that variable causes the
coefficient on contemporary establishment growth to drop to .44. Regression (4) also shows that
increases in the number of Yelp closings is negatively correlated with growth in the number of
CBP establishments, and that the number of Yelp reviews is not correlated with growth in the
number of CBP establishments. Some of these extra Yelp variables are statistically significant, but
they added little to overall explanatory power. The adjusted r-squared only rises from .225 to .229

                                                  10
between regression (2) and regression (4). The real improvement in predictive power comes from
the inclusion of contemporaneous Yelp openings, not from the more complex specification. This
suggests that simply looking at current changes in the number of Yelp establishments may be
enough for most local policy-makers who are interested in assessing the current economic path of
a neighborhood.
       Table 3 replicates the above analysis for changes in the number of restaurants in a given
ZIP code and year. The first specification suggests that there is little serial correlation in CBP
restaurant openings, and consequently, past changes in CBP do little to predict current changes.
The second regression shows a strong correlation between changes in the number of CBP
restaurant openings and contemporaneous Yelp restaurant openings. The r-squared of .11 is lower
in this specification than in the comparable regression (2) in Table 2 (.23), but this is perhaps
unsurprisingly given the much lower baseline r-squared. The improvement in r-squared from
adding contemporaneous Yelp data in the restaurant predictions is larger both in absolute and
relative terms.
       Perhaps more oddly, the coefficient on Yelp openings is .32, which is smaller for the
restaurant data than for overall data. We would perhaps expect the measurement bias problem to
be smaller for this industrial sub-group, and that would presumably lead us to expect a larger
coefficient in Table 3. The exclusion of other industries, however, reduces the scope for spillover
bias, which probably explains the lower coefficient. This shift implies that both attenuation and
spillover biases are likely to be large, which pushes against any structural interpretation of the
coefficient.
         Regression (3) includes a one-year lag of Yelp openings, which also has a positive
coefficient. Including this lag causes the coefficient on lagged CBP openings to become even
more negative. One explanation for this shift could be that actual restaurant openings display mean
reversion, but restaurants appear in Yelp before they appear in County Business Patterns.
Consequently, last year’s growth in Yelp restaurants predicts this year’s growth in CBP
restaurants. Including this lag improves the r-squared to .123.
       In regression (4), we include also our measure of closures in the Yelp data and the number
of Yelp reviews. The coefficients on both variables are statistically significant and both have the
expected signs. More Yelp closures are associated with less growth in CBP establishments. More
Yelp reviews imply more restaurant openings, perhaps because more reviews are associated with

                                                11
more demand for restaurants. Including these extra variables improves the r-squared to .139.
These regressions suggest that there is more advantage in using a more complicated Yelp-based
model to assess the time series of restaurants than to assess the overall changes in the number of
establishments.
       While these results suggest that Yelp data has the potential to serve as a useful complement
to official data sources, these regression analyses are hardly a comparison of best possible
predictors. To provide a more robust evaluation of the potential for Yelp data to provide
informative measures of the local economy, we now turn to out-of-sample forecasting of CBP
measures using more sophisticated prediction algorithms.


Forecasting with Random Forest Algorithms


       We leverage random forest algorithms to evaluate whether Yelp measures can provide
gains in nowcasting CBP measures before the release of official statistics. We are interested in the
ability of Yelp to predict changes in overall CBP establishments and restaurants over and above
the prediction power generated by lagged CBP data. Consequently, we begin our prediction task
by regressing the change in CBP establishments on the two lags of changes in CBP establishments
and ZIP code and year fixed effects. We then work with the residual quantity. Given the two lags
of CBP, our sample spans years 2012 to 2015. We use a relatively simple first stage regression
because we have a limited number of years, and because modest increases in complexity add little
predictive power.
       We assign the last year of our data set (2015) to the test set, which represents 25% of our
sample, and the rest to the training set. We then examine the ability of lagged and contemporaneous
Yelp data to predict residual changes in CBP number of establishments in a given year and ZIP
code. We include the following Yelp measures in the feature set: contemporaneous and lagged
changes in, and absolute count of, the total number of open, opened, and closed businesses,
aggregate review count, and the average rating of businesses, all in terms of total numbers and
broken down by lowest and highest price level, along with year and the total number of businesses
that closed within one year. The number of trees in the forest is set to 300. Using off-the-shelf
random forest algorithms on models with limited feature sets, our analyses represent basic
exercises to evaluate the usefulness of Yelp data, rather than to provide the most precise forecasts.

                                                 12
        Table 4 shows prediction results. The first column shows our results for CBP
establishments overall. The second column shows the results for restaurants. We evaluate the
predictive power of our algorithm in two ways. Using the 2012-2014 data, we can use an “out-of-
bag” estimate of the prediction accuracy. We also use the 2015 data as a distinct testing sample.
        The first row shows that the algorithm has an r-squared of .29 for predicting the 2014-2015
CBP openings for all businesses and an r-squared of .26 for restaurants. Since the baseline data
had already orthogonalized with respect to year, this implies that the Yelp-based algorithm can
explain between one-quarter and one-third of the variation across ZIP code in the residualized CBP
data.
        The second row shows the out-of-bag estimates of r-squared, based on the training data.
In this case, the r-squared is .21 for both data samples. The lower r-squared is not surprising given
that out-of-bag estimates can often understate the predictive power of models. Nonetheless, it is
useful to know that the fit of the model is not particular to anything about 2015.
        There appears to be a wide range of predictive ability – but on average bounded within
approximately half a standard deviation for businesses, with 8.0 mean absolute error (MAE) and
3.9 median absolute error, compared to a mean of 3.4 and a standard deviation of 15.1. The mean
and median absolute errors for restaurants are substantially smaller than for businesses, at 1.7 and
1.1, respectively, but the mean and standard deviation for restaurant growth are also substantially
lower than for businesses, at .5 and 2.9, respectively.
        Yelp’s predictive power is far from perfect, but it does provide significant improvement in
our knowledge about the path of local economies. Adding Yelp data can help marginally improve
predictions compared to using only prior CBP data.


IV. The Limits to Nowcasting by Geographic Area and Industry


        We now examine where Yelp data is better or worse at predicting local economic change,
looking across geographic traits and industry categories. As discussed earlier, we believe that Yelp
is likely to be more accurate when population densities are higher and when Yelp use is more
frequent. We are less sure why Yelp should have more predictive power in some industries than
in others, but we still test for that possibility. We first use a regression framework to examine the
interaction between Yelp changes and local economic statistics on population density, median

                                                 13
household income, and education. We then run separate regression analyses by industry categories.
Finally, we reproduce our random forest approach for geographic and industrial sub-groups.


Table 5: Interactions with Area Attributes


       Table 5 shows results from regressions where changes in Yelp’s open business numbers
are interacted with indicators for geographic characteristics. We use indicator variables that take
on a value of one if the area has greater than the median level of population density, education,
and income, and zero otherwise. Population density estimates are from the 2010 Census, while
measures of median household income and percent with a Bachelor’s degree are from the 2015
American Community Survey 5-year estimates. We present results just for total establishments,
and begin with the simple specification of regression (2) in Table 2.
       In this first regression, we find that all three interactions terms are positive and statistically
significant. The interaction with high population density is .14. The interaction with high income
is .30. The interaction with high education is .09. Together, these interactions imply that the
coefficient on contemporaneous Yelp openings is .2 in a low density, low education and low
income locale and .73 in a high density, high education, high income ZIP code. This is an
extremely large shift in coefficient size, perhaps best explained by far greater usage of Yelp in
places with more density, education and income. If higher usage leads to more accuracy, this
should cause the attenuation bias to fall and the estimated coefficient to increase.
       In the second regression, we also add lagged Yelp openings. In this case, the baseline
coefficient is negative, but again all three interactions are positive. Consequently, the estimated
coefficient on lagged Yelp openings is -.1 in low density, low income, low education locales, but
.24 in high density, high income, high education areas. Again, decreased attenuation bias is one
possible interpretation of this change. The third regression includes changes in Yelp closings and
the number of Yelp reviews.
       These interactions suggest that the predictive power of Yelp is likely to be higher in places
with more density, education and income. However, it is not true that adding interactions
significantly improves the overall r-squared. There is also little increase in r-squared from adding
the lag of Yelp openings or the other Yelp variables, just as in Table 2. While contemporaneous
Yelp openings is the primary source of explanatory power, if policy-makers want to use Yelp

                                                  14
openings to predict changes in establishments, they should recognize that the mapping between
contemporaneous Yelp openings and CBP openings is different in different places.


Table 6: The Predictive Power of Yelp and Area Attributes


           Table 5 examined how the coefficient on Yelp openings changed with area attributes.
Table 6 examines whether the predictive power of Yelp differs with the same attributes. To test
this hypothesis, we replicate Table 4 on different subsamples of the data. We split the data into
two groups based on first density, then income, and then education. The split is taken at the sample
median. For each split, we replicate our previous analysis using a random forest algorithm. Once
again, we omit the 2015 data in forming our algorithm and use that data to test the algorithm’s fit.
           The first panel of Table 6 shows the split based on density. Our two primary measures of
goodness of fit are the r-squared for 2014-2015 CBP openings and the out-of-bag r-squared
estimated for the earlier data. In the high density sample, the r-squared for the out-of-sample data
is .24. In the low density sample, the r-squared is .06. The out-of-bag r-squared is .19 in the high
density sample and .03 in the low density sample. As the earlier interactions suggest, Yelp
openings have far more predictive power in high density ZIP codes than in low density ZIP codes.
One natural interpretation of this finding is that there is much more Yelp usage in higher density
areas, and consequently Yelp provides a more accurate picture of the local economy when density
is high.
           The mean and median absolute errors are higher in high density ZIP codes than in low
density ZIP codes. Yet the mean and standard deviation of CBP establishment growth is also much
higher in such areas. Relative to the mean and standard deviation of CBP openings, the standard
errors are smaller in higher density locations. The mean and median absolute errors are 12.7 and
8.0 in the high density sample, compared to a mean CBP growth of 7.0 and standard deviation of
20.5. In low density locations, the mean and median absolute errors are 3.9 and 2.5, compared to
a mean CBP growth of .5 with a 6.5 standard deviation.
           In the second panel, we split based on income. In the higher income sample, the r-squared
for 2014-2015 data is .33 and the out-of-bag r-squared is .26. In the lower income sample, the r-
squared for the later data is .15 and the out-of-bag r-squared is .08. Once again, in higher income
areas where Yelp usage is more common, Yelp provides better predictions. In higher income areas,

                                                  15
the median absolute error (5.1) is lower than the mean CBP growth (6.1), compared to lower
income areas where the median absolute error at 3.5 is two and half times the mean CBP growth
of 1.4.
          In the final panel, we split based on education and the results are again similar. The r-
squared using the 2014-2015 data is .29 in the high education sample and .06 in the low education
sample. The out-of-bag r-squared is .23 in the high education sample and .03 in the low education
sample. Similar to the density split, the mean and median absolute errors are much higher in high
education ZIP codes than in low education ZIP codes, but smaller relative to the mean and standard
deviation of CBP establishment growth. The median absolute error in high education ZIP codes is
6.0, slightly lower than the mean CBP growth of 6.5 and approximately a third of the standard
deviation of CBP growth (19.1). In low education ZIP codes, the median absolute error is 3.0,
more than three times the mean CBP growth (.9) and approximately a third of the standard
deviation (10.2).
          Table 6 shows that the predictive power of Yelp is much lower in lower education or lower
density locations. Yelp does a bit better in lower income areas. Yelp is more effective at predicting
the local economy when education, density and income is high. This suggests that using Yelp to
understand the local economy makes more sense in richer coastal cities, than in poorer places.
          Yelp appears to complement income, education, and population density, perhaps because
higher density areas have more restaurant options. Consequently, Yelp is just a better source for
data in these areas and may be able to do more to improve local policy-making. This provides yet
another example of a setting where new technology favors areas with initial advantages.


Tables 7, 8 and 9: Cross Industry Variation


          We now examine whether Yelp is more predictive in some industries than others. We
define industry categories loosely based on NAICS supersectors, creating six industry categories
described in Table 7. These sectors include “retail, leisure and hospitality,” which is the sector
that has the most overlap with Yelp coverage, “goods production,” “transportation and wholesale
trade.” “information and financial activities,” “professional and business services” and “public
services.”



                                                 16
        We expect that Yelp’s predictive power will be higher in those industries where Yelp has
more coverage. Yelp covers local restaurants and services businesses, including hospitality, real
estate, home services, and automotive repair, as well as local landmarks including museums and
religious buildings. These industries mostly fall into two of our industry categories – retail, leisure,
and hospitality and professional and business services, with real estate and leasing falling into the
information and financial activities category.
        For each industrial supersector, we regress changes in CBP business numbers in year t on
two lags of CBP in that industry group, contemporaneous and lagged changes in Yelp business
numbers, and changes in business closures and aggregate review counts in Yelp. We include the
CBP lags in each specific industry, but we do not try to distinguish Yelp listings by industry,
primarily because Yelp coverage in most of the industries is modest.
        The first regression in Table 8 shows that the coefficients for the retail, leisure, and
hospitality industries are relatively large. A one-unit contemporaneous change in the number of
Yelp businesses is associated with a .21 change in the number of CBP businesses in that sector.
The coefficients on Yelp closings and total Yelp reviews are also significant. As in Table 3, lagged
CBP establishment openings are statistically insignificant in this sector.
        The coefficient on contemporary Yelp openings for all of the other five industrial
supersectors can essentially be grouped into two sets. For professional and business services and
for information and finance, the coefficient is close to .1, and the other Yelp variables are strongly
significant as well. For the other three supersectors, the coefficient on the Yelp variables is much
smaller. The r-squared mirrors the coefficient sizes. In retail, leisure, and hospitality and
professional and business services categories, we can explain 8.5 to 10.2 percent of the variation
in CBP measures using lagged CBP and Yelp data, compared to 0.9 to 8.2 percent in the other
industry categories. These results suggest that Yelp is most likely to be useful for retail and
professional services industries and less likely for public services, goods manufacturing or
transportation and wholesale trade.
        Finally, Table 9 replicates our random forest approach for each of the industrial
supersectors. Again, we follow the same two stage structure of first orthogonalizing with respect
to year, ZIP code, and past CBP changes. We again exclude the 2014-2015 CBP data from the
training data. We again calculate both the out-of-sample r-squared for that later year and we
calculate the out-of-bag r-squared based on earlier data.

                                                  17
        The cross-industry pattern here is similar to the pattern seen in the regressions. Yelp has
the greatest predictive power for hospitality and leisure, professional and business services, and
information and finance. Among this group, however, Yelp data has the greatest ability to predict
movement in professional and business services, perhaps because that sector is less volatile than
restaurants. In this group, the r-squared for 2014-2015 data ranges from .11 for information and
finance to .17 for professional and business services. The out-of-bag r-squared values range from
.08 to .16.
        Goods production and public services show less predictability from Yelp data. The 2014-
2015 r-squared for both these two groups is approximately .07. The out-of-bag r-squared is less
than .01 for goods production and .03 for public services. Finally, Yelp shows little ability to
predict transportation and wholesale trade.
        Our overall conclusion from this exercise is that Yelp does better at predicting overall
changes in the number of establishments than in predicting changes within any one industry. The
safest industries to focus on relatively fall either to hospitality or to business services. For
manufacturing and wholesale trade, Yelp doesn’t seem to offer much predictive power.


V. Identifying Neighborhood-Level Trends: Evidence from New York City


        We now turn to a concrete example of how the data might be useful for policymakers,
focusing on Brooklyn and Manhattan in New York City (NYC) -- an area that has had high Yelp
penetration since Yelp’s early years. This section provides a small case study in how data from
Yelp might be used to quantify within city variation in economic activity, and go beyond the data
already contained in the census to demonstrate what might be learned by data that is contained
only in external datasets (in this case, Yelp).
        Figure 11 shows a map of Yelp coverage across NYC in 2009, where Yelp coverage in
most of Brooklyn and Manhattan was over 75%. In 2015, New York City had a total of 19,673
CBP restaurants and 22,562 Yelp restaurants -- with over 60% of these in Manhattan and Brooklyn
(see Figure 12 for a map of Yelp coverage in 2015). There are no ZIP codes that CBP covers that
are not covered in Yelp (see Figure 13 for the distribution of Yelp/CBP ratios, average ratings,
and aggregate review counts across NYC ZIP codes).



                                                  18
       We examine fast-growing ZIP codes in recent years in Manhattan and Brooklyn. Between
2012-2014, ZIP codes that show the highest growth in Yelp and CBP are comparable, in that all
ZIP codes with highest CBP growth also show high Yelp growth (see Table 10a). Table 10b
shows the fastest-growing ZIP codes sorted by Yelp growth rate, which suggests that Yelp appears
to find growth in areas that CBP doesn't show, which may be in part but not in full explained by
growth in Yelp reviews. Mapping ZIP codes to neighborhoods is challenging, since no official
definition of NYC neighborhoods exists and ZIP codes rarely match up cleanly with commonly
accepted neighborhood boundaries. We map ZIP codes to neighborhoods using ZCTA shapefiles
and Google Maps’ definitions of NYC neighborhoods. Between 2012 and 2014, CBP shows
highest growth in Williamsburg waterfront (11249), parts of Prospect Heights/Crown Heights/Fort
Greene/Clinton Hill (11238), Washington Heights (10040), eastern Bushwick (11237), and
Greenpoint (11222) -- where Yelp also shows high growth. Yelp’s five fastest-growing ZIP codes
also shows growth in Williamsburg and Bushwick, but also identifies western East New York and
southern Bushwick (11207), eastern East New York and part of Cypress Hills (11208), and
northern Brownsville and eastern Bedford-Stuyvesant (11233) -- all areas that from casual
empiricism experienced gentrification and growth in these years.
       We now suppose that we are in 2016, when the latest CBP data available is from 2014.
Focusing on Manhattan and Brooklyn, which areas have been growing quickly between 2014 and
2016 that we wouldn’t have been able to see from CBP data in 2014? With only a few exceptions,
Yelp data from 2014 to 2016 shows before CBP 2015 is released whether growth is likely to slow
or rise (see Table 11). The five fastest-growing ZIP codes between 2014 and 2016 in Yelp include
areas that were already fast-growing in CBP 2014 like Williamsburg waterfront (11249) and
eastern Bushwick (11237), but also include Prospect Lefferts Gardens and Crown Heights (11225),
northern Brownsville and eastern Bedford Stuyvesant (11233), and eastern Crown Heights (11213)
-- all areas that showed little growth in CBP 2012-2014 but high growth in 2014-2015 once CBP
2015 was released.
       Similarly, Yelp data points to ZIP codes that experience slowing growth that is eventually
reflected in CBP 2015. Between 2014 and 2016, the five areas with slowest (or negative) growth
are Harlem (10030), Sheepshead Bay and Gerritsen Beach (11229), Upper East Side (10021),
Midtown East (10022), and the intersection of Greenwich Village, East Village, Gramercy Park,
and Union Square (10003) -- only one of which showed negative growth in Yelp and CBP between

                                              19
2012 and 2014 (10021). CBP 2015 shows a slowing of growth in at least three of these ZIP codes
(11229, 10022, 10003).
       This example, in addition to our analyses, suggests how Yelp data can be useful for
policymakers in particular areas. In some ways, our exercise in this paper is a cross-validation to
evaluate the legitimacy of Yelp as a data source for policy.


Combining Yelp with Other Data


       A tight geographic focus enables us to examine whether other variables available in Yelp
may create even more predictive power. One of these Yelp variables is the price level of local
businesses. Figure 14 shows the average price level of open restaurants by ZIP code across NYC
in 2015, pointing to areas that may have higher average prices across local businesses. Another
dimension that Yelp data provides is more granularity into what types of businesses are opening
and closing in a given ZIP code -- which we cannot glean through aggregate numbers of open
businesses as provided by official sources like CBP. For example, among the 10 ZIP codes
showing highest growth in Yelp in 2014-2016 (Table 11), we analyze the number of restaurants
closed in 2015 and 2016 over the number of open restaurants in 2014. We find that Brownsville,
Financial District, and Crown Heights show a low rate of closure (0.05 - 0.1), while Prospect
Lefferts Gardens / Crown Heights, Bushwick, and Bedford-Stuyvesant / Bushwick show almost
double that rate (0.22 - 0.29) -- highlighting different trajectories of growth. Furthermore, while
every ZIP code in this list of high growth showed at least a 10% growth in inexpensive restaurants,
Williamsburg and Prospect Lefferts Gardens / Crown Heights experienced the highest growth in
this category (41.8% and 31.4%), while only the Financial District and Williamsburg added more
expensive restaurants ($$$+ in Yelp, representing over $31 per person). Figures 15-18 show the
number of restaurant openings and closings by price level across NYC in 2015.
       This snapshot of NYC openings and closings by price provides one example of how Yelp
data can offer additional data points not available in government data sets. In addition to these
dimensions, Yelp also provides data on consumer reviews and detailed business attributes
including hours, and services like wifi, reservations, and delivery, which can potentially allow for
new insight into local economies.



                                                20
V. Conclusion


       Recent years have witnessed ongoing discussions about how to update or replace the
national census across many countries. For example, the United Kingdom considered replacing
the census with administrative data as well as third-party data from search engines like Google
(Hope 2010, Sanghani 2013). One of the areas that the U.S. Census Bureau has been considering
in its new plan to pare $5.2 billion dollars from its cost of $20 billion for the decennial census is
to utilize administrative records and third-party data (U.S. Census Bureau 2015a, Mervis 2017).
       Our analyses of one possible data source, Yelp, suggests that these new data sources can
be a useful complement to official government data. Yelp can help predict contemporaneous
changes in the local economy. It can also provide a snapshot of economic change at the local level.
It is a useful addition to the data tools that local policy-makers can access.
       Yet our analysis also highlights the challenges with the idea of replacing the Census
altogether at any point in the near future. Government statistical agencies invest heavily in
developing relatively complete coverage, for a wide set of metrics. The variation in coverage
inherent in data from online platforms make it difficult to replace the role of providing official
statistics that government data sources play.
       Ultimately, data from platforms like Yelp –combined with official government statistics –
can provide valuable complementary datasets that will ultimately allow for more timely and
granular forecasts and policy analyses, with a wider set of variables and more complete view of
the local economy.




                                                 21
References

Cavallo, Alberto (2012). “Scraped Data and Sticky Prices.” MIT Sloan Working Paper.

Bureau of Labor Statistics (2010). “Mission Statement.” Accessed June 10, 2017.
https://www.bls.gov/bls/blsmissn.htm

Census Bureau (2017). “About the Bureau.” Accessed June 10, 2017.
https://www.census.gov/about/what.html

Choi, Hyunyoung, and Hal Varian (2012). “Predicting the Present with Google Trends.”
Economic Record 88:2–9

Einav, Liran, and Jon Levin (2014). "The Data Revolution and Economic Analysis," Innovation
Policy and the Economy 14: https://doi.org/10.1086/674019

Glaeser, Edward L., Scott Duke Kominers, Michael Luca, and Nikhil Naik (2017). "Big Data
and Big Cities: The Promises and Limitations of Improved Measures of Urban Life." Economic
Inquiry (forthcoming).

Goel, Sharad, Jake M. Hofman, Sebastien Lahaie, David M. Pennock, and Duncan J. Watts
(2010). “Predicting consumer behavior with Web search.” PNAS 107(41): 17486-17490.

Guzman, Jorge, and Scott Stern (2016). “Nowcasting and Placecasting Entrepreneurial Quality
and Performance.” Working Paper.

Hope, Christopher (2010). “National Census to be axed after 200 years.” The Telegraph, July 9,
2010. <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/7882774/National-census-to-be-axed-after-
200-years.html> Accessed July 6, 2017.

Mervis, Jeffrey (2017). “Scientists fear pending attack on federal statistics collection.” Science
Magazine, January 3, 2017. <http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/01/scientists-fear-pending-
attack-federal-statistics-collection> Accessed July 6, 2017.

Owens, Brian (2015). “Canada reinstates mandatory census, to delight of social scientists.”
Science Magazine, November 5, 2015. <http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2015/11/updated-
canada-reinstates-mandatory-census-delight-social-scientists> Accessed July 6, 2017.

Sanghani, Radhika (2013). “Google could replace national census.” The Telegraph, June 26,
2013. <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/10142641/Google-could-replace-national-
census.html> Accessed July 6, 2017.

U.S. Census Bureau (2015a). “2020 Census Operational Plan Overview and Operational Areas.”
<https://censusproject.files.wordpress.com/2015/12/2020-census-opplan-conference-call_the-
census-project_10-21-15_final-1.pdf> Accessed July 6, 2017.



                                                22
U.S. Census Bureau (2015b). “Potential data sources to replace or enhance the question on
condominium status on the American Community Survey.”
<https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/working-
papers/2015/acs/2015_Flanagan_Doyle_01.pdf> Accessed July 6, 2017.

Wu, Lin, and Erik Brynjolfsson (2015). “The Future of Prediction: How Google Searches
Foreshadow Housing Prices and Sales” in Economic Analysis of the Digital Economy, eds. Avi
Goldfarb, Shane M. Greenstein, and Catherine E. Tucker. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2015.

Yelp (2017). News Release, “Yelp to Participate in the J.P. Morgan Global Technology, Media
and Telecom Conference,” May 24, 2017. Accessed June 10, 2017.
http://www.yelp-ir.com/phoenix.zhtml?c=250809&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=2272465




                                              23
Figure 1 Example of Yelp Restaurant Listing




This figure shows a screenshot of the Yelp platform, for a search of restaurants in New York, NY.


                                                                              24
Figure 2 Yelp Coverage of CBP Establishments by ZIP Code in 2015




This map shows the ratio of Yelp-reviewed businesses to CBP establishments by ZIP code in 2015. All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or Yelp are included.
Hues from red to green indicate the Yelp/CBP ratio, from red indicating low Yelp coverage (0-4%) to green that indicates higher Yelp coverage (15% and higher).
Shading indicates population density, with darker regions showing greater population density.




                                                                             25
Figure 3 Yelp Coverage of CBP Restaurants by ZIP Code in 2015




This map shows the ratio of Yelp-reviewed restaurants to CBP restaurants by ZIP code in 2015. All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or Yelp are included. Hues
from red to green indicate the Yelp/CBP ratio, from red indicating low Yelp coverage (0-24%) to green that indicates higher Yelp coverage (75% and higher).
Shading indicates population density, with darker regions showing greater population density.




                                                                            26
Figure 4 Number of Businesses Recorded by CBP vs. Yelp 2004-2015




These figures compare the mean and median number of businesses per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp and CBP between 2004 (when Yelp was founded) to 2015,
in all ZIP codes covered by both sources. Yelp Opened shows the mean and median number of businesses opened that year per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp. Yelp
Closed represents the mean and median number of businesses closed that year per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp.




                                                                            27
Figure 5 Number of Restaurants Recorded by CBP vs. Yelp 2004-2015




These figures compare the mean and median number of restaurants per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp and CBP between 2004 (when Yelp was founded) to 2015,
in all ZIP codes covered by both sources. Yelp Opened shows the mean and median number of restaurants opened that year per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp. Yelp
Closed represents the mean and median number of restaurants closed that year per ZIP code as recorded by Yelp.




                                                                            28
Figure 6 Distribution of Yelp Coverage Across ZIP codes (Weighted by Population)




This figure shows the cumulative density function of Yelp coverage weighted by population, across all ZIP codes that
CBP covers. For each ratio of Yelp to CBP restaurants, this figure shows the percentage of ZIP codes that has that
ratio or higher. This figure has been truncated at Yelp/CBP ratio = 2.




                                                        29
Figure 7 Yelp Coverage by Population Density




This figure shows the conditional expectation function of the ratio of Yelp to CBP restaurants on population density
across all ZIP codes covered by CBP, plotting the average Yelp/CBP ratio for each equal-sized bin of population
density.




                                                        30
Figure 8 ZIP code examples




These figures show the ZIP Code Tabulation Areas of ZIP code examples described. The top left figure shows 93634
in Lakeshore, California – a mountainous area with low population density where Yelp reports 2 restaurants and CBP
0 (in 2015). The figure on top right shows 45346 in New Madison, Ohio, a large rural area encompassing a small
village where both CBP and Yelp report one restaurant. The figure on bottom shows 10129 in Manhattan, New York
City’s Upper East Side with high population density and a high Yelp coverage of 129%.




                                                       31
Figure 9 Relationship between CBP Establishment Growth and Lagged CBP Establishment and Yelp Business Growth




All figures show binned scatterplots that plot the conditional expectation function of the change in number of open businesses as recorded by CBP in a given ZIP
code and year. On the top left (a), we plot the average change in the number of businesses recorded by CBP in a given ZIP code and year for each value of the
change in number of businesses open in a given ZIP code in the previous year as recorded by CBP. The figure on the top right (b) plots the conditional expectation
function for each value of the change in number of open businesses in a given ZIP code in the previous year as recorded by Yelp. The bottom figure (c) plots the
average change in the number of businesses recorded by CBP in a given ZIP code and year for each value of the previous year’s change in number of open
businesses as recorded by Yelp, controlling for the change recorded by CBP in the previous year.


                                                                               32
Figure 10 Relationship between CBP Restaurant Growth and Lagged CBP and Yelp Restaurant Growth




All figures show binned scatterplots that plot the conditional expectation function of the change in number of open restaurants as recorded by CBP in a given ZIP
code and year. On the top left (a), we plot the average change in the number of restaurants recorded by CBP in a given ZIP code and year for each value of the
change in number of restaurants open in a given ZIP code in the previous year as recorded by CBP. The figure on the top right (b) plots the conditional expectation
function for each value of the change in number of open restaurants in a given ZIP code in the previous year as recorded by Yelp. The bottom figure (c) plots the
average change in the number of restaurants recorded by CBP in a given ZIP code and year for each value of the previous year’s change in number of open
restaurants as recorded by Yelp, controlling for the change recorded by CBP in the previous year.


                                                                               33
Figure 11 Yelp Coverage of NYC in 2009




This figure shows the ratio of Yelp-reviewed restaurants to CBP restaurants across New York City by ZIP code in 2009. All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or
Yelp are included. Hues from red to green indicate the Yelp/CBP ratio, from red indicating low Yelp coverage (0-24%) to green that indicates higher Yelp coverage
(75% and higher). Shading indicates population density, with darker regions showing greater population density.




                                                                              34
Figure 12 Yelp Coverage of NYC in 2015




This figure shows the ratio of Yelp-reviewed restaurants to CBP restaurants across New York City by ZIP code in 2015. All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or
Yelp are included. Hues from red to green indicate the Yelp/CBP ratio, from red indicating low Yelp coverage (0-24%) to green that indicates higher Yelp coverage
(75% and higher). Shading indicates population density, with darker regions showing greater population density.




                                                                              35
Figure 13 Distribution of Yelp Coverage, Review Count, and Ratings Across NYC in 2015




These figures show histograms of Yelp to CBP restaurants ratio, average Yelp ratings, and total Yelp review count per ZIP code across New York City in 2015.
The last figure on bottom right shows the distribution of average Yelp review count per restaurant per ZIP code.


                                                                            36
Figure 14 Average Price Level of Yelp Restaurants by ZIP Code in NYC 2015




This figure shows the average price level of restaurants across New York City by ZIP code in 2015 as listed in Yelp. All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or Yelp
are included. Hues from red to green indicate the average price, from red indicating low price (1-1.49 dollar signs) to green indicating higher Yelp coverage (1.75
dollar signs and higher). Yelp dollar signs indicate $= under $10. $$=11–30. $$$=31–60. $$$$= over $61 per person. Shading indicates population density, with
darker regions showing greater population density.




                                                                               37
Figure 15 Number of Inexpensive ($) Yelp Restaurants Per Capita Opening in 2015




This figure shows the number of inexpensive restaurants (under $10 per person) per capita that opened in New York City in 2015 by ZIP code, as listed in Yelp.
All ZIP codes covered by either CBP or Yelp are included. Hues from red to green indicate the number of restaurants normalized by the population level in that
ZIP code, from red indicating low numbers opened (0-0.49) to green indicating higher numbers opened (1.5 and higher).




                                                                             38
Figure 16 Number of Mid-to-Expensive ($$+) Yelp Restaurants Per Capita Opening in 2015




This figure shows the number of expensive restaurants (over $10 per person) per capita that opened in New York City in 2015 by ZIP code, as listed in Yelp. All
ZIP codes covered by either CBP or Yelp are included. Hues from red to green indicate the number of restaurants normalized by the population level in that ZIP
code, from red indicating low numbers opened (0-0.99) to green indicating higher numbers opened (3 and higher).




                                                                             39
Figure 17 Number of Inexpensive ($) Yelp Restaurants Closing in 2015




This figure shows the number of inexpensive restaurants (under $10 per person) that closed in New York City in 2015 by ZIP code, as listed in Yelp. All ZIP codes
covered by either CBP or Yelp are included. Hues from green to red indicate the number of restaurants normalized by the population level in that ZIP code, from
green indicating low numbers closed (0-0.49) to red indicating higher numbers closed (1.5 and higher).




                                                                              40
Figure 18 Number of Mid-to-Expensive ($$+) Yelp Restaurants Closing in 2015




This figure shows the number of inexpensive restaurants (over $10 per person) that closed in New York City in 2015 by ZIP code, as listed in Yelp. All ZIP codes
covered by either CBP or Yelp are included. Hues from green to red indicate the number of restaurants normalized by the population level in that ZIP code, from
green indicating low numbers closed (0-0.99) to red indicating higher numbers closed (3 and higher).




                                                                              41
Table 1 Summary Statistics

                                                                Businesses                   Restaurants
                                                                        Annual            Number     Annual
                                                             Number
                                                                        Growth                       Growth

 CBP Number of Open Establishments                          317.920          1.717         27.723         0.484
                                                           (432.933)       (14.503)       (34.026)       (2.852)

 Yelp Number of Open Businesses                              52.274          4.071         26.679         1.811
                                                            (99.450)        (9.159)       (38.880)       (3.571)

 Yelp Number of Closed Businesses                             1.534          0.476         1.076          0.294
                                                             (4.878)        (2.221)       (2.745)        (1.622)

 Number of Yelp Reviews                                     272.051    69.266   247.470    63.386
                                                          (1218.273) (260.433) (984.581) (214.393)

 Average Yelp Rating                                          3.000          0.162         3.104          0.144
                                                             (1.547)        (1.560)       (1.350)        (1.405)

 Yelp Number of Businesses that Closed
                                                             0.038          -0.268         0.032         -0.140
 Within 1 Year
                                                             (0.235)        (8.157)       (0.204)        (3.386)

 Yelp Number of Opened Businesses                             5.497          0.012         2.831          0.010
                                                            (11.697)        (0.271)       (4.831)        (0.252)

 Observations                                                159369         136602        127176         109008

 Population Density per Sq. Mile                           1756.609                      2034.598
                                                          (5634.997)                    (6035.183)

 % Bachelor's Degree or Higher                               26.556                        27.686
                                                            (16.249)                      (16.438)

 Median Household Income in Past 12
                                                          56533.953                     57271.358
 Months (in 2015 dollars)
                                                         (23725.879)                   (24219.673)

 Observations                                                145425                       122976
Means and standard deviations (in parentheses) are displayed for each variable, for absolute numbers and annual
changes of both businesses and restaurants. Each observation is at the ZIP code – year level, across years 2009-2015.
Population Density estimates are from the 2010 Census. Percent with a Bachelor’s Degree or Higher and Median
Household Income are from the 2015 American Community Survey 5-year estimates.

                                                        42
Table 2 Predicting CBP Establishment Growth Using Regression Analysis

                                  (1)                     (2)                    (3)                    (4)
                                 CBP                     CBP                    CBP                    CBP
                             Establishment           Establishment          Establishment          Establishment
                                Growth                  Growth                 Growth                 Growth
 CBP Establishment
                                 0.271***               0.197***                0.189***               0.188***
 Growth (lag1)
                                  (0.018)                (0.017)                (0.017)                (0.017)
 CBP Establishment
                                 0.219***               0.190***                0.185***               0.184***
 Growth (lag2)
                                  (0.010)                (0.011)                (0.011)                (0.011)
 Yelp Business
                                                        0.605***                0.443***               0.495***
 Growth
                                                         (0.023)                (0.029)                (0.029)
 Yelp Business
                                                                                0.194***               0.169***
 Growth (lag1)
                                                                                (0.025)                (0.025)
 Yelp Growth in
                                                                                                      -0.264***
 Closed Businesses
                                                                                                       (0.048)
 Yelp Reviews
 Growth                                                                                                 0.094
 (divided by 100)
                                                                                                       (0.081)
                                        ***                    ***                    ***
 Constant                        4.542                  1.782                   1.854                  1.822***
                                 (0.127)                (0.148)                 (0.149)                (0.144)
 Year FE                           Yes                    Yes                     Yes                    Yes
 Observations                     91068                  91068                   91068                  91068
 Adjusted R2                      0.148                  0.225                   0.228                  0.229
All regressions include a full set of calendar year dummies and cluster standard errors at the ZIP Code level. * p<0.10,
** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                          43
Table 3 Predicting CBP Restaurant Growth Using Regression Analysis

                                                 (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                                CBP                 CBP               CBP                 CBP
                                             Restaurant         Restaurant         Restaurant         Restaurant
                                               Growth             Growth             Growth             Growth
 CBP Restaurant Growth (lag1)                 -0.049***          -0.127***          -0.157***          -0.165***
                                               (0.010)            (0.009)            (0.009)            (0.009)
 CBP Restaurant Growth (lag2)                 0.059***             -0.012           -0.034***          -0.048***
                                               (0.008)            (0.007)            (0.007)            (0.007)
 Yelp Restaurant Growth                                          0.319***           0.257***            0.274***
                                                                  (0.008)            (0.008)            (0.009)
 Yelp Restaurant Growth (lag1)                                                      0.132***            0.088***
                                                                                     (0.009)            (0.009)
 Yelp Growth in
                                                                                                       -0.119***
 Closed Restaurants
                                                                                                        (0.013)
 Yelp Reviews Growth
                                                                                                        0.164***
 (divided by 100)
                                                                                                        (0.020)
                                                     ***                ***                ***
 Constant                                     0.783              0.160               0.099              0.166***
                                              (0.025)            (0.024)             (0.025)            (0.024)
 Year FE                                        Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
 Observations                                  72672              72672               72672              72672
 Adjusted R2                                   0.009              0.110               0.123              0.139
All regressions include a full set of calendar year dummies and cluster standard errors at the ZIP Code level. *
p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                           44
Table 4 Predicting CBP Establishment and Restaurant Growth Using Random Forest

                                                   Establishments                             Restaurants
 R-squared                                               0.292                                    0.264
 Out-of-bag R-squared                                    0.214                                    0.212
 Mean Absolute Error                                     7.989                                    1.713
 Mean Squared Error                                    222.067                                    7.200
 Median Absolute Error                                   3.871                                    1.062
 Mean CBP Growth                                         3.393                                    0.539
 St. Dev CBP Growth                                     15.078                                    2.913
 Observations                                            91068                                   72672
All analyses predict residual variance in the change in CBP establishments after regressing two lags of changes in
CBP establishments with ZIP code and year fixed effects. Features include year and the change in and absolute number
of total open, opened, and closed businesses as recorded by Yelp, aggregate review count, and average rating, and
broken down by lowest and highest business price level. The sample covers the time period 2012-2015, and all
observations for 2015 have been assigned to the test set, and the rest to training. The number of trees in the forest is
set to 300. The number of observations, means and standard deviations of CBP Growth are reported using the full set
of observations across both training and test sets.




                                                          45
Table 5 Predicting CBP Establishment Growth by Area Attributes Using Regression Analysis

                                                                  (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                                 CBP           CBP           CBP
                                                            Establishment Establishment Establishment
                                                               Growth        Growth        Growth
 CBP Establishment Growth (lag1)                               0.188***      0.179***      0.179***
                                                               (0.018)       (0.018)       (0.017)
                                                                      ***           ***
 CBP Establishment Growth (lag2)                               0.182         0.177         0.175***
                                                               (0.011)       (0.011)       (0.011)
                                                                      ***           ***
 Yelp Business Growth                                          0.195         0.302         0.339***
                                                               (0.047)       (0.060)       (0.060)
                                                                       **
 High Density * Yelp Business Growth                           0.144          0.016         0.021
                                                               (0.047)       (0.065)       (0.065)
 High Income * Yelp Business Growth                            0.295***      0.222**       0.224**
                                                               (0.037)       (0.072)       (0.072)
                                                                       **
 High Education * Yelp Business Growth                         0.092          -0.022        -0.004
                                                               (0.035)       (0.068)       (0.067)
 Yelp Business Growth (lag1)                                                 -0.106*       -0.112*
                                                                             (0.047)       (0.047)
                                                                                     **
 High Density * Yelp Business Growth (lag1)                                  0.139         0.136**
                                                                             (0.047)       (0.047)
 High Income * Yelp Business Growth (lag1)                                    0.086         0.084
                                                                             (0.073)       (0.073)
 High Education * Yelp Business Growth
                                                                                      0.125*               0.115
 (lag1)
                                                                                     (0.062)              (0.061)
 Yelp Growth in Closed Businesses                                                                        -0.281***
                                                                                                          (0.048)
 Yelp Reviews Growth (divided by 100)                                                                      0.056
                                                                                                          (0.074)
 Constant                                                       2.066***             2.095***            2.038***
                                                                (0.154)              (0.156)              (0.153)
 Year FE                                                          Yes                  Yes                  Yes
 Observations                                                    83100                83100                83100
 Adjusted R2                                                     0.230                0.233                0.235
All regressions include a full set of calendar year dummies and cluster standard errors at the ZIP Code level. Indicators
High Density, High Income, and High Education equal 1 if a ZIP Code is above the median across all ZIP Codes in
population density, median household income, and percent with a bachelor's degree, respectively. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05,
*** p<0.01.




                                                          46
Table 6 Predicting CBP Establishment Growth by Area Attributes Using Random Forest

                                  Population Density                    Income                        Education
                                    High           Low            High            Low            High            Low
 R-squared                         0.244           0.056          0.328          0.149           0.291          0.064
 Out-of-bag R-squared              0.194           0.029          0.256          0.075           0.234          0.023
 Mean Absolute Error              12.731           3.922          9.806          6.997          11.111          5.593
 Mean Squared Error               427.918         42.065        292.104         186.273        363.237         110.182
 Median Absolute Error             7.966          2.492          5.0785           3.476          6.030          3.034
 Mean CBP Growth                   6.799          0.494           6.106           1.370          6.453          0.900
 St. Dev CBP Growth               20.484          6.485          17.654          13.011         19.137         10.153
 Observations                     42644           42648          41548           41552          42224          42568
Broken down by subsamples of the data based on population density, median household income, and percent with a
Bachelor’s degree, all analyses predict residual variance in the change in CBP establishments after regressing two lags
of changes in CBP establishments with ZIP code and year fixed effects. Features include year and the change in and
absolute number of total open, opened, and closed businesses as recorded by Yelp, aggregate review count, and
average rating, and broken down by lowest and highest business price level. The sample covers the time period 2012-
2015, and all observations for 2015 have been assigned to the test set, and the rest to training. The number of trees in
the forest is set to 300. Each column indicates which subsample of the data was analyzed. The number of observations,
means and standard deviations of CBP Growth are reported for each column using the full set of observations across
both training and test sets.




                                                           47
Table 7 Industry Category Definitions

 Category                  NAICS sectors Description
 Retail, Leisure, and      44, 45, 71, 72  Retail stores and dealers, arts, entertainment,
 Hospitality                               recreation, accommodation, and food services
 Goods Production          11, 21, 22, 23, Agriculture, forestry, fishing, hunting, mining,
                           31, 32, 33      quarrying, oil and gas extraction, utilities, construction,
                                           and manufacturing
 Transportation and        42, 48, 49      Wholesale traders, markets, and agents; transportation
 Wholesale Trade                           and support activities; postal and delivery services; and
                                           warehousing
 Information and           51, 52, 53      Publishing, media production, telecommunications,
 Financial Activities                      finance, insurance, real estate, and leasing
 Professional and          54, 55, 56, 81  Professional, scientific, technical, administrative, and
 Business Services                         support services; management of companies; waste
                                           management; repair and maintenance; personal and
                                           laundry services; religious and other organizations
 Public Services           61, 62, 92, 99  Education, health care, social assistance, public
                                           administration, and government
All CBP establishments are classified by NAICS codes, and each NAICS code was categorized into an industry
category, based loosely on NAICS supersectors.




                                                     48
Table 8 Predicting CBP Establishment Growth by Industry Category Using Regression Analysis

                                              (1)                 (2)                (3)                   (4)                  (5)                 (6)
                                                                                Transportation         Information         Professional
                                      Retail, Leisure,          Goods
                                                                                and Wholesale         and Financial        and Business       Public Services
                                      and Hospitality         Production
                                                                                    Trade               Activities           Services
 CBP Establishment Growth
                                           -0.077               -0.010                0.006               -0.065              0.068***            0.180***
 (own industry, lag1)
                                           (0.055)              (0.007)              (0.018)              (0.067)             (0.014)             (0.043)
 CBP Establishment Growth
                                            0.003              0.044***              0.039*               0.038*              0.103***            0.095***
 (own industry, lag2)
                                          (0.060)              (0.006)              (0.015)              (0.019)              (0.013)             (0.028)
 Yelp Business Growth                     0.214***             0.015**              0.035***             0.090***             0.112***            0.039***
                                          (0.016)              (0.006)              (0.007)              (0.010)              (0.013)             (0.009)
 Yelp Business Growth (lag1)               0.025               0.034***              -0.007              0.068***             0.102***            0.054***
                                          (0.013)              (0.005)              (0.006)              (0.011)              (0.012)             (0.010)
 Yelp Growth in Closed
                                          -0.112***             -0.018              -0.038***            -0.055***            -0.041*             -0.037*
 Businesses
                                           (0.030)              (0.010)              (0.011)              (0.016)             (0.020)             (0.018)
 Yelp Reviews Growth
                                           0.086**              0.035**               0.013               -0.039               0.083*             0.084***
 (divided by 100)
                                           (0.030)              (0.011)             (0.017)               (0.033)             (0.033)             (0.019)
 Constant                                   -0.139             -0.139***            0.397***               0.151*             0.461***             0.034
                                           (0.102)              (0.029)             (0.030)               (0.071)             (0.048)             (0.033)
 Year FE                                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Observations                               91068                91068               91068                 91068               91068               91068
 Adjusted R2                                0.085                0.020               0.009                 0.051               0.102               0.082
All regressions include a full set of calendar year dummies and cluster standard errors at the ZIP Code level. * p<0.10, ** p<0.05, *** p<0.01.




                                                                               49
Table 9 Predicting CBP Establishment Growth by Industry Category Using Random Forest

                                                                             Transportation          Information          Professional
                                 Retail, Leisure,           Goods
                                                                             and Wholesale          and Financial         and Business         Public Services
                                 and Hospitality          Production
                                                                                 Trade                Activities            Services
 R-squared                             0.131                 0.066               0.014                  0.109                0.172                   0.072
 Out-of-bag R-squared                  0.147                 0.004                  0.007                0.079                 0.158                 0.034
 Mean Absolute Error                   3.161                 2.315                  1.759                2.205                 3.437                 2.448
 Mean Squared Error                   36.203                13.300                  10.468              17.752                38.502                36.945

 Median Absolute Error                 1.616                 1.392                  0.967                0.982                 1.659                 1.161
 Mean CBP Growth                       0.648                 0.280                  0.193                0.469                 1.030                 0.774
 St. Dev CBP Growth                    5.755                 3.585                  3.231                4.498                 6.303                 5.097
 Observations                          91068                 91068                  91068               91068                 91068                 91068
Broken down by subsamples of the data based on industry categories, all analyses predict residual variance in the change in CBP establishments after regressing
two lags of changes in CBP establishments with ZIP code and year fixed effects. Features include year and the contemporaneous and lagged change in and absolute
number of total open, opened, and closed businesses as recorded by Yelp, aggregate review count, and average rating, and broken down by lowest and highest
business price level. The sample covers the time period 2012-2015, and all observations for 2015 have been assigned to the test set, and the rest to training. The
number of trees in the forest is set to 300. Each column indicates which subsample of the data was analyzed. The number of observations, means and standard
deviations of CBP Growth are reported for each column using the full set of observations across both training and test sets.




                                                                               50
Table 10 ZIP codes with Highest CBP and Yelp Growth, 2012-2014

Highest CBP Growth
                                       Yelp            CBP         Yelp       CBP                       Review
                                  Restaurants      Restaurants   Growth %   Growth %   Yelp Reviews    Growth %
 Rank       City          ZIP     2012     2014   2012    2014    ’12-14     ’12-14    2012     2014    ’12-14
   1    Brooklyn, NY     11249      42       74     43      71      76         65      1650     2551       55
   2    Brooklyn, NY     11238     176      214    129     172      22         33      3582     5460       52
   3    New York, NY     10040      42       55     41      54      31         32       247      494      100
   4    Brooklyn, NY     11237     121      164     86     110      36         28       799     2355      195
   5    Brooklyn, NY     11222     150      199    109     139      33         28      2214     3680       66
   6    New York, NY     10027     134      159     92     117      19         27      1950     3208       65
   7    Brooklyn, NY     11206     115      142     87     109      23         25      1362     2018       48
   8    New York, NY     10026      57       77     48      59      35         23      1080     2161      100
   9    New York, NY     10005      63       71     42      51      13         21       557      765       37
  10    Brooklyn, NY     11211     366      423    250     298      16         19      9776    12540       28
  11    Brooklyn, NY     11219      67       77     82      97      15         18       196      441      125
  12    New York, NY     10039      23       28     25      29      22         16        72       85       18
  13    New York, NY     10018     292      335    228     264      15         16      4530     7615       68
  14    New York, NY     10029     170      199    144     165      17         15      1283     1804       41
  15    Brooklyn, NY     11210      52       70     55      63      35         15        78      319      309
  16    Brooklyn, NY     11231     150      152    114     129       1         13      2911     3118        7
  17    Brooklyn, NY     11220     219      246    249     280      12         12      1047     1672       60
  18    Brooklyn, NY     11214     131      157    147     165      20         12       805     1507       87
  19    New York, NY     10031      86      102     66      74      19         12       476     1180      149
  20    New York, NY     10034      77       93     61      68      21         11       686     1331       94




                                                           51
Highest Yelp Growth

                                                Yelp                CBP               Yelp              CBP                                      Review
                                           Restaurants          Restaurants         Growth %          Growth %           Yelp Reviews           Growth %
 Rank          City             ZIP        2012     2014       2012    2014          ’12-14            ’12-14            2012    2014            ’12-14
   1       Brooklyn, NY        11249         42       74         43      74            76                65              1650    2551               55
   2       Brooklyn, NY        11207         55       81         97      99            47                 2                77     259              236
   3       Brooklyn, NY        11208         48       67         79      81            40                 3                43     171              298
   4       Brooklyn, NY        11237        121      164         86     110            36                28               799    2355              195
   5       Brooklyn, NY        11233         37       50         43      46            35                 7               376     620               65
   6       New York, NY        10026         57       77         48      59            35                23              1080    2161              100
   7       Brooklyn, NY        11210         52       70         55      63            35                15                78     319              309
   8       Brooklyn, NY        11222        150      199        109     139            33                28              2214    3680               66
   9       Brooklyn, NY        11221         71       94         72      75            32                 4               412     748               82
  10       New York, NY        10040         42       55         41      54            31                32               247     494              100
  11       New York, NY        10032         81      106         85      90            31                 6               374     936              150
  12       Brooklyn, NY        11223        118      153        126     131            30                 4               609    1122               84
  13       New York, NY        10006         46       58         38      41            26                 8               441     748               70
  14       Brooklyn, NY        11236         50       63         87      88            26                 1                58     142              145
  15       Brooklyn, NY        11212         35       44         80      82            26                 2                21      67              219
  16       Brooklyn, NY        11213         37       46         56      58            24                 4                71     122               72
  17       Brooklyn, NY        11225         70       87         60      63            24                 5               270     635              135
  18       Brooklyn, NY        11216        114      141         92     100            24                 9               850    1710              101
  19       Brooklyn, NY        11206        115      142         87     109            23                25              1362    2018               48
  20       Brooklyn, NY        11204         81       99        110     110            22                 0               357     666               87

These tables show ZIP codes that show the highest growth in CBP and Yelp between 2012-2014. The top table (a) shows the fastest-growing ZIP codes in CBP,
while the bottom table (b) shows the fastest-growing ZIP codes in Yelp.




                                                                          52
Table 11 ZIP Codes with Lowest and Highest Yelp Growth, 2014-2016

Lowest Yelp Growth
                                                                                                                    Review
                                                          CBP        Yelp Growth     CBP Growth                     Growth
                                  Yelp Restaurants   Restaurants          %               %          Yelp Reviews     %
 Rank       City          ZIP    2014 2015 2016      2014 2015      ’12-14 ’14-16   ’12-14 ’14-15    2014    2016   ’14-16
   1    New York, NY     10030     43    46     38     24     27       8     -12       4     12       373     500     34
   2    Brooklyn, NY     11229    127   129    116    124    123       9      -9       6     -1       812    1132     39
   3    New York, NY     10021    224   222    206    174    168      -5      -8      -5     -3      4254    4638      9
   4    New York, NY     10022    503   484    470    351    337       5      -7       0     -4     11813 12940       10
   5    New York, NY     10003    727   701    683    529    523       6      -6       8     -1     32943 34551        5
   6    Brooklyn, NY     11204     99    98     94    110    117      22      -5       0      6       666     959     44
   7    New York, NY     10028    229   219    218    176    169       4      -5       2     -4      4707    5301     13
   8    New York, NY     10017    381   374    365    274    267       9      -4      -1     -3      7328    8259     13
   9    New York, NY     10002    481   473    461    517    511      19      -4      -5     -1     16218 19752       22
  10    New York, NY     10023    172   174    165    155    165      -2      -4      -3      6      5082    5900     16
  11    New York, NY     10009    322   331    311    230    217       9      -3       6     -6     10847 11373        5
  12    New York, NY     10024    202   198    197    156    153       3      -2       0     -2      7452    8036      8
  13    New York, NY     10013    507   502    496    500    495       4      -2       0     -1     15842 20969       32
  14    Brooklyn, NY     11215    343   347    336    267    269       8      -2      11      1      7355    7682      4
  15    New York, NY     10006     58    54     57     41     44      26      -2       8      7       748    1269     70
  16    Brooklyn, NY     11228     58    60     57     56     60      14      -2      -2      7       421     580     38
  17    New York, NY     10011    459   454    454    340    359       9      -1       8      6     16752 19540       17
  18    New York, NY     10016    516   521    511    384    394       3      -1       9      3     13631 16637       22
  19    New York, NY     10025    244   245    243    212    208       8      -0       3     -2      4955    5166      4
  20    New York, NY     10012    428   422    427    315    320       2      -0      -3      2     19720 21288        8




                                                           53
Highest Yelp Growth
                                                                                                                                                        Review
                                                                         CBP           Yelp Growth           CBP Growth                                 Growth
                                           Yelp Restaurants         Restaurants             %                     %               Yelp Reviews             %
 Rank          City              ZIP      2014 2015 2016            2014 2015         ’12-14 ’14-16         ’12-14 ’14-15         2014    2016          ’14-16
   1       Brooklyn, NY         11249       74    82    106           71     80         76     43             65     13           2551    3524             38
   2       Brooklyn, NY         11225       87   102    114           63     74         24     31              5     17            635    1296            104
   3       Brooklyn, NY         11237      164   198    211          110    136         36     29             28     24           2355    3369             43
   4       Brooklyn, NY         11233       50    59     63           46     49         35     26              7      7            620    1166             88
   5       Brooklyn, NY         11213       46    56     57           58     68         24     24              4     17            122     296            143
   6       New York, NY         10040       55    60     66           54     48         31     20             32     -11           494     687             39
   7       Brooklyn, NY         11212       44    46     52           82     82         26     18              2      0             67     147            119
   8       Brooklyn, NY         11221       94   107    110           75     84         32     17              4     12            748    1344             80
   9       Brooklyn, NY         11203       60    62     68           74     68         18     13             -5      -8           340     628             85
  10       New York, NY         10004      121   127    137           98    103         12     13              9      5           2183    3147             44
  11       Brooklyn, NY         11210       70    73     79           63     65         35     13             15      3            319     504             58
  12       New York, NY         10029      199   214    223          165    175         17     12             15      6           1804    2533             40
  13       Brooklyn, NY         11205      133   143    149          104    113          7     12              0      9           2520    2529              0
  14       Brooklyn, NY         11219       77    81     86           97     96         15     12             18      -1           441     571             29
  15       Brooklyn, NY         11238      214   237    238          172    183         22     11             33      6           5460    6718             23
  16       Brooklyn, NY         11218      143   153    159          105    119         19     11              4     13           1521    2045             34
  17       Brooklyn, NY         11207       81    89     90           99    109         47     11              2     10            259     602            132
  18       Brooklyn, NY         11236       63    67     70           88     84         26     11              1      -5           142     236             66
  19       Brooklyn, NY         11226      137   154    152          130    138         15     11              3      6            852    1324             55
  20       New York, NY         10039       28    30     31           29     29         22     11             16      0             85     175            106

These tables show ZIP codes that show the highest and lowest growth in Yelp between 2014-2016. The top table (a) shows the slowest-growing ZIP codes, while
the bottom table (b) shows the fastest-growing ZIP codes in Yelp.




                                                                           54
