                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES


                               FIRM-LEVEL POLITICAL RISK:
                               MEASUREMENT AND EFFECTS

                                         Tarek A. Hassan
                                        Stephan Hollander
                                        Laurence van Lent
                                         Ahmed Tahoun

                                       Working Paper 24029
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24029


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2017, Revised June 2019

We thank seminar participants at Barcelona GSE, Boston University, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Philadelphia, Frankfurt School of Finance and Management, University of Bristol, Universidad
Carlos III de Madrid, University of Chicago, University of Exeter, Humboldt University,
Lancaster University, Mannheim University, University of Melbourne, MIT (Department of
Economics), MIT Sloan School of Management, University of Southern California, Stanford
SITE, the Stigler Center, DAR Conference at the University of Maastricht, the joint BFI-Hoover
Conference on Elections, Policymaking, and Uncertainty, and the NBER EFG meeting. We
received helpful feedback from Scott Baker, Nick Bloom, Steve Davis, Gene Fama, Alex
Frankel, Ray Fisman, Igor Goncharov, Lars Peter Hansen, Rick Hornbeck, Emir Kamenica, Ties
de Kok, Christian Leuz, Juhani Linnainmaa, Valeri Nikolaev, Lubos Pastor, Andrei Shleifer,
Chad Syverson, Stephen Terry, Pietro Veronesi, and Luigi Zingales. We are most grateful to
Menno van Zaanen for generously providing his textual analysis code and for advising on
computational linguistics matters. Markus Schwedeler deserves a special thanks for his excellent
research assistance. We also thank Jakub Dudzic, Chris Emmery, Yusiyu Wang, and Hongcen
Wei for their help as RAs at various stages. Funding for this project was provided by the Institute
for New Economic Thinking. We further gratefully acknowledge the Fama-Miller Center at the
University of Chicago (Hassan) and the London Business School (Tahoun) for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Tarek A. Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Level Political Risk: Measurement and Effects
Tarek A. Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun
NBER Working Paper No. 24029
November 2017, Revised June 2019
JEL No. D8,E22,E24,E32,E6,G18,G32,G38,H32

                                            ABSTRACT

We adapt simple tools from computational linguistics to construct a new measure of political risk
faced by individual US firms: the share of their quarterly earnings conference calls that they
devote to political risks. We validate our measure by showing it correctly identifies calls
containing extensive conversations on risks that are political in nature, that it varies intuitively
over time and across sectors, and that it correlates with the firm’s actions and stock market
volatility in a manner that is highly indicative of political risk. Firms exposed to political risk
retrench hiring and investment and actively lobby and donate to politicians. These results
continue to hold after controlling for news about the mean (as opposed to the variance) of
political shocks. Interestingly, the vast majority of the variation in our measure is at the firm level
rather than at the aggregate or sector level, in the sense that it is neither captured by the
interaction of sector and time fixed effects, nor by heterogeneous exposure of individual firms to
aggregate political risk. The dispersion of this firm-level political risk increases significantly at
times with high aggregate political risk. Decomposing our measure of political risk by topic, we
find that firms that devote more time to discussing risks associated with a given political topic
tend to increase lobbying on that topic, but not on other topics, in the following quarter.

Tarek A. Hassan                                    Laurence van Lent
Department of Economics                            Frankfurt School of Finance and Management
Boston University                                  Adickesallee 32-34
270 Bay State Road                                 60322 Frankfurt am Main
Boston, MA 02215                                   Germany
and NBER                                           l.vanlent@fs.de
thassan@bu.edu
                                                   Ahmed Tahoun
Stephan Hollander                                  London Business School
Tilburg University                                 26 Sussex plc, Regent's Park
Warandelaan 2                                      NW1 4SA London
5037 AB Tilburg                                    atahoun@london.edu
the Netherlands
s.hollander@tilburguniversity.edu
From the UK’s vote to leave the European Union to repeated shutdowns of the US federal government,
recent events have renewed concerns about risks emanating from the political system and their effects on
investment, employment, and other aspects of firm behavior. The size of such effects, and the question
of which aspects of political decision-making might be most disruptive to business, are the subject of
intense debates among economists, business leaders, and politicians. Quantifying the effects of political
risk has often proven difficult due to a lack of firm-level data on exposure to political risks and on the
kind of political issues firms may be most concerned about.
   In this paper, we use textual analysis of quarterly earnings conference-call transcripts to construct
firm-level measures of the extent and type of political risk faced by firms listed in the United States—
and how it varies over time. The vast majority of US listed firms hold regular earnings conference calls
with their analysts and other interested parties, in which management gives its view on the firm’s past
and future performance and responds to questions from call participants. We quantify the political risk
faced by a given firm at a given point in time based on the share of conversations on conference calls
that centers on risks associated with politics in general, and with specific political topics.
   To this end, we adapt a simple pattern-based sequence-classification method developed in computa-
tional linguistics (Song and Wu, 2008; Manning et al., 2008) to distinguish between language associated
with political versus non-political matters. For our baseline measure of overall exposure to political
risk, we use a training library of political text (i.e., an undergraduate textbook on American politics
and articles from the political section of US newspapers) and a training library of non-political text
(i.e., an accounting textbook, articles from non-political sections of US newspapers, and transcripts
of speeches on non-political issues) to identify two-word combinations (“bigrams”) that are frequently
used in political texts. We then count the number of instances in which these bigrams are used in a
conference call in conjunction with synonyms for “risk” or “uncertainty,” and divide by the total length
of the call to obtain a measure of the share of the conversation that is concerned with political risks.
   For our topic-specific measure of political risk, we similarly use training libraries of text on eight
political topics (e.g., “economic policy & budget” and “health care”), as well as the political and
non-political training libraries mentioned above, to identify patterns of language frequently used when
discussing a particular political topic. This approach yields a measure of the share of the conversation
between conference call participants that is about risks associated with each of the eight political topics.
   Having constructed our measures, we present a body of evidence bolstering our interpretation that
they indeed capture political risk. First, we show that top-scoring transcripts correctly identify conver-
sations that center on risks associated with politics, including, for example, concerns about regulation,
ballot initiatives, and government funding. Similarly, the bigrams identified as most indicative of polit-


                                                     1
ical text appear very intuitive—e.g., “the constitution,” “public opinion,” and “the FAA.”
   Second, we find our measure varies intuitively over time and across sectors. For example, the mean
across firms of our overall measure of political risk increases significantly around federal elections and
is highly correlated with the index of aggregate economic policy uncertainty proposed by Baker et al.
(2016), as well as with a range of sector-level proxies of government dependence used in the literature.
   Third, we show that our measure correlates with firm-level outcomes in a way that is highly indicative
of reactions to political risk. Specifically, conventional models predict that an increase in any kind of
risk, and therefore also an increase in the firm’s political risk, should trigger a rise in the firm’s stock
return volatility and decrease its investment and employment growth (e.g., Pindyck (1988); Bloom et al.
(2007)). In contrast to such “passive” reactions, firms may also “actively” manage political risk by
donating to political campaigns or lobbying politicians (Tullock, 1967; Peltzman, 1976). Such “active”
management of political risks, however, should be concentrated among large but not small firms, as
large firms internalize more of the gain from swaying political decisions than small firms (Olson, 1965).
   Consistent with these theoretical predictions, we find that increases in our firm-level measure of
political risk are associated with significant increases in firm-specific stock return volatility and with
significant decreases in firms’ investment, planned capital expenditures, and hiring. In addition, we find
that firms facing higher political risk tend to subsequently donate more to political campaigns, forge
links to politicians, and invest in lobbying activities. Again, consistent with theoretical predictions,
such active engagement in the political process is primarily concentrated among larger firms.
   Having established that our measure is correlated with firm-level outcomes in a manner that is
highly indicative of political risk, we next conduct a series of falsification exercises by modifying our
algorithm to construct measures of concepts that are closely related, but logically distinct from political
risk, simply by changing the set of words on which we condition our counts.
   A key challenge to any measure of risk is that news about the variance of shocks may be correlated
with (unmeasured) news about their conditional mean, and such variation in the conditional mean may
confound our estimates of the relation between political risk and firm actions. To address this challenge,
we modify our methodology to measure the sentiment expressed by call participants when discussing
politics-related issues. Specifically, we modify our algorithm to count the same political bigrams as
used before, but now condition on their use in conjunction with positive and negative tone words,
rather than synonyms for risk or uncertainty. We find that this measure of political sentiment has
all expected properties. For example, it correctly identifies transcripts with positive and negative news
about politics, and more positive political sentiment is associated with higher stock returns, investment,
and hiring. Nevertheless, controlling for political sentiment (and other measures of the mean of the firm’s


                                                     2
prospects) has no effect on our main results, lending us confidence that our measure of political risk
captures information about the second moment, but not the first moment.
   Using a similar approach, we also construct measures of non-political risk (conditioning on non-
political as opposed to political bigrams) and overall risk (counting only the number of synonyms
for risk, without conditioning on political bigrams), and show that the information reflected in these
measures differs from our measure of political risk in the way predicted by theory.
   Thus, having bolstered our confidence that we are indeed capturing economically significant variation
in firm-level political risk, we use it to learn about the nature of political risk affecting US listed firms.
Surprisingly, most of the variation in measured political risk appears to play out at the level of the
firm, rather than the level of (conventionally defined) sectors or the economy as a whole. Variation
in aggregate political risk over time (time fixed effects) and across sectors (sector × time fixed effects)
account for only 0.81% and 7.50% of the variation in our measure, respectively. “Firm-level” variation
drives the remaining 91.69%, most of which is accounted for by changes over time in the assignment of
political risk across firms within a given sector. Of course, part of this large firm-level variation may
simply result from differential measurement error. However, all the associations between political risk
and firm actions outlined above change little when we condition on time, sector, sector × time, and
firm fixed effects, or if we increase the granularity of our definition of sectors. The data thus strongly
suggest the firm-level (idiosyncratic) variation in our measure has real economic content.
   To shed some light on the origins of firm-level variation in political risk, we provide detailed case
studies of political risks faced by two illustrative firms over our sample period. These studies show the
interactions between firms and governments are broad and complex, including the crafting, revision,
and litigation of laws and regulations, as well as budgeting and procurement decisions with highly
heterogeneous and granular impacts. For example, only a very small number of firms involved with
power generation will be affected by new regulations governing the emissions of mercury from coal
furnaces across state lines, or changing rules about the compensation for providing spare generation
capacity in Ohio. Based on our reading of these transcripts, we find it quite plausible that the incidence
of political risk should be highly volatile and heterogeneous, even within strictly defined sectors.
   Our main conclusion from these analyses is that much of the economic impact of political risk is
not well described by conventional models in which individual firms have relatively stable exposures to
aggregate political risk (e.g., Pastor and Veronesi (2012); Baker et al. (2016)). Instead, firms considering
their exposure to political risk may well be more worried about their relative position in the cross-
sectional distribution of political risk (e.g., drawing the attention of regulators to their firms’ activities)
than about time-series variation in aggregate political risk. Consistent with this interpretation, we also


                                                       3
find that this cross-sectional distribution has a fat right tail.
   A direct implication of our findings is that the effectiveness of political decision-making may have
important macroeconomic effects, not only by affecting aggregate political risk, but also by altering the
identity of firms affected and the dispersion of political risk across firms. For example, if some part of the
firm-level variation in political risk results from failings in the political system itself (e.g., the inability
to reach compromises in a timely fashion), this may affect the allocation of resources across firms, and
thus lower total factor productivity, in addition to reducing aggregate investment and employment (not
to mention generating potentially wasteful expenditure on lobbying and political donations). Consistent
with this view, we find that a one-percentage-point increase in aggregate political risk is associated with
a 0.79-percentage-point increase in the cross-sectional standard deviation of firm-level political risk,
suggesting the actions of politicians may indeed influence the dispersion of firm-level political risk.
   After studying the incidence and effects of overall political risk, we turn to measuring the risks
associated with eight specific political topics. To validate our topic-specific measures, we exploit the
fact that firms that lobby any branch of the US government must disclose not only their total expenditure
on lobbying, but also the list of topics this expenditure is directed toward. That is, lobbying disclosures
uniquely allow us to observe a firm’s reaction(s) to risks associated with specific political topics, and
to create a mapping between specific political topics discussed in conference calls and the topics that
are the object of the same firm’s lobbying activities. Using this mapping, we are able to show that
a one-standard-deviation increase in risk associated with a given political topic in a given quarter is
associated with a 11% increase relative to the mean in the probability that a given firm will lobby on
that topic in the following quarter. That is, a significant association exists between political risk and
lobbying that continues to hold within firm and topic.
   Although we do not interpret the associations between our measures of political risk and firm actions
as causal, we believe the persistence of these associations conditional on time, firm, sector × time, and
(in the case of lobbying) topic and topic × firm fixed effects, rule out many potentially confounding
factors, and thus go some way toward establishing such causal effects of political risk.
   Going beyond the narrow question of identification, a deeper challenge results from the fact that
not all political risk is necessarily generated by the political system itself, but rather arises as a reaction
to external forces (e.g., from political attempts to reduce the economic impact of a financial crisis).
Although we have no natural experiments available that would allow us to systematically disentangle
the causal effects of these different types of political risks on firm actions, we make a first attempt
by studying three budget crises during the Obama presidency. These crises arguably created political
risk that resulted purely from politicians’ inability to compromise in a timely fashion. We find that


                                                       4
a one-standard-deviation increase in a firm’s political risk generated by these crises results in a 2.430-
percentage-point increase (s.e.=0.937) in the probability that the firm lobbies the government on the
the topic of “economic policy & budget” in the following quarter.
       We make three main caveats to our analysis. First, all of our measures likely contain significant
measurement error and should be interpreted with caution. Second, while showing statistically and
economically significant associations between firm-level variation in our measures and firm actions, we
do not claim this firm-level variation is more or less important than aggregate or sector-level variation.
Third, all of our measures should be interpreted as indicative of risk as it is perceived by firm managers
and participants on their conference calls. Naturally, these perceptions may differ from actual risk. 1
       Our efforts relate to several strands of prior literature. An important set of studies documents that
risk and uncertainty about shocks emanating from the political system affect asset prices, international
capital flows, investment, employment growth, and the business cycle (Belo et al., 2013; Gourio et al.,
2015; Handley and Limao, 2015; Kelly et al., 2016; Koijen et al., 2016; Besley and Mueller, 2017;
Mueller et al., 2017). In the absence of a direct measure, this literature has relied on identifying
variation in aggregate and sector-level political risk using country-level indices, event studies, or the
differential exposure of specific sectors to shifts in government contracting. Many recent studies rely
on an influential index of US aggregate economic policy uncertainty (EPU) based on textual analysis
of newspaper articles developed by Baker et al. (2016).2 Relative to this existing work, we provide not
just the first firm-level measure of political risk—allowing a meaningful distinction between aggregate,
sector-level, and firm-level exposure—but also a flexible decomposition into topic-specific components.
       Although our analysis partly corroborates key findings documented in previous research, for example,
by showing aggregations of our firm-level political risk measure correlate closely with various sector-level
and country-level proxies used in other papers, we also find such aggregations mask much of the variation
in political risk, which is significantly more heterogeneous and volatile than previously thought. This
finding is in stark contrast to existing theoretical work that has typically viewed political risk as a driver
of systematic but not idiosyncratic risk (Croce et al., 2012; Pastor and Veronesi, 2012, 2013; Born and
Pfeifer, 2014; Fernandez-Villaverde et al., 2013; Drautzburg et al., 2017).
       In contrast, our findings suggest political actions may affect the activity of firms in ways that are
not well reflected in representative-agent models. For example, an increase in the dispersion of firm-
level political risk may interact with financial or other frictions to reduce growth (Gilchrist et al., 2014;
   1
     A growing literature argues that managers’ expectations affect firm actions, even when they are biased ( Gennaioli and
Shleifer, 2018).
   2
     Jurado et al. (2015), Bachmann et al. (2013), and Giglio et al. (2016) propose measures of aggregate (political and
non-political) uncertainty in the US economy. Caldara and Iacoviello (2016) propose an index of geopolitical uncertainty.




                                                            5
Arellano et al., 2016; Bloom et al., 2018). Or, such a spike in the cross-sectional variation of political risk
may reduce the efficiency of the allocation, and thus decrease total factor productivity (TFP) ( Hsieh
and Klenow, 2009; Arayavechkit et al., 2017).
    Another closely related strand of the literature studies the value of connections to powerful politicians
(Roberts, 1990; Fisman, 2001).3 We contribute to this literature by showing that firms may lobby and
cultivate connections to politicians in an attempt to actively manage political risk. Consistent with
these results, Akey and Lewellen (2016) show that firms whose stock returns are most sensitive with
respect to variation in EPU are more likely to donate to politicians. 4
    Finally, several recent studies have adopted methods developed in computational linguistics and
natural language processing. These studies tend to use pre-defined dictionaries of significant words to
process source documents (e.g. Baker et al. (2016)). By contrast, our approach aims to endogenously
capture those word combinations that are indicative of political discourse about a given topic. 5 In
addition, whereas prior studies have relied on newspaper archives and corporate disclosures as source
texts (Baker et al. (2016); Koijen et al. (2016); Wiesen and Wysocki (2015); Gentzkow and Shapiro
(2010)), we introduce the idea that (transcripts of) conference calls provide a natural context to learn
about the risks firms face and market participants’ views thereof. We also build on Loughran and
McDonald (2011) who use sentiment analysis of corporate documents to predict market outcomes (see
Loughran and McDonald (2016) for a survey).


1     Data

We collect the transcripts of all 178,173 conference calls held in conjunction with an earnings release
(hereafter “earnings conference call” or “earnings call”) of 7,357 firms listed in the United States between
2002 and 2016 from Thomson Reuters’ StreetEvents. 6 During our sample window, firms commonly host
one earnings call every fiscal quarter, thus generating roughly four observations per firm per year. Calls
    3
      Also see Johnson and Mitton (2003); Khwaja and Mian (2005); Leuz and Oberholzer-Gee (2006); Snowberg et al.
(2007); Ferguson and Voth (2008); and Acemoglu et al. (2016, 2017). In turn, politicians reciprocate by distributing favors
in the form of bailouts, reduced oversight, or by allocating government contracts ( Faccio et al., 2006; Goldman et al., 2009;
Benmelech and Moskowitz, 2010; Correia, 2014; Tahoun, 2014; Tahoun and van Lent, 2018).
    4
      A large literature documents that lobbying is pervasive in the US political system ( Milyo et al., 2000), can affect policy
enactment (Kang, 2016), and yields economically significant returns (De Figueiredo and Silverman, 2006). Arayavechkit,
Saffie, and Shin (2017) develop a quantitative model of lobbying and taxation.
    5
      Alternative text-mining approaches (e.g., Latent Dirichlet Allocation, LDA) enable automated topic classification.
However, LDA-type methods are likely to lack the power to detect politics-related issues as a separate topic. Reflecting the
possibly limited advance offered by more sophisticated methods, the literature in computational linguistics has documented
that our simple, yet intuitive approach is remarkably robust (Ramos (2003); Mishra and Vishwakarma (2015)).
    6
      The majority of calls are held within 33 days of the new quarter. The exception is the first quarter, where the median
call is on the 45th day of the quarter. This delay is due to the fact that the first-quarter call is typically held after the
annual report (i.e. Form 10-K) is made public, which goes with longer statutory due dates and is more labor intensive.




                                                               6
typically begin with a presentation by management, during which executives (e.g., the Chief Executive
Officer or the Chief Financial Officer) share information they wish to disclose or further emphasize,
followed by a question-and-answer (Q&A) session with market participants (usually, but not limited to,
financial analysts). Our measure of political risk is constructed using the entire conference call. 7
        We obtain each firm’s total expenditure on lobbying US Congress in each quarter from the Center
for Responsive Politics (CRP). The same source also gives a list of 80 possible topics that each firm
lobbied on. We manually match between these 80 topics and the eight topics our topic-based measure
of political risk encompasses (see Appendix Table 1 for details).
        We obtain additional data from the following sources: campaign contributions by Political Action
Committees (PACs) from the CRP website, data on government contracts from USAspending.gov, stock
information from the Center for Research in Security Prices, firm-quarter-level implied volatility from
OptionMetrics, and—for a smaller set of sample firms—data on projected capital expenditure for the
following fiscal year from I/B/E/S Guidance. Finally, for each firm-quarter or, if not available, firm-year,
we obtain employment, investment, and basic balance sheet (e.g., total assets) and income statement
(e.g., quarterly earnings) information from Standard and Poors’ Compustat. Table 1 provides summary
statistics and Appendix A gives details on the construction of all variables.


2        Measuring Political Risk at the Firm Level

In this section, we introduce our firm-level measure of political risk. To separate measurement from
interpretation, we begin by defining a measure of the share of the quarterly conversation between call
participants and firm management that centers on risks associated with political matters. In a second
step, we then argue this measure can be interpreted as a proxy for the political risk and uncertainty
individual firms face.


2.1       Defining a measure of political risk

We begin with a simple objective: to measure the share of the conversation between conference call
participants and firm management that centers on risks associated with political matters. Clearly,
any issue that is raised during an earnings call will tend to be of some concern either for the firm’s
management or its analysts, such that quantifying the allocation of attention between different topics
is interesting in its own right.
    7
    In untabulated analysis, we find the average number of words spoken in our sample conference calls is 7,533. Matsumoto
et al. (2011) find a typical earnings call lasts for about 46 minutes, with on average 18 minutes for the managerial
presentation and 28 minutes for the Q&A.



                                                            7
    Rather than a priori deciding on specific words associated with different topics, we distinguish
political from non-political topics using a pattern-based sequence-classification method developed in
computational linguistics (Song and Wu, 2008; Manning et al., 2008). Using this approach, we correlate
language patterns used by conference-call participants to that of a text that is either political in nature
(e.g., an undergraduate political science textbook) or indicative of a specific political topic (e.g., speeches
by politicians about health care). Similarly, we identify the association with risk simply by the use of
synonyms of the words “risk” and “uncertainty” in conjunction with this language.
    Specifically, we construct our measure of overall political risk by first defining a training library of
political text, archetypical of the discussion of politics, P, and another training library of non-political
text, archetypical of the discussion of non-political topics, N. Each training library is the set of all
adjacent two-word combinations (“bigrams”) contained in the respective political and non-political
texts (after removing all punctuation). 8 We then similarly decompose each conference-call transcript of
firm i in quarter t into a list of bigrams contained in the transcript b = 1, ..., Bit .9 We then count the
number of occurrences of bigrams indicating discussion of a given political topic within the set of 10
words surrounding a synonym for “risk” or “uncertainty” on either side, and divide by the total number
of bigrams in the transcript:

                                           PBit                                        fb,P
                                                                                               
                                              b     1[b ∈ P\N] × 1[|b − r| < 10] ×      BP
                             P Riskit =                                                            ,                    (1)
                                                                  Bit

where 1[•] is the indicator function, P\N is the set of bigrams contained in P but not N, and r is the
position of the nearest synonym of risk or uncertainty. The first two terms in the numerator thus simply
count the number of bigrams associated with discussion of political but not non-political topics that
occur in proximity to a synonym for risk or uncertainty (within 10 words). In our standard specification,
we also weight each bigram with a score that reflects how strongly the bigram is associated with the
discussion of political topics (the third term in the numerator), where fb,P is the frequency of bigram b
in the political training library and BP is the total number of bigrams in the political training library.
Our overall measure of the share of the conversation devoted to risk associated with political topics
is thus the weighted sum of bigrams associated with political (rather than non-political) text that are
used in conjunction with synonyms for risk or uncertainty.
    This specification follows closely the most canonical weighting scheme used in the automated text-
   8
     Previous research suggests text-classification results generally improve by applying n-grams (usually bigrams) of words
as opposed to single words (unigrams) (Tan et al., 2002; Bekkerman and Allan, 2004).
   9
     As is standard in the literature, we remove all bigrams that contain pronouns, shortened pronouns, or two adverbs. We
have also experimented with more involved text pre-processing procedures, such as removing stop words and lemmatizing.
However, we found these procedures did not substantially affect our results.



                                                             8
classification literature, where the two terms 1[b ∈ P\N] × fb,P /BP are commonly referred to as the
bigram’s inverse document frequency interacted with its term frequency (Sparck Jones, 1972; Salton
and McGill, 1983; Salton and Buckley, 1988). When more than two training libraries exist, the former
generalizes to the more familiar form: log(# of training libraries/# of libraries in which the bigram
occurs). In this sense, (1) is a straight-forward application of a standard text-classification algorithm,
augmented by our conditioning on the proximity to a synonym for risk or uncertainty, and a normaliza-
tion to account for the length of the transcript. In robustness checks reported below, we experiment with
a number of plausible variations of (1). Across all of these variations, we generally find this conventional
approach yields the most consistent results.
   Although we construct P Riskit using a weighted rather than a straight sum of bigrams, we con-
tinue to interpret it as a measure of the share of the conversation devoted to risks associated with
political topics, adjusted for the fact that some passages of text can be more or less related to politics.
(Nevertheless, we also show below that our results are similar when we do not use this weighting.)


2.2   Defining additional measures of risk and sentiment

An advantage of this approach (i.e., combining pattern-based sequence classification with conditional
word-counts) is that it also lends itself to measuring the extent of conversations about issues that are
related to political risk, but logically distinct from it, simply by modifying the conditioning information
in (1). We find it useful to construct two sets of such additional measures for use as control variables
and in falsification exercises that corroborate and contrast the information content of P Riskit .
   The first two of these measures distinguish between different types of risk. Dropping the conditioning
on political bigrams in (1) yields a simple measure of conversations about the overall degree of risk the
firm faces—simply counting the number of synonyms for risk or uncertainty found in the transcript,
                                                    PBit
                                                           1[b ∈ R]
                                         Riskit =     b
                                                                    ,                                    (2)
                                                           Bit

where R denotes the same set of synonyms for risk or uncertainty used in the construction of (1).
Similarly, we measure the share of the conversations centering on risks and uncertainties associated
with non-political topics, N P riskit , by counting and weighting N\P rather than P\N in (1).
   The second set of additional measures serves to disentangle information about the mean from in-
formation about the variance of political shocks. A major challenge to any measurement of risk is
that innovations to the variance of shocks are likely correlated with innovations to their conditional
mean. For example, a firm that receives news it is being investigated by a government agency simulta-


                                                     9
neously learns that it faces a lower mean (e.g., a possible fine) and higher variance (the outcome of the
investigation is uncertain).
       Following the same procedure as in the construction of P Riskit , we are able to measure variation
in the mean of the firm’s political shocks by again counting the use of political but not non-political
bigrams, but now conditioning on proximity to positive and negative words, rather than synonyms of
risk or uncertainty:

                                                   Bit                     b+10
                                                                                    !
                                                1 X                 fb,P   X
                          P Sentimenti,t     =         1[b ∈ P\N] ×      ×      S(c) ,                                      (3)
                                               Bit                  BP
                                                      b                              c=b−10


where S(c) is a function that assigns a value of +1 if bigram c is associated with positive sentiment
(using Loughran and McDonald (2011)’s sentiment dictionary), a value of −1 if bigram c is associated
with negative sentiment, and 0 otherwise. Frequently used positive and negative words include ‘good,’
‘strong,’ ‘great,’ and ‘loss,’ ‘decline,’ and ‘difficult,’ respectively. 10,11 (See Appendix Table 2 for details.)
Using the same procedure we also calculate a measure of overall sentiment
                                                                   PBit
                                                                            S(b)
                                               Sentimentit =          b
                                                                                 ,                                          (4)
                                                                          Bit

as well as a measure of non-political sentiment (N P Sentimentit ), constructed by counting and weighting
N\P rather than P\N in (3).
       Taken at face value, these additional measures should proxy for the mean and variance of different
types of shocks in a manner similar to, but logically distinct from P Riskit . Although we use them
primarily to corroborate the information content of P Riskit , they may be of independent interest for
a variety of other applications. To maintain focus, we relegate the majority of the material validating
these additional measures to the appendix, and refer to it in the main text only when relevant.


2.3      Training libraries

P Riskit differs from similar measures used in the previous literature in two important respects. First,
it is constructed using text generated by decision makers within firms rather than newspaper articles or
financial indicators. Second, it does not require us to exogenously specify which words or word patterns
may be associated with which topic. Instead, the only judgement we have to make is about training
  10
      We choose to sum across positive and negative sentiment words rather than simply conditioning on their presence to
allow multiple positive words to outweigh the use of one negative word, and vice versa.
   11
      One potential concern that has been raised with this kind of sentiment analysis is the use of negation, such as ‘not good’
or ‘not terrible’ (Loughran and McDonald (2016)). However, we have found the use of such negation to be exceedingly
rare in our analysis, so that we chose not to complicate the construction of our measures by explicitly allowing for it.



                                                              10
libraries—what text may be considered archetypical of discussions of political versus non-political topics.
       In our applications, we show results using three alternative approaches to defining the political and
non-political libraries (P and N). In the first, we use undergraduate textbooks, where the non-political
library consists of bigrams extracted from a textbook on financial accounting (Libby et al., 2011), to
reflect that earnings conference calls tend to focus on financial disclosures and accounting information.
As the source for the bigrams in the corresponding political training library, we use Bianco and Canon’s
textbook, American Politics Today (3rd ed.; Bianco and Canon (2013)).
       In the second, we construct the non-political library by selecting from Factiva any newspaper articles
published in the New York Times, USA Today, the Wall Street Journal, and the Washington Post on
the subject of “performance,” “ownership changes,” or “corporate actions” during our sample period,
and contrast it with a political training library derived from newspaper articles from the same sources
on the subject of “domestic politics.”
       In both cases, we also include all bigrams from the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American
English (Du Bois et al., 2000) as part of the non-political library to filter out bigrams that are specific
to spoken language, such as “next question” or “we should break for lunch.” This source records a vast
library of face-to-face conversations, on-the-job talk, classroom lectures, sermons, and so on.
       We will show both approaches yield similar results in terms of our analysis, although they identify
slightly different bigrams as pivotal for political text. Whereas the textbook-based approach identifies
bigrams such as “the constitution” and “interest groups” as most pivotal, the newspaper-based approach
identifies more topical expressions such as “[health] care reform” and “president obama.’ In our preferred
specification, we therefore use a hybrid of the two approaches. We first define P and N using the
textbook-based libraries, yielding 101,165 bigrams in the set P\N. We then add the same number of
bigrams from the newspaper-based approach (adding 87,813 bigrams that were not already in the set)
and normalize the score of these additional bigrams (fb,P /BP ) such that their mean is equal to the mean
of the bigrams identified using only the textbook-based libraries. 12 See Appendix B for details.
       Finally, we obtain the list of synonyms for “risk,” “risky,” “uncertain,” and “uncertainty” from the
Oxford dictionary (shown in Appendix Table 3). Because they are likely to have a different meaning
in the context of conference calls, we exclude from this list the words “question,” “questions” (e.g.,
conference-call moderators asking for the next question), and “venture.”
       As a simple way of reducing reliance on a few bigrams with very high term frequency, we cap
P Riskit at the 99th percentile. To facilitate interpretation, we also standardize with its sample standard
  12
    Because the newspaper-based libraries are significantly longer than the textbook-based libraries, we chose this approach
to ensure both sources of text receive equal weight.




                                                            11
deviation.


2.4    Validation

We next describe the output of our measure and verify it indeed captures passages of text that discuss
risks associated with political topics. Table 2 shows the bigrams in P\N with the highest term frequency,
(fb,P /BP ), that is, the bigrams associated most strongly with discussion of political versus non-political
topics and receiving the highest weight in the construction of P Riskit . These bigrams are almost
exclusively with strong political connotations, such as “the constitution,” “the states,” and “public
opinion.” Appendix Figure 1 shows a histogram of these bigrams by their term frequency. It shows the
distribution is highly skewed, with the median term frequency being 0.586×10−5 .
    Table 3 reports excerpts of the 20 transcripts with the highest P Riskit , a summary of the political
risks discussed in the transcripts, and the text surrounding the top-scoring political bigram. All but one
of these highest-scoring transcripts indeed contain significant discussions of risk associated with political
topics. For example, the transcript with the highest score (Nevada Gold Casino Inc in September of
2008) features discussions of a pending ballot initiative authorizing an increase in betting limits, the
potential impact of a statewide smoking ban, and uncertainties surrounding determinations to be made
by the EPA. Other transcripts focus on uncertainty surrounding tort reform, government funding,
legislation, and many other political topics.
    The one false positive is shown in Panel B: a call held by Piedmont Natural Gas that, in fact, does
not contain a discussion of risks associated with politics. The reason it nevertheless has a relatively
high score is that the transcript is very short—only six pages—and contains the one passage shown in
column 5, which, although it contains bigrams from P\N, does not relate to political risk.
    Although our approach is designed to measure the share of the transcript, not the paragraph,
containing discussion of political risks, the fact that the text surrounding the bigram with the highest
fb,P /BP (shown in column 5) also reliably identifies a passage of text within the transcript that contains
the discussion of one of the topics shown in column 4 is reassuring. The only exception is the transcript
by Employers Holdings and Transcontinental in which these topics are identified within transcript by
other high-scoring bigrams. 13
    On two other occasions, as column 5 shows, the conditioning on proximity to synonyms produces
apparently false positives: one in which the word “bet” is not meant to refer to risks associated with
the ballot initiative but rather to betting limits, and another in which “government pressures” are
  13
     As an additional validation exercise we also manually read excerpts of hundreds of transcripts to verify the information
content of P Riskit at various points of its distribution. See Appendix C for details.




                                                             12
mentioned in proximity to discussion of “currency risks.” Nevertheless, both snippets of text correctly
identify discussions of risks associated with political topics. Accordingly, we show evidence below that
this conditioning on synonyms for risk or uncertainty has economic content and on average improves
the properties of our measure.
    Having examined the workings of our pattern-based classifications, we next examine the properties of
the measures they generated. Figure 1 plots the average across firms of our measure of overall political
                                P
risk at each point in time, 1/N i P Riskit , and compares it with the newspaper-based measure of
economic policy uncertainty (EPU) constructed by Baker et al. (2016). The two series have a correlation
coefficient of 0.82 and thus visibly capture many of the same events driving uncertainty about economic
policy. This high correlation is reassuring because both series are constructed using very different data
sources and methodologies, but nevertheless yield similar results. 14 It also suggests that, as one might
expect, uncertainty about economic policy is a major component of the aggregate variation in political
risks on the minds of managers and conference-call participants.
    Further probing the variation in the mean of P Riskit over time, we might expect that part of the
overall political risk firms face arises due to uncertainty about the identity of future decision makers. For
example, Democrats may be more inclined than Republicans to pass tough environmental regulations.
Elections should resolve some of the uncertainties, and thus increase and decrease aggregate political
risk at regular intervals. Figure 2 shows results from a regression relating P Riskit to a set of dummy
variables indicating quarters with federal elections (presidential and congressional), as well as dummies
for the two quarters pre and post these elections. We can see political risk is significantly higher in the
quarters in which elections are held and the quarters before, but falls off in the quarter after elections.
    Probing the variation of our measure across sectors (SIC divisions), we find that participants in
conference calls of firms in the ‘finance, insurance & real estate’ and ‘construction’ sectors on average
spend the highest proportion of their time discussing risks associated with political topics, whereas firms
in the ‘retail trade’ sector have the lowest average P Riskit (see Appendix Figure 3). These means line
up intuitively with parts of the economy that may be considered most dependent on government for
regulation or expenditure. Figure 3 formalizes this insight by showing a positive and highly significant
correlation between the mean P Riskit across firms in a given 2-digit sector and an index of regulatory
constraints (Al-Ubaydli and McLaughlin, 2017), as well as the share of the sector’s revenue accounted
for by federal government contracts.
  14
     For comparison, Appendix Figure 2 plots the average across firms of our measure of non-political risk (N P Riskit ),
which comfortingly is more strongly related to the CBOE stock market volatility index (VIX) (with a correlation of 0.846)
than to EPU (with a correlation of 0.538). The reverse is true for the average across firms of P Riskit , which is more
strongly associated with EPU (with a correlation of 0.821) than with the VIX (with a correlation of 0.608); see Figure 1.




                                                           13
    To further probe the properties of our measure, we make use of historical episodes in which a
particular political shock is associated with a unique word or expression that is used only during the
period of interest, and not before. Arguably the best example is the term “brexit.” Appendix Table 4
shows that the 954 firms that mention the term during their earnings call in the third quarter of 2016
exhibit a significant increase in their level of P Riskit (on average by 17.2% of a standard deviation)
relative to the previous quarter. 15 The same is true for firms that mention the words “trump” and
“twitter” or “tweet” in the fourth quarter of 2016 (on average by 89.6% of a standard deviation). 16
    We next show P Riskit correlates significantly with realized and implied volatility of stock returns—a
clear requirement for any valid measure of risk. Our main specification takes the form


                                       yit = δt + δs + β P Riskit + γXit + it ,                                          (5)


where δt and δs represent a full set of time and sector fixed effects, and the vector Xit always contains
the log of the firm’s assets as a control for its size. Throughout, we cluster standard errors by firm. 17
    Panel A of Table 4 uses implied stock return volatility, measured using 90-day at-the-money options
(again standardized for ease of interpretation). Column 1 shows our most parsimonious specification
where we regress this variable on P Riskit and the size control. The coefficient of interest is positive and
statistically significant at the 1% level (0.056, s.e.=0.006), suggesting a one-standard-deviation increase
in political risk at the firm level is associated with a 0.06-standard-deviation increase in the firm’s stock
return volatility. Column 2 shows that some of this association is driven by the time-series dimension:
when adding the mean of PRisk i,t across firms at each point in time as a control, the coefficient of
interest drops by about one-third (0.048, s.e.=0.006), but remains statistically significant at the 1%
level. The coefficient on the mean itself suggests a one-standard-deviation increase in the time series
(which is factor 6.74 smaller than in the panel) is associated with a 0.245-standard-deviation increase
(s.e.=0.005) in volatility, a number very similar to that documented in previous research ( Baker et al.,
2016). Columns 3 and 4 build up to our standard specification by adding time and sector fixed effects.
Doing so reduces the size of the coefficient of interest, but it remains highly statistically significant
   15
      Using business segment data from CapitalIQ, we also verify these firms do significantly more of their business in the
UK. Regressing the firm’s percentage of total sales to the UK on the number of times the term “brexit” is used in the
third quarter of 2016 yields a coefficient of 0.28 (s.e.=0.05).
   16
      For firms that mention these terms at least once, the average number of mentions is 6.15 for “brexit” and 6.4 for
“trump” and “twitter,” or “trump” and “tweet.” Multiplying these numbers by the coefficients given in the table yields
6.15 ×0.028=0.172 and 6.40 ×0.140=0.896.
   17
      To corroborate our choice of standard errors, Appendix Figure 4 shows the results of a falsification exercise, where
we repeatedly assign the P Riskit to a randomly selected other firm with replacement. The figure shows a histogram of
t-statistics on the estimated coefficient on P Riskit across 500 random assignments. The t-statistics are centered around
zero, with no noticeable tendency for positive or negative estimates. Reassuringly, the rates of false positives and negatives
are about 2.5%. Appendix Table 5 shows alternative standard errors clustered by sector and time.



                                                             14
(0.025, s.e.=0.005 in column 4). It also remains statistically significant but falls to 0.016 (s.e.=0.006)
once we go from sector fixed effects to a more demanding specification with firm and CEO fixed effects
(column 5). Panel B shows parallel results for the larger set of firms for which we can measure realized
(rather than implied) volatility, that is, the standard deviation of the firm’s daily stock return (adjusted
for stock splits and dividends) during the quarter.
         Our measure of political risk at the firm level is thus significantly correlated with stock return volatil-
ity even when focusing only on within-time-and-sector variation, bolstering our confidence that P Riskit
indeed captures a type of risk. The fact that this association is smaller within time and sector than
in the time series is interesting, because it suggests part of the strong association between aggregate
political risk and aggregate stock market volatility may be driven by reverse causality, where, for exam-
ple, politicians entertain reform (and thus create political risk) as a response to volatile macroeconomic
conditions. To the extent that introducing time and sector effects rules out this kind of confounding
effect at the macroeconomic level, we hope the smaller estimates we obtain in the within-time-and-
sector dimension stimulate future efforts to isolate the causal effect of political risk on volatility and
other outcomes (e.g., using a natural experiment that generates exogenous variation in political risk).
However, part of the difference in the size of coefficients is also likely due to differential measurement
error. We discuss this possibility in more detail below.
         The conclusion from this first set of validation exercises is that transcripts with the highest P Riskit
indeed center on the discussion of political risks and that the time-series and cross-sectional variations
of our measure line up intuitively with episodes of high aggregate political risk and with sectors that are
most dependent on political decision-making. Consistent with these observations, P Riskit correlates
significantly with firms’ stock return volatility.


3         Managing Political Risk

Next, we further probe the validity of our measure by examining how it correlates with actions taken
by the firm. The theoretical literature makes three broad sets of predictions. First, standard models of
investment under uncertainty predict that an increase in any kind of risk, and thus also an increase in
the firm’s political risk, should decrease firm-level investment and employment growth (e.g., Pindyck
(1988); Bernanke (1983); Dixit and Pindyck (1994); Bloom et al. (2007)).18 Second, a large literature in
political economy predicts that firms have an incentive to “actively” manage political risk by lobbying
    18
     In macroeconomic models, increases in aggregate risk may increase or decrease aggregate investment, because of general
equilibrium effects on the interest rate (see, e.g., Fernández-Villaverde et al. (2015); Hassan and Mertens (2017)). However,
this ambiguity usually does not exist at the firm level (i.e., conditional on a time fixed effect). In models with adjustment
costs, a firm that faces relative increases in firm-level risk should always decrease its investment relative to other firms.


                                                             15
and donating to politicians (Tullock, 1967; Stigler, 1971; Peltzman, 1976). Third, “active” management
of political risks should be concentrated among large but not small firms due to free-rider problems
(Olson, 1965).
    The three panels of Table 5 test each of these predictions in turn. Panel A reports the association
between P Riskit , again standardized by its standard deviation, and corporate investment and hiring
decisions. The capital investment rate, Ii,t /Ki,t−1 , measured quarterly, is calculated recursively using
a perpetual-inventory method as described in Stein and Stone (2013). For a smaller set of firms, we
can also measure the percentage change in projected capital expenditure, Δcapexg i,t /capexgi,t−1 , as
the change (relative to the previous quarter) in the firm’s guidance for total capital expenditure for
the next fiscal year. Net hiring, Δemp i,t /empi,t−1 , is the change in year-to-year employment over last
year’s value.19,20 All specifications are in the same form as (5), always including time and sector fixed
effects, as well as controlling for the log of the firm’s assets. The coefficients in columns 1 to 3 suggests
a one-standard-deviation increase in political risk is associated with a 0.159-percentage-point decrease
in a firm’s capital investment rate (s.e.=0.041), a 0.338-percentage-point decrease in its planned capital
expenditure for the following year (s.e.=0.120), and a 0.769-percentage-point decrease in its employment
growth rate (s.e.=0.155). Whereas the former coefficient is relatively small (corresponding to a 1.4%
decrease relative to the sample mean), the latter two coefficients correspond to economically large
decreases of 28.7% and 11.5% relative to the sample mean, respectively. 21,22
    Across the board, these results are suggestive of firms’ reactions to risk, where firms retrench hiring
and investment when faced with heightened political risk. They are also consistent with the findings
by Baker et al. (2016), who document a negative relation between their measure of aggregate economic
policy uncertainty and firm-level investment rates and employment growth. Also consistent with this
prior work, column 4 shows a much weaker and statistically insignificant association between P Riskit
and sales growth. As argued in Baker et al. (2016), a smaller effect on sales is again consistent with the
predictions of the real options literature: larger short-run effects of risk on hard-to-reverse investments
in physical and human capital than on short-run output growth.
    Panel B examines the degree to which firms affected by political risk also actively engage in the
political process. Columns 1-3 study donations on behalf of the firm to politicians. We find a significant
  19
     Because these data on investment, capital expenditure, and employment are notoriously noisy, we winsorize each of
these variables at the first and last percentile.
  20
     Here the number of observations is smaller because employment data are at the annual frequency. In all specifications
at the annual frequency, we take an arithmetic mean of P Riskit across all transcripts of a given firm and year.
  21
     Because changes in employment are measured at the annual frequency, we show contemporaneous correlations between
P Riskit and the outcomes in Panel A. In Panel B, where all outcomes are at the quarterly frequency, we show correlations
at the first lag.
  22
     Consistent with this pattern, we generally find that associations with firm-level outcomes are larger when we aggregate
outcome variables to the annual frequency, as also shown in columns 1 and 3 of Appendix Table 6.


                                                            16
association between P Riskit and the dollar amount of campaign donations (column 1) as well as the
number of politicians who receive contributions to their election campaigns from the firm (column 2).
These associations are economically meaningful, as a one-standard-deviation increase in political risk is
associated with a 8.7% increase in the total amount donated to politicians (s.e.=0.018) and an increase
in the number of donation recipients of 0.462 (s.e.=0.118), representing a 17% increase relative to the
mean of 2.73 recipients. Column 3 examines whether political risk may spur firms to develop ties
with both major political parties at the same time, using Hedgeit , which is an indicator variable that
captures those instances wherein firms donate similar amounts to both Democrats and Republicans. 23
Our intuition is that increases in political risk raise the benefit of having established connections with
both parties. Consistent with this intuition, we find that as political risk increases, so does the likelihood
of the firm “hedging” its political ties. In column 4, we turn to the firm’s overall lobbying expenditure,
regressing the natural logarithm of one plus the dollar amount of lobby expenditure on P Riskit . The
estimate (0.186, s.e.=0.027) suggests a one-standard-deviation increase in political risk is associated
with a 18.6% increase in the amount of lobbying expenditures.
    Taken together, these results are consistent with the view that P Riskit indeed captures variation
in political risk: firms more exposed to it retrench hiring and investment to preserve option value, and
actively engage in the political system to mitigate these risks. If this interpretation is correct and firms
actively manage political risk by forging ties with politicians, we might expect these associations to
be stronger for large firms, which internalize more of the gain from influencing political decisions than
small firms (Olson, 1965) and have the resources to sway political decisions at the federal or state level.
Panel C of Table 5 shows that, indeed, predominantly larger firms donate to politicians in the face of
political risk, whereas smaller firms tend to react with more vigorous retrenchment of employment and
investment (the latter statistically significant only at the 10% level). 24


Mean versus variance of political shocks.                     Having established that P Riskit correlates with firm
actions in a manner highly indicative of political risk, we next introduce controls for news about the
mean of political shocks, comparing the information contained in P Riskit with that contained in our
measure of political sentiment (P Sentimentit ) and in other controls for the firm’s prospects.
    To corroborate that P Sentimentit indeed contains information about the mean of political shocks,
we follow steps similar to those above, showing that transcripts with the most positive (negative)
P Sentimentit indeed contain significant discussions of positive (negative) news about legislation, regu-
  23
     Specifically, if the ratio of donations to Republicans over donations to Democrats is between the 25th and 75th
percentile of the sample.
  24
     This latter result is also consistent with the predictions of Gilchrist et al. (2014), where firm-level risk affects macroe-
conomic aggregates due to financial frictions that are more severe for small than for large firms.


                                                               17
lation, and government spending (see Appendix Tables 7 and 8). For example, the transcript with the
most negative P Sentimentit (Arctic Glacier in May of 2009) features a lengthy discussion of antitrust
action by the department of justice against the firm, while the transcript with the most positive political
sentiment (Central Vermont Public Service in May of 2006) anticipates advantageous changes to the
regulation of electricity prices in Vermont. Consistent with these examples, we also find that firms tend
to experience significantly positive stock returns in quarters when P Sentimentit is high. Appendix
Table 9 shows additional validation exercises.
    The primary concern with our interpretation of the results in Table 5 is that firms with high P Riskit
may simultaneously also receive bad news associated with political events (and vice versa), and that
failing to control for variation in the mean of the firm’s political shocks may bias our estimates of the
association between P Riskit and firm actions. Indeed, we find that the correlation between P Riskit
and P Sentimentit is negative (-0.08), so that news about higher political risk tends to arrive when
sentiment about politics is negative. Nevertheless, Table 6 shows no evidence of omitted variable bias
in our estimates. Columns 1 and 5 replicate our standard specification. Columns 2 and 6 show that
adding P Sentimentit as an additional control does not have a perceptible effect on the coefficient of
interest for any of the six outcome variables shown. In each case, the change in the coefficient is smaller
than one standard error.
    As expected, firms tend to invest and hire significantly more when they are more optimistic about
politics (positive sentiment). Similarly, firms that are more optimistic about their political prospects
also tend to invest significantly more in lobbying and political donations.
    A related potential concern with our measure of political risk is that managers’ incentives to discuss
risks associated with political topics may vary over time. For example, they may have an incentive to
blame politicians for bad performance by ‘cheap talking’ more about political risks whenever perfor-
mance is bad. To test for this possibility, columns 3 and 7 add a control for the firm’s overall sentiment
(Sentimentit ). Similarly, columns 4 and 8 add two proxies for the firm’s recent performance: its pre-call
stock return, accumulated during the seven days prior to the earnings-related conference call, and a
conventional measure for the earnings surprise. 25 Again, these variations have little to no effect on our
estimates of the association between P Riskit and the firm’s actions. We thus find no evidence that
managers’ incentives to blame political risks for bad performances affect our results. 26
    Taken together, these results bolster our confidence that P Riskit correctly identifies variation in the
  25
     Consistent with many prior studies, we define earnings surprise as earnings per share before extraordinary items minus
earnings per share in the same quarter of the prior year, scaled by the price per share at the beginning of the quarter ( Ball
and Bartov, 1996).
  26
     Consistent with these results, Appendix Tables 10 and 11 show that interactions between P Riskit and P Sentimentit ,
Sentimentit , and prior stock returns are never statistically distinguishable from zero when added to these specifications.


                                                             18
second moment (risk), rather than the expected realization of political shocks.


Falsification exercises.         We next conduct a series of falsification exercises comparing the information
contained in P Riskit with that in our measures of non-political risk (N P Riskit ) and overall risk (Riskit ).
The results are shown in Table 7. First, all kinds of risk, whether political or non-political, should be
negatively associated with investment and hiring. When we add N P Riskit to the specification with
investment as a dependent variable, we find exactly this pattern (column 2 in Panel A—all specifications
now also control for P Sentimentit ). The coefficient on N P riskit is negative and statistically significant
(-0.256, s.e.=0.043), whereas the one on P Risk falls in absolute terms but retains its negative sign and
statistical significance (-0.082, s.e.=0.042). 27 The same pattern, albeit with a much smaller change in
the size of the coefficient on P Riskit , holds for employment growth (column 5), suggesting both P Riskit
and N P Riskit indeed contain information about risk.
    Second, if firms indeed retrench hiring and investment due to risks associated with political topics,
and not for other reasons, the association between P Riskit and these outcomes should be significantly
attenuated when we control for overall risk. We find this pattern in columns 3 and 6 of Panel A, where
including Riskit again reduces the negative association between P Riskit and these outcomes.
    Third, firms should lobby and donate to politicians only to manage political risk, and not other forms
of risk that are unrelated to politics. Consistent with this prediction, Panels B and C show P Riskit
dominates N P Riskit and Riskit when predicting expenditures on lobbying and donations, as well as
the other outcomes proxying for active management of political risk. Neither of the two measures of
non-political and overall risk are significantly associated with any of these outcome variables, whereas
the coefficient on P Riskit remains stable and highly statistically significant.
    We view these contrasting results for active and passive forms of management of political risk (Panel
A versus Panels B and C) as strongly supportive of our interpretation that P Riskit indeed captures the
extent of political risk a given firm faces.
    The overall conclusion from our falsification exercises is that P Riskit is indeed a valid proxy for firm-
level political risk: it meaningfully identifies transcripts that center on the discussion of political risk; its
time-series and cross-sectional variation line up intuitively with episodes of high aggregate political risk
and with sectors that are most dependent on political decision-making; it correlates with firm actions
in a manner highly indicative of political risk; and its logical components (risk and political exposure)
both serve their intended purpose—significantly identifying risks associated with political topics.
  27
     Since both variables are standardized, the magnitudes of the two coefficients are not directly comparable to each
other and should not be interpreted to mean that N P Riskit is more strongly associated with outcomes than P Riskit .
The standard deviation of N P Riskit is about factor 5 larger at the quarterly frequency than that of P Riskit , so that its
coefficients are mechanically inflated.


                                                            19
Choice of training libraries and alternative implementations of P Riskit .                             Before using our
measure to study the nature of political risk faced by US listed firms, we discuss alternative implemen-
tations of P Riskit . Conditional on the structure given in (1), which is a simple adaptation of existing
methods in computational linguistics, the only judgment we made is in our choice of training libraries.
In addition to our standard specification, which combines materials from textbooks, newspapers, and
the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken American English, we also experimented with specifications that
relied exclusively on textbooks or newspapers. In each case, we judged the quality of results based on an
internal audit study, where we read the 50 transcripts with the highest and lowest scores, and manually
measured the share of their contents that focused on risks associated with political topics. In addition,
we checked 600 political bigrams with the highest term frequencies for plausible links to political topics.
In the course of this audit study, we quickly determined adding the Santa Barbara Corpus of Spoken
American English to the non-political library was always essential. Moreover, both the newspaper-based
and the textbook-based approaches yielded surprisingly similar sets of top-50 transcripts, although both
approaches yielded somewhat noisier results than our preferred specification. The correlation of the two
alternative measures with P Riskit are 0.663 and 0.970, respectively (see Appendix Table 12). Appendix
Table 13 replicates some of the key findings of the paper with these alternative measures. 28
    Beyond the choice of training libraries, we also experimented with two other specifications. In
                                         fb,P
the first, we dropped the weight         BP     from (1). Doing so did not fundamentally alter the sorting of
transcripts generated (the correlation with P Riskit is .759), but led to a noticeable deterioration in its
correspondence with the sorting obtained from our manual reading of transcripts. In the second, we
dropped the pattern-based classification algorithm altogether and instead constructed a dummy variable
(EP Uit ) that equals 1 if the transcript contains a combination of words specified by Baker et al. (2016,
p. 1599).29 Although this simpler measure is directionally still correlated with outcomes in the same
way as P Riskit , it appears to contain much less information, as shown in Appendix Tables 13 and 14.
    For use in robustness checks below, we also constructed an implementation of P Riskit using the
‘Management Discussion and Analysis’ (MD&A) section of firms’ annual Form 10-K filings as an alter-
native text source. Appendix Table 6 shows that the correlations between P Risk10Kit and firm-level
outcomes are similar, but less pronounced and less statistically significant than those with (annualized)
P Riskit . We believe this pattern may be due to the fact that disclosures in 10-Ks are highly scripted
  28
     Another, completely different, approach would be to manually select passages of transcripts that focus on risks asso-
ciated with political matters, and then use these manually selected passages as the political training library. We decided
against this approach because its replicability is limited and for inducing a backward-looking bias by only identifying
political risks of the same nature as those that preoccupied firms in the training sample.
  29
     Specifically, if the transcript contained at least one term from each of the following three set of terms: “uncertain,”
“uncertainties,” “uncertainty”; “economic” or “economy”; and “congress,” “deficit,” “federal reserve,” “legislation,” “reg-
ulation,” “regulatory,” “the fed,” or “white house.”


                                                            20
and tend to have higher disclosure thresholds than earnings conference calls (Hollander et al., 2010;
Brown and Tucker, 2011; Cohen et al., 2018).


4         Firm-Level Political Risk

Having bolstered our confidence that P Riskit indeed captures political risk, we now use it to learn
about the nature of political risk faced by US listed firms and establish new stylized facts.
         A notable feature of the associations between P Riskit and corporate outcomes, as documented in
Tables 4 and 5, is that they all hold even when we condition on time and sector fixed effects. This finding
may be somewhat surprising given a focus in the literature on aggregate political risk that emanates from
national politics and has relatively uniform impacts within sector (e.g., Pastor and Veronesi (2012)).
         To probe the relative contributions of aggregate, sectoral, and firm-level political risk, we conduct a
simple analysis of variance: asking how much of the variation in P Riskit is accounted for by various sets
of fixed effects. The striking finding from this analysis, reported in column 1 of Table 8, is that time
fixed effects—and thus the time-series variation of aggregate political risk shown in Figure 1—account
for only 0.81% of the variation. Sector fixed effects (at the SIC 2-digit level) and the interaction of
sector and time fixed effects only account for an additional 4.38% and 3.12%, respectively. Most of
the variation in measured political risk (91.69%) thus plays out at the level of the firm, rather than at
level of the sector or the economy as a whole. For lack of a better term, we henceforth refer to this
within-sector-and-time variation as “firm-level” or “idiosyncratic” variation in political risk. Although
the two terms are often used synonymously in the literature, we prefer the former because it avoids
confusion with the concept of non-systematic risk in the finance literature. 30
         Further decomposing this firm-level variation, we find that permanent differences across firms in a
given sector (i.e., firm-sector pair fixed effects) account for nearly one quarter (19.87%) of this variation,
whereas changes over time in the assignment of political risk across firms within a given sector account
for the remainder (i.e., the remaining 71.82% not explained by time or firm fixed effects). 31 Perhaps
surprisingly, these conclusions do not change substantially when we use more granular sector definitions
in columns 2 and 3 of Table 8.32
         Taken at face value, these results are at odds with the conventional view that political events have
    30
      However, we show below that the two concepts are quantitatively almost identical in our application, because very
little of the firm-level variation appears to be explained by heterogeneous loadings on aggregate political risk.
   31
      This large within-firm-and-time variation in political risk may partly explain why other studies have found a large
amount of firm-level productivity risk that is not explained by industry- or economy-wide factors ( Castro et al., 2010).
   32
      Of course, this residual mechanically disappears in the limit when each firm is assigned to its own sector. Nevertheless,
the point remains that variation at the level of sectors, defined at conventional levels of granularity, does not absorb most
of the variation in P Riskit .



                                                              21
relatively uniform impacts across firms in a developed economy, where we think of regulatory and
spending decisions as affecting large groups of firms at the same time. Instead, our decomposition
suggests that, even among US listed firms, such decisions have differential impacts among subsets of
firms, and that the assignment of political risk across firms within a given sector changes dramatically
over time. Thus, when facing political risk, firms may be considerably more concerned about their
position in this cross-sectional distribution (e.g., increased scrutiny by regulators of their activities)
than about variation in the time series (e.g., elections or large-scale reforms). 33
       Although suggestive, the results from our variance decomposition admit other interpretations. For
instance, part of the large firm-level variation might simply be due to differential measurement error
that makes firm-level variation harder to pick up than aggregate or sector-level variation. However, the
highly significant associations between P Riskit and corporate outcomes, as documented in Tables 4 and
5, strongly suggest this variation nevertheless has economic content. In Figure 4, we take this one step
further by showing the associations between P Riskit and investment, planned capital expenditure, and
employment growth, respectively, all change very little when we drop all fixed effects (panel a) and when
we supplement our standard specification with the interaction of sector and time fixed effects (panel b),
as well as as fixed effects for each firm-sector pair (panel c). 34 For example, the unconditional correlation
between P Riskit and the investment rate is -0.162 (s.e.=0.043) in panel (a) and -0.188 (s.e.=0.039) in
panel (c). (As before, this pattern is largely invariant to using more granular definitions of sectors; see
Appendix Table 15.) Our results thus suggest the large amounts of firm-level variation in political risk
have real meaning and are not just an artifact of measurement error.
       Although we cannot in general quantify the degree of measurement error contained in different di-
mensions of P Riskit , it is possible to do so under some further assumptions. Suppose, for example, that
true political risk follows a first-order auto-regressive process, and that P Riskit measures this true polit-
ical risk with classical (i.i.d.) measurement error. If we could identify a valid instrument for P Riski,t−1
we could then back out the share of its variation consisting of measurement error by comparing the OLS
and IV coefficients. Table 9 shows three such attempts: panel A for the overall variation in P Riskit ,
and panel B for its firm-level component. Column 1 shows the OLS estimates of the autocorrelation
in P Riskit . In column 2 we instrument P Riski,t−1 using our alternative measure of political risk con-
  33
      Consistent with this interpretation, Akey and Lewellen (2016) also find little persistence in firms’ “policy sensitivity”
across election cycles, where firms are defined as “policy sensitive” if their monthly stock returns co-move significantly
with the EPU measure in the 18 months prior to an election cycle.
   34
      The fact that there is no attenuation in the coefficient when we condition on granular variation implies that the
quantitative results from our variance decomposition in Table 8 also extend to the explained variation of our regressions:
if we regress the firm’s investment rate separately on the sector-time and the firm-level components of P Riskit , we find
that the latter accounts for 87.2% of the total variation explained by P Riskit . Repeating this calculation for employment
growth and planned capital expenditure yields shares of 64.2% and 99.4%, respectively (see Appendix Table 16 for details).



                                                              22
structed by applying (1) to 10-K filings. Under the assumption that this alternative P Risk10Kit is also
an unbiased measure of true political risk, and that measurement error is uncorrelated between the two
measures, the IV estimates shown in column 2 are unbiased. Using this estimate, we calculate that
48.5% (s.e.=1.8%) of the overall variation and 53.8% (s.e.=2.5%) of the firm-level variation in P Riskit
consists of measurement error, while the remaining variation reflects true political risk. 35 Columns 3 and
4 repeat the same calculations using the second lags, P Risk10Ki,t−2 and P Riski,t−2 , as instruments,
respectively. Across all three specifications, the share of variation accounted for by measurement error
is about four percentage points higher in firm-level variation than in the overall variation.
       Although we interpret these results with due caution, they suggest that the implied measurement
error in the firm-level dimension is not dramatically higher than in the overall variation. Moreover, it
is comforting that these shares of measurement errors are very similar to the degree of measurement
error found in other firm-level variables measured using accounting data, such as the measures of TFP
constructed by Bloom et al. (2018) and Collard-Wexler (2011).
       Another possibility is that the large amounts of firm-level variation in P Riskit might simply be
driven by heterogeneous exposure to aggregate political risk. To probe this possibility, we construct a
“political risk beta” for each firm by regressing P Riskit on its quarterly mean across firms, and then
include the interaction of this political risk beta with the mean of P Riskit across firms in our analysis
of variance. Specifically, we include it as a control in addition to the full set of time, sector, and sector
× time fixed effects. We find this interaction (not shown) accounts for less than a hundredth of the
firm-level variation in overall political risk, suggesting P Riskit is not well described by a model in which
firms have stable heterogenous exposures to aggregate political risk.
       Consistent with this result, column 2 of Table 10 shows the association between P Riskit and stock
return volatility remains almost unchanged when we control for such heterogenous exposure to aggregate
political risk. Column 3 allows for time variation of firms’ political risk beta on a two-year rolling
window. Here, too, we find the coefficient on the interaction is statistically insignificant whereas the
coefficient on P Riskit remains unchanged and highly statistically significant—thus suggesting that any
information reflected in these alternative measures is subsumed in P Riskit . The following columns
repeat the same procedure but construct each firm’s political risk beta by regressing its daily stock
return on daily variation in EP Ut (columns 4 and 5). Columns 5 and 6 instead use the log of one
plus the dollar amount the firm has outstanding in government contracts as a measure of exposure to
aggregate political risk. In each case, the inclusion of these variables has no effect on the coefficient of
  35
     If firms, indeed, disclose only severe and longer-term risks in 10-Ks, it is likely that our instrumentation strategy
isolates more persistent elements of the true underlying political risk, so that the estimates of measurement error in Table
9 may be more appropriately interpreted as upper bounds of the true measurement error.



                                                            23
interest. Appendix Table 17 shows the same result for all other corporate outcomes studied in Table 5.
   To summarize, the main conclusion from this analysis is that the incidence of political risk across
firms is far more volatile and heterogeneous than previously thought. Much of the economic impact of
political risk plays out within sector and time and is not well described by a model in which individual
firms have relatively stable exposures to aggregate political risk. Instead, a surprisingly large share of
the variation in political risk is accounted for by changes over time in allocation of political risk across
firms within a given sector. That is, firms may be more concerned about their relative position in the
cross-sectional distribution of political risk than about time-series variation in aggregate political risk.
   We next elaborate on the macroeconomic implications of this finding before turning to two case
studies that further illustrate the nature of the firm-level variation in political risk.


4.1   Macroeconomic effects of firm-level political risk

Much of the academic debate on the effects of political risk has focused on the idea that increases in
aggregate political risk may reduce the average firm’s investments in human and physical capital ( Baker
et al., 2016; Fernández-Villaverde et al., 2015). The economically significant variation in firm-level
political risk we document above suggests that the effectiveness of political decision making may, in
addition, affect the economy in more subtle ways, even when aggregate political risk is held constant.
   First, by affecting firms’ investment and hiring decisions, firm-level variation in political risk should
induce firm-level variation in measured total factor productivity. That is, firm-level political risk may in
fact be a root cause of the kind of idiosyncratic productivity risk that has been the object of an active
literature studying the microeconomic origins of aggregate fluctuations. Different branches of this
literature have argued that idiosyncratic productivity shocks may propagate by impacting the actions
of upstream and downstream producers, resulting in aggregate fluctuations (Gabaix, 2011; Acemoglu
et al., 2012), and that spikes in idiosyncratic productivity risk may reduce aggregate economic growth
if firms face financial or other frictions (Gilchrist et al., 2014; Arellano et al., 2016; Bloom et al., 2018).
   Second, going beyond the effects of idiosyncratic risk studied in this literature, our finding that
the allocation of political risk across firms is highly volatile and heterogeneous also suggests that it
may result in an additional misallocation of resources across firms that lowers aggregate total factor
productivity (Hsieh and Klenow, 2009; Arayavechkit et al., 2017).
    To illustrate this channel, consider a simple model in which a unit mass of firms produce output
                                             R
using capital, Yit = Kitα , with α < 1 and Kit di ≡ K  ˉ t . Capital investment decisions are made one

period in advance subject to adjustment costs. In addition, assume that each firm faces uncertainty
about some political decision that affects its profits; and that this uncertainty makes it privately optimal


                                                      24
to reduce the level of investment so that Kit = K ∗ e−b(σt +σit ) , where b is some positive constant and
σt and σit are the aggregate and firm-level components of political risk, respectively. Both components
are known to the firm, and the dispersion of political risk across firms follows a normal distribution,
              Σ2t
σit ∼ N (b    2 , Σt ).   For the sake of argument, let us also assume that this political risk is unrelated to
economic fundamentals and originates exclusively from failings in the political system itself (e.g., an
inability to reach compromise), so that the socially optimal level of investment is Kit = K ∗ .
                                                                                              ˉ t below
       Within this model, the conventional concern is that aggregate political risk depresses K
its optimal level and that spikes in aggregate political risk may cause business cycles by inducing the
average firm to temporarily lower investment. (Taking our results in Table 5 at face value, we are
inclined to add socially wasteful lobbying activities and donations to politicians to this list.)
       Solving the model, we can show that in addition to these aforementioned effects, the dispersion in
                                                                         ˉ α , where φ = 1 b2 (1 − α) α > 0.
political risk across firms lowers total factor productivity: Yt = e−φΣt K
                                                                                2
                                                                           t             2

That is, the mere existence of dispersion of political risk across firms directly lowers aggregate total
factor productivity and output, even if we hold constant the aggregate capital stock. In addition, any
temporary increase in this dispersion causes a recession by causing total factor productivity to fall.
       To summarize, our results suggest that the effectiveness of political decision-making may have im-
portant macroeconomic effects not only by affecting aggregate political risk, but also by altering the
identity of firms affected by political risk and the dispersion of firm-level political risk over time.
       To probe this latter possibility, we project P Riskit on the interaction of time and sector fixed effects
and plot the cross-sectional standard deviation of the residual at each point in time in the top panel of
Figure 5 as a proxy for the time-series variation in Σ t . For comparison, the figure also plots the average
across firms of P Riskit (corresponding to σt in the model). The figure shows the dispersion of firm-level
political risk tends to be higher during the 2008-9 recession. More striking, however, is the strong
correlation with aggregate political risk: the dispersion in political risk across firms is high precisely
when aggregate political risk is high. Regressing the standard deviation of the residuals on the mean of
P Riskit yields a coefficient of 0.790 (s.e.=0.056), implying a one-percentage-point increase in aggregate
political risk is associated with a 0.79-percentage-point increase in the cross-sectional standard deviation
of firm-level political risk. 36
       This strong association between aggregate political risk and the dispersion of firm-level political risk
suggests politicians may to some extent control the dispersion of political risk across firms and that
events that increase aggregate political risk may also transmit themselves through an increase in the
  36
    As is already apparent from visual inspection, Appendix Table 18 shows that this association remains significant, and
even dominates, when we simultaneously control for the business cycle.




                                                           25
firm-level dispersion of political risk. In this sense, part of the well-documented countercyclical variation
in uncertainty (Bloom, 2009) may in fact have political origins.
      The bottom panel of Figure 5 shows the distribution of firm-level political risk, without conditioning
on a specific time-period. It further illustrates this variation is large relative to the variation in the
whole panel (the standard deviation of this purely firm-level variation is 0.96 of the standard deviation
of the full panel), and that it is positively skewed, with a fat right tail.


4.2      Case studies: two firms

As a useful illustration of the kind of firm-level political risk captured by our measure, Figure 6 plots the
time series of P Riskit for two particular firms: a large energy firm (panel A) and a small firm belonging
to the information technology sector (panel B). For each spike in the time series, the figures provide a
brief description of the risks associated with political topics discussed in the transcript.
      As shown in panel A, a recurring theme in the genesis of the energy firm’s P Riskit is risks associated
with emission regulations. At various stages, EPA emissions rules are changed, challenged in court,
withdrawn, and re-formulated, each time creating spikes in P Riskit . When reading the underlying
transcripts, it becomes clear why these regulatory actions have highly heterogeneous, firm-specific,
impacts: our example firm relies heavily on coal-burning furnaces of an older generation that specifically
emit a lot of mercury and are also located such that they are subject to interstate emissions rules. 37
Other regulatory risks are also highly localized, where, for example, a regulator in Ohio considers
changing rules on compensation for providing spare generating capacity, and an agency in North Carolina
considers aggregation of electricity purchases. Both actions specifically impact our example firm because
of its relatively large presence in these states. Altogether, only a small number of electricity generating
firms might exhibit a similar exposure to these specific regulatory actions. Another recurring theme
surrounds the likelihood of climate legislation and its interaction with health care reform. Although
these kinds of legislations are arguably broad in their impact, here, too, we find a noticeable firm-specific
element: the firm’s executives are rooting for health care reform not because of its effect on the firm’s
health plan, but because it reduces the likelihood of Congress taking up climate legislation.
      The example firm in panel B is a smaller high-tech firm, specializing in voice-over-IP systems. As is
evident from Figure 6, this firm’s exposure to political risk is much simpler, and centers almost entirely
on government contracts. Specifically, the company hopes the government will make a strategic decision
to invest in the firm’s (secure) voice-over-IP standard, and that in particular the Department of Defense
will invest in upgrading its telephone infrastructure. Some of this uncertainty is again “aggregate” in the
 37
      For an in-depth study of the heterogeneous effects of uncertainty about interstate emissions rules, see Dorsey (2017).



                                                             26
sense that it depends generally on the level of government spending, but much of it is also more specific
to procurement decisions of individual agencies and the funding of specific government programs.
    These case studies illustrate two main points. First, P Riskit captures risks associated with a broad
range of interactions between governments and firms, including regulation, litigation, legislation, bud-
geting, and procurement decisions. Second, given this breadth of government activities, the incidence
of political risk could quite plausibly be highly volatile and heterogeneous across firms, such that much
of the economically relevant variation of political risk is at the firm level.


5    Measuring Topic-Specific Political Risk

In the final step of our analysis we now demonstrate it is possible to generalize our approach in ( 1) to
identify risks associated with specific political topics, rather than politics in general. To this end, we
require a set of training libraries Z = {P1 , ..., PZ }, each containing the complete set of bigrams occurring
in one of Z texts archetypical of discussion of a particular political topic, such as health care policy or
tax policy. As before, we then calculate the share of the conversation that centers on risks associated
with political topic T as the weighted number of bigrams occurring in PT but not the non-political
library, N, that are used in conjunction with a discussion of political risk:

                            PBit                                       fp,P       fb,PT
                                                                                                          
                              b      1[b ∈ PT \N] × 1[|b − p| < 10] ×   BP     ×   BPT     log(Z/fb,Z )
                     T
               P Riskit =                                                                                     ,   (6)
                                                            Bit

where p is the position of the nearest bigram already counted in our measure of overall political risk ( 1),
that is, a political but not non-political bigram that is also near to a synonym for risk and uncertainty—
the nearest bigram for which 1[b ∈ P\N] × 1[|b − r| < 10] > 0. Both bigrams (p and b) are again weighted
with their term frequencies and inverse document frequencies.
    Because we must now distinguish between multiple political topics, b’s inverse document frequency,
log(Z/fb,Z ), plays a more important role: it adjusts each bigram’s weighting for how unique its use is
to the discussion of a specific topic compared to all the other political topics, where fb,Z is the number
of libraries in Z that contain bigram b. For example, a bigram that occurs in all topic-based political
libraries is not useful for distinguishing a particular topic and is thus assigned a weight of log(Z/Z) = 0.
By contrast, this weight increases the more unique the use of this bigram is when discussing topic T ,
and is highest (log(Z/1)) for a bigram that is used exclusively in discussion of topic T .
    To implement (6), we rely on the collection of newspaper articles, speeches, press releases, and bill
sponsorships, compiled by OnTheIssues.org, which is a nonpartisan not-for-profit organization that uses



                                                       27
this information to educate voters about the positions politicians take on key topics. We believe this
source is particularly useful because it includes a wide variety of written texts as well as transcripts of
spoken language. From the material provided on the website, we distilled training libraries for eight
political topics: “economic policy & budget,” “environment,” “trade,” “institutions & political process,”
“health care,” “security & defense,” “tax policy,” and “technology & infrastructure.” 38
      Mirroring our approach in section 2, we begin by verifying that our topic-based measures correctly
identify transcripts that feature significant discussions of risks associated with each of the eight political
topics. We then examine firms’ lobbying activities and how they change in the face of political risk
associated with each topic. The lobbying data are particularly attractive for this purpose, because we
have information on the lobbying activities of each firm by topic, allowing us to relate this information
directly to our topic-specific measure of political risk. Finally, we use these data to study the impacts
of three federal budget crises during the Obama presidency on political risk and lobbying.


Validation.        Appendix Table 20 shows the top 15 bigrams most indicative of each of our eight political
                                            fb,PT
topics: the bigrams with the highest        B PT    log(Z/fb,Z ). For example, the top 15 bigrams associated with
“economic policy & budget” include “balanced budget,” “legislation provides,” and “bankruptcy bill;”
those associated with “security & defense” include “on terror,” “from iraq,” and “nuclear weapons.” As
before, the table also shows the text surrounding the highest-scoring bigrams within the three highest-
scoring transcripts for each topic, which also give an impression as to each transcript’s content. For
example, the transcript with the highest score in the “economic policy & budget” category discusses
the possibility of government stimulus for the construction industry (Ashtead Group PLC in December
2008). Similarly, the transcript with the highest rank in the “security & defense” category (Circor
International Inc in May 2011) features discussions of how government budget cuts and the winding
down of activities in Iraq and Afghanistan affect the demand for the firm’s products.
      Although our approach yields the expected results, we note a few minor exceptions. On four occa-
sions, the conditioning on proximity to synonyms for risk, again, produces apparent false positives when
considering only the text surrounding the highest-scoring bigrams shown in the table: i.e., the tran-
scripts of Torchmark Corp., Exelon Corp., Radian Group Inc., and Magellan Health Services. However,
a closer reading of these transcripts reveals the surrounding paragraphs do in fact contain significant
discussions of political risks associated with the regulation of Mediare, greenhouse gas emissions, hous-
ing finance reform, and health care reform, respectively. We find only one false positive among the 24
top transcripts listed in Appendix Table 20 (the February 2007 transcript by Faurecia, in the “economic
 38
      Appendix Table 19 gives details on the mapping between the materials provided on the website and these topics.



                                                            28
policy & budget” category).


Lobbying by topic.          For each firm-quarter, the CRP lists which of 80 possible topics a given firm
lobbies on. Using our mapping between these 80 topics and our eight political topics (Appendix Table 1),
we generate a dummy variable that equals 1 if firm i lobbies on topic T in quarter t, and zero otherwise.
Our main specification relating this lobbying activity to our topic-based measures of political risk takes
the form:
                                T
                      1[Lobbyingi,t+1 > 0] ∗ 100 = δt + δi + δT + θP Riskit
                                                                         T
                                                                            + γ T Xit + Tit ,                     (7)

where δt , δi , and δT represent time, firm, and topic fixed effects, respectively, and Xit always controls
for the log of the firm’s assets and P Sentimentit . The θ coefficient measures the association between a
firm’s political risk associated with a given topic and its propensity to lobby on that topic.
       Panel A of Table 11 shows estimates of θ, were column 3 corresponds directly to (7). The coefficient
estimate (0.794, s.e.=0.047) implies that a one-standard-deviation increase in the political risk associated
with a given political topic is associated with a 0.794-percentage-point increase in the probability that
a given firm lobbies on that topic in the following quarter. Because, on average, only 7% of sample
firms lobby on any given topic, this effect corresponds to a 11% increase relative to the mean. Column
5 shows our most demanding specification which also includes firm × topic fixed effects, thereby only
focusing on variation within firm and topic. Doing so reduces the coefficient of interest by an order of
magnitude, although it remains statistically significant at the 1% level. Panel B reports similar findings
using the log of one plus the dollar expenditure on lobbying as dependent variable, constructed under
the assumption that firms spend an equal amount on each topic they lobby on in a given quarter.
       Our conclusion from this set of results is that the within-firm-and-topic variation of our topic-based
measure has economic content, finding that firms actively manage political risk by lobbying on the
political topics they are most concerned about. 39


Timing and causality.           The granularity of these results, linking within-firm-and-topic variation in
political risk to topic-specific lobbying expenditures in the subsequent quarter, warrants a brief con-
sideration of the direction of causality. Two obstacles to attributing a causal interpretation to the θ
coefficient in (7) remain.
       The first challenge is that an unobserved non-political event simultaneously increases the share of the
conversation devoted to risks associated with a particular political topic and, for reasons unrelated to
this risk, increases the propensity to lobby on that same topic, but not other topics. Although thinking
  39
      Going one step further, Appendix Figure 5 probes the heterogeneity of this effect across topics by allowing the θ
coefficient in (7) to vary by topic.


                                                          29
of examples of such an unobserved event is somewhat difficult, we cannot rule out this possibility.
However, if such a confounding event indeed drives the identification of θ, we may expect it to affect
lobbying expenditures before as much as after the discussion of the political topic at hand.
    To probe this possibility, Appendix Table 21 replicates column 5 of Table 11—our most demanding
specification relating lagged P Riskit
                                    T to lobbying at t + 1—while adding both contemporaneous and


future P Risk T to the regression. The results show the coefficient on the lag is almost unchanged (0.081,
s.e.=0.030), and it shows a larger effect than both the contemporaneous P Riski,t+1
                                                                              T     (0.064, s.e.=0.030)
and the lead (0.048, s.e.=0.031), which is statistically indistinguishable from zero. If anything, the lag
thus dominates the lead, consistent with a causal interpretation of the results. We interpret this result,
however, with caution given the relatively low frequency of the data, the high persistence of lobbying
activities,40 and the fact that the three point estimates are not dramatically different from each other.
    The second challenge to a causal interpretation is that a politically engaged firm may lobby the
government on a given topic—regardless of the risks associated with the issue—and then have to defend
financial or other risks resulting from this lobbying activity during a conference call, or it might lobby
in anticipation of future innovations to political risk. Again, the timing of the effect weighs somewhat
against this interpretation, but we cannot rule it out in the absence of a natural experiment.
    This narrow issue of identification aside, a deeper challenge results from the fact that not all political
risk is generated by the political system itself, but rather arises in reaction to external forces. For
example, an acute liquidity crisis in financial markets may prompt regulators to act, thus creating
political risk from the perspective of the firm. In this case, the political risk itself results from politicians’
attempts to minimize adverse impacts from the crisis. In other words, a meaningful distinction exists
between political risk that fundamentally originates from the political system and political risk that
arises due to other forces. Again, disentangling the causal effects of these different types of political
risks would require a natural experiment.
    Although we have no such natural experiments available, we can nevertheless speak to this issue by
making use of three historical case studies that allow us to trace rises in political risk directly to specific
political crises.


Case studies: three federal budget crises.                   During the Obama presidency, the federal government
suffered a sequence of budget crises surrounding the so-called “debt ceiling,” the “fiscal cliff,” and the
“shutdown” of the federal government. These episodes are of special interest because they arguably
created political risk that resulted purely from the inability of politicians to reach a compromise in
  40
     A pooled regression of Lobbying i,t+1 (1 ∗ 100) on Lobbyingi,t (1 ∗ 100) gives a coefficient of 0.877 (s.e.=0.056). Lobbying
by topic exhibits similarly high persistence (0.882, s.e.=0.005).


                                                               30
a timely fashion, and not from some other unobserved factor. Moreover, each of these episodes is
associated with a unique bigram that comes into use in conference-call transcripts only during the
period of interest and not before. These unique bigrams allow us to measure which firms appeared most
concerned with these episodes.
      In the third quarter of 2011 the federal government had reached its debt limit and an imminent
default on federal debt was averted only by a last-minute budget deal between President Obama and
congress. As shown in Figure 7, the use of the bigram “debt ceiling” in conference calls peaks around
that time. In December 2012, the expiration of the Bush-era tax cuts and a scheduled reduction in
government spending (“sequestration”) threatened to send America hurtling over the “fiscal cliff.” In
addition, on December 31, 2012, the debt ceiling was expected to be reached once more. As shown
in Figure 7, the occurrence of the bigrams “fiscal cliff” and “debt ceiling” peaks in q4 2012 to q1
2013. Finally, on October 1, 2013, Congress failed to pass a budget, resulting in a partial government
shutdown which lasted for 16 days, before a compromise was reached. Figure 7 shows the use of the
bigram “government shutdown” peaks sharply around q4 2013. Notably, the figure further shows each
of these episodes is associated with a marked increase in the average across firms in our measure of
                                                                 ep&b
political risk associated with “economic policy & budget,” P Riskit   .
                                                                               ep&b
      Table 12 probes this apparent effect of the three budget crises on P Riskit   by examining the cross
section of firms. Columns 1-3 in Panel A report that firms that use the bigrams “debt ceiling,” “fiscal
cliff,” and “government shutdown” more frequently in their earnings calls held during these respective
                                                                    ep&b
periods tend to experience a significantly higher increase in P Riskit   relative to the previous quarter.
      Although we have no quasi-experimental variation in the identities of the firms most affected by these
episodes, we can show the firms using the three bigrams more frequently tend to rely on the federal
government for significantly larger shares of their revenues. Moreover, this approach arguably enables
us to isolate variation in political risk induced by the political process itself, namely, the inability of
decision makers to arrive at compromises in a timely fashion.
      How might firms react to this politically-induced increase in risk associated with the federal budget?
Panel B of Table 12 reports estimates of a regression of a dummy variable that equals 1 if a firm lobbies
on the topic “economic policy & budget” in a given quarter on a full set of time and firm fixed effects,
and the number of times a conference call contains any of the three bigrams associated with the three
crises. We find one additional mention of one of the three bigrams is associated with a 0.698-percentage-
point increase (s.e.=0.299) in the probability that the firm lobbies the federal government on the topic
of “economic policy & budget” in the following quarter. 41
 41
      In total, 2,160 firm-quarters show use of one of these bigrams (on average used 1.69 times).



                                                             31
                                                                                   ep&b
    In column 2, we regress the dummy for lobbying on this specific topic on P Riskit   , returning
a positive and significant coefficient (0.183, s.e.=0.084). Finally, in column 3, we use polynomials of
the number of mentions of “debt ceiling,” “fiscal cliff,” and “government shutdown” during the three
                                            ep&b
respective periods as instruments for P Riskit   . The result suggests a one-standard-deviation increase
in political risk associated with “economic policy & budget” attributable to the three budget crises
is associated with a 2.430-percentage-point increase (s.e.=0.937) in the probability that a given firm
lobbies on that topic. We cautiously interpret this coefficient as the local average treatment effect of the
Obama-presidency budget crises on the probability that firms most concerned with these crises lobby
the federal government on the topic of “economic policy & budget” in the subsequent quarter.
    The notable increase in the coefficient between the OLS and IV specifications (by a factor of 14)
is consistent with the view that political risks attributable to the political process itself may be more
amenable to influencing by lobbying than political risks resulting from some external force. Alterna-
tively, the increase may also be explained by the presence of substantial measurement error or some
other force contributing to endogenous selection.


6    Conclusion

Political decisions on regulation, taxation, expenditure, and the enforcement of rules have a major
impact on the business environment. Even in well-functioning democracies, the outcomes of these
decisions are often hard to predict, generating risk. A major concern among economists is that the
effects of such political risk on the decisions of households and firms might entail social costs that may
outweigh potential upsides even of well-meaning reforms, prompting questions about the social costs
of the fits and starts of political decision-making. However, quantifying the effects of political risk has
often proven difficult, partially due to a lack of measurement.
    In this paper, we adapt simple tools from computational linguistics to construct a new measure of
political risk faced by individual firms: the share of their quarterly earnings conference calls that they
devote to political risks. This measure allows us to quantify, and decompose by topic, the extent of
political risk faced by individual firms over time.
    We show a range of results corroborating our interpretation that our measure indeed reflects mean-
ingful firm-level variation in exposure to political risk: we find that it correctly identifies conference
calls that center on risks associated with politics, that aggregations of our measure correlate strongly
with measures of aggregate and sectoral political risk used in the prior literature, and that it correlates
with stock market volatility and firm actions—such as hiring, investment, lobbying, and donations to



                                                      32
politicians—in a way that is highly indicative of political risk. Moreover, these correlations with firm
actions remain unchanged when we control for news about the mean of the firm’s political and non-
political shocks, lending us confidence that our measure of political risk genuinely captures information
about the second moment, not the first moment.
   Using this measure, we document that a surprisingly large share of the variation in political risk
appears to play out at the level of the firm, rather than the level of the sector or the economy as a
whole. About two-thirds of the variation of our measure is accounted for by changes in the assignment
of political risk across firms within a given sector. Although part of this variation is likely measured
with error, we find it has economic content, in the sense that it is significantly associated with all the
same firm-level outcomes and actions outlined above.
   An immediate implication of these results is that the economic impact of political risk is not well
described by conventional models in which individual firms have relatively stable exposures to aggregate
political risk. Instead, political shocks appear to be a significant source of firm-level (idiosyncratic)
risk, and firms may well be as concerned about their relative position in the distribution of firm-level
political risk as they are about aggregate political risk. Consistent with this interpretation, we find the
distribution of firm-level political risk has high variance and a fat right tail.
   Our main conclusion from this set of results is that the effectiveness of political decision-making
may affect the economy, not only by affecting aggregate political risk (as is the focus of much of the
existing literature), but also by creating idiosyncratic political risk. Such idiosyncratic political risk may
affect the macroeconomy through three distinct channels. First, it may lower total factor productivity by
distorting the allocation of resources across firms within sector. Second, it may prompt socially wasteful
diversion of resources toward lobbying and other attempts to actively manage firm-level political risk.
Third, a recent literature in macroeconomics has argued that idiosyncratic risk, regardless of its origin,
may have independent effects on the level of hiring and investment in a variety of settings.
   Consistent with the view that politicians have some control over the level of idiosyncratic political
risk, we also find that the dispersion of firm-level political risk co-moves strongly with aggregate political
risk, rising when aggregate political risk is high. Because aggregate political risk tends to be high in
economic downturns, this association may also explain part of the countercyclical nature of idiosyncratic
risk (both political and non-political), which is the subject of a broader literature.
   In addition to our measure of overall political risk, we also generate additional measures of overall
risk, non-political risk, corresponding measures of political, and non-political sentiment, as well as
additional measures of political risks associated with eight specific political topics. Using these topic-
specific measures, we show that firms that devote more time to discussing risks associated with a given


                                                     33
political topic in a given quarter are more likely to begin lobbying on that topic in the following quarter.
   Our results leave a number of avenues for future research. In particular, we hope the ability to
measure firm-level variation in political risk will contribute to identifying and quantifying causal effects
of political risk in future work, for example, by combining our data with information about natural
experiments affecting the degree of political risk associated with particular topics.


References
Acemoglu, D., V. M. Carvalho, A. Ozdaglar, and A. Tahbaz-Salehi (2012). The network origins of
  aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 80 (5), 1977–2016.
Acemoglu, D., T. A. Hassan, and A. Tahoun (2017). The power of the street: Evidence from egypt’s
  arab spring. The Review of Financial Studies , Forthcoming, Available at SSRN 2485984.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, A. Kermani, J. Kwak, and T. Mitton (2016). The value of connections in
  turbulent times: Evidence from the united states. Journal of Financial Economics , Forthcoming.
Akey, P. and S. Lewellen (2016). Policy uncertainty, political capital, and firm risk-taking. Working
  paper , London Business School.
Al-Ubaydli, O. and P. A. McLaughlin (2017). Regdata: A numerical database on industry-specific regu-
  lations for all united states industries and federal regulations, 19972012. Regulation & Governance 11,
  109–123.
Arayavechkit, T., F. Saffie, and M. Shin (2017). Too big to pay: Tax beneifts and corporate lobbying.
  Mimeo University of Maryland .
Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and P. J. Kehoe (2016). Financial frictions and fluctuations in volatility. Technical
  report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bachmann, R., S. Elstner, and E. R. Sims (2013). Uncertainty and economic activity: Evidence from
  business survey data. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5 (2), 217–249.
Baker, S. R., N. Bloom, and S. J. Davis (2016). Measuring economic policy uncertainty. The Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131 (4), 1593–1636.
Ball, R. and E. Bartov (1996). How naive is the stock market’s use of earnings information? Journal
  of Accounting and Economics 21 (3), 319–337.
Bekkerman, R. and J. Allan (2004). Using bigrams in text categorization. Technical report, Technical
  Report IR-408, Center of Intelligent Information Retrieval, UMass Amherst.
Belo, F., V. D. Gala, and J. Li (2013). Government spending, political cycles, and the cross section of
  stock returns. Journal of Financial Economics 107 (2), 305–324.
Benmelech, E. and T. J. Moskowitz (2010). The political economy of financial regulation: Evidence
  from us state usury laws in the 19th century. The Journal of Finance 65 (3), 1029–1073.
Bernanke, B. S. (1983). Irreversibility, uncertainty, and cyclical investment. Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 98, 85–106.
Besley, T. and H. Mueller (2017). Institutions, volatility, and investment. Journal of the European
  Economic Association , jvx030.
Bianco, W. T. and D. T. Canon (2013). American Politics Today (Third Essentials Edition). McGraw-
  Hill/Irwin.
Bloom, N. (2009). The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica 77, 623–685.

                                                    34
Bloom, N., S. Bond, and J. Van Reenen (2007). Uncertainty and investment dynamics. Review of
  Economic Studies 74, 391–415.
Bloom, N., M. Floetotto, N. Jaimovich, I. Saporta-Eksten, and S. Terry (2018). Really uncertain
  business cycles. Econometrica 86, 1031–1065.
Born, B. and J. Pfeifer (2014). Policy risk and the business cycle. Journal of Monetary Economics 68,
  68–85.
Brown, S. V. and J. W. Tucker (2011). Large-sample evidence on firms year-over-year md&a modifica-
  tions. Journal of Accounting Research 49 (2), 309–346.
Caldara, D. and M. Iacoviello (2016). Measuring geopolitical risk. Technical report, Working Paper,
  Federal Reserve Board of Governors.
Castro, R., G. L. Clementi, and Y. Lee (2010). Cross–sectoral variation in firm–level idiosyncratic risk.
Cohen, L., C. Malloy, and Q. Nguyen (2018). Lazy prices.
Collard-Wexler, A. (2011). Productivity dispersion and plant selection in the ready-mix concrete in-
  dustry. Mimeo NYU Stern.
Correia, M. M. (2014). Political connections and sec enforcement. Journal of Accounting and Eco-
  nomics 57 (2), 241–262.
Croce, M. M., T. T. Nguyen, and L. Schmid (2012). The market price of fiscal uncertainty. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 59 (5), 401–416.
De Figueiredo, J. M. and B. S. Silverman (2006). Academic earmarks and the returns to lobbying.
  Journal of Law and Economics 49 (2), 597–625.
Dixit, A. K. and R. S. Pindyck (1994). Investment Under Uncertainty. Princeton University Press.
Dorsey, J. (2017). Waiting on the courts: Effects of policy uncertainty on pollution and investment.
 Mimeo University of Arizona .
Drautzburg, T., J. Fernandez-Villaverde, and P. Guerron-Quintana (2017). Political distribution risk
  and aggregate fluctuations. NBER Working Paper No. 23647 .
Du Bois, J. W., W. L. Chafe, C. Meyer, S. A. Thompson, and N. Martey (2000). Santa barbara corpus
 of spoken american english. CD-ROM. Philadelphia: Linguistic Data Consortium .
Faccio, M., R. W. Masulis, and J. McConnell (2006). Political connections and corporate bailouts. The
  Journal of Finance 61 (6), 2597–2635.
Ferguson, T. and H.-J. Voth (2008). Betting on hitler – the value of political connections in nazi
  germany. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (1), 101–137.
Fernandez-Villaverde, J., L. Garicano, and T. Santos (2013). Political credit cycles: the case of the
  eurozone. The Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (3), 145–166.
Fernández-Villaverde, J., P. Guerrón-Quintana, K. Kuester, and J. Rubio-Ramı́rez (2015). Fiscal volatil-
  ity shocks and economic activity. The American Economic Review 105 (11), 3352–3384.
Fisman, R. (2001). Estimating the value of political connections. The American Economic Review 91 (4),
  1095–1102.
Gabaix, X. (2011). The granular origins of aggregate fluctuations. Econometrica 79 (3), 733–772.
Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2018). A Crisis of Beliefs: Investor Psychology and Financial Fragility.
 Princeton University Press.
Gentzkow, M. and J. M. Shapiro (2010). What drives media slant? evidence from us daily newspapers.
 Econometrica 78 (1), 35–71.

                                                   35
Giglio, S., B. Kelly, and S. Pruitt (2016). Systemic risk and the macroeconomy: An empirical evaluation.
  Journal of Financial Economics 119 (3), 457–471.
Gilchrist, S., J. W. Sim, and E. Zakrajšek (2014). Uncertainty, financial frictions, and investment
  dynamics. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Goldman, E., J. Rocholl, and J. So (2009). Do politically connected boards affect firm value? Review
 of Financial Studies 22 (6), 2331–2360.
Gourio, F., M. Siemer, and A. Verdelhan (2015). Uncertainty and international capital flows. Working
 paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, MIT .
Handley, K. and N. Limao (2015). Trade and investment under policy uncertainty: theory and firm
  evidence. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7 (4), 189–222.
Hassan, T. A. and T. M. Mertens (2017). The social cost of near-rational investment. The American
  Economic Review 107 (4), 1059–1103.
Hollander, S., M. Pronk, and E. Roelofsen (2010). Does silence speak? an empirical analysis of disclosure
  choices during conference calls. Journal of Accounting Research 48 (3), 531–563.
Hsieh, C.-T. and P. Klenow (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing tfp in china and india. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 124, 1403–1448.
Johnson, S. and T. Mitton (2003). Cronyism and capital controls: Evidence from malaysia. Journal of
  Financial Economics 67 (2), 351–382.
Jurado, K., S. C. Ludvigson, and S. Ng (2015). Measuring uncertainty. The American Economic
  Review 105 (3), 1177–1216.
Kang, K. (2016). Policy influence and private returns from lobbying in the energy sector. The Review
 of Economic Studies , 269–305.
Kelly, B., L. Pástor, and P. Veronesi (2016). The price of political uncertainty: Theory and evidence
  from the option market. The Journal of Finance , Forthcoming.
Khwaja, A. I. and A. Mian (2005). Do lenders favor politically connected firms? rent provision in an
 emerging financial market. The Quarterly Journal of Economics , 1371–1411.
Koijen, R. S., T. J. Philipson, and H. Uhlig (2016). Financial health economics. Econometrica 84 (1),
 195–242.
Leuz, C. and F. Oberholzer-Gee (2006). Political relationships, global financing, and corporate trans-
  parency: Evidence from indonesia. Journal of Financial Economics 81 (2), 411–439.
Libby, R., P. A. Libby, and D. G. Short (2011). Financial accounting. McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2011). When is a liability not a liability? textual analysis, dictionaries,
  and 10-ks. The Journal of Finance 66 (1), 35–65.
Loughran, T. and B. McDonald (2016). Textual analysis in accounting and finance: A survey. Journal
  of Accounting Research 54 (14), 1187–1230.
Manning, C. D., P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze (2008). Introduction to information retrieval. Cambridge
 University Press.
Matsumoto, D., M. Pronk, and E. Roelofsen (2011). What makes conference calls useful? the infor-
 mation content of managers’ presentations and analysts’ discussion sessions. The Accounting Re-
 view 86 (4), 1383–1414.
Milyo, J., D. Primo, and T. Groseclose (2000). Corporate pac campaign contributions in perspective.
 Business and Politics 2 (1), 75–88.


                                                   36
Mishra, A. and S. Vishwakarma (2015, Dec). Analysis of tf-idf model and its variant for document
 retrieval. In 2015 International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Communication Net-
 works (CICN), pp. 772–776.
Mueller, P., A. Tahbaz-Salehi, and A. Vedolin (2017). Exchange rates and monetary policy uncertainty.
 The Journal of Finance 72 (3), 1213–1252.
Olson, M. (1965). The logic of collective action. Harvard University Press.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2012). Uncertainty about government policy and stock prices. The Journal
  of Finance 67 (4), 1219–1264.
Pastor, L. and P. Veronesi (2013). Political uncertainty and risk premia. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 110 (3), 520–545.
Peltzman, S. (1976). Toward a more general theory of regulation. Journal of Law and Economics 19,
  211–240.
Pindyck, R. S. (1988). Irreversible investment, capacity choice, and the value of the firm. The American
  Economic Review 78 (5), 969.
Ramos, J. (2003). Using tf-idf to determine word relevance in document queries. In Proceedings of the
  first instructional conference on machine learning.
Roberts, B. E. (1990). A dead senator tells no lies: Seniority and the distribution of federal benefits.
  American Journal of Political Science , 31–58.
Salton, G. and C. Buckley (1988). Term-weighting approaches in automatic text retrieval. Information
  Processing and Management 24 (5), 513–523.
Salton, G. and M. McGill (1983). Introduction to Modern Information Retrieval. McGraw-Hill, Inc.
  New York.
Snowberg, E., J. Wolfers, and E. Zitzewitz (2007). Partisan impacts on the economy: evidence from
  prediction markets and close elections. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (2), 807–829.
Song, M. and Y.-f. B. Wu (2008). Handbook of research on text and web mining technologies. IGI Global.
Sparck Jones, K. (1972). A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval.
  Journal of Documentation 28 (1), 11–21.
Stein, L. C. and E. C. Stone (2013). The effect of uncertainty on investment, hiring, and r&d: Causal
  evidence from equity options. Working paper , Available at SSRN 1649108.
Stigler, G. J. (1971). The theory of economic regulation. Bell Journal of Economics and Management
  Science 2, 3–21.
Tahoun, A. (2014). The role of stock ownership by us members of congress on the market for political
  favors. Journal of Financial Economics 111 (1), 86–110.
Tahoun, A. and L. van Lent (2018). The personal wealth interests of politicians and government
  intervention in the economy. Review of Finance 23 (1), 37–74.
Tan, C.-M., Y.-F. Wang, and C.-D. Lee (2002). The use of bigrams to enhance text categorization.
  Information Processing & Management 38 (4), 529–546.
Tullock, G. (1967). The welfare costs of tariffs, monopolies, and theft. Western Economic Journal 5,
  224–232.
Wiesen, T. and P. Wysocki (2015). Which firms are affected by regulation? a new text-based measure
 from corporate disclosures. Working paper, University of Miami .



                                                    37
Figure 1: Variation in PRisk i,t over time and correlation with EPU

                                                                             Lehman, Obama elected
                                                                                                                                                          250
                                    .9




  Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)
                                          Iraq war starts
                                                                                                            Obama reelected




                                                                                                                                                                News-based EPU Indext
                                                                                                        Debt ceiling                      Brexit, Trump200
                                    .8



                                                                        Bear Stearns failed
                                    .7                                                                                                                    150



                                                       Bush elected

                                    .6                                                                                                                    100




                                    .5                                                                                                                    50
                                         2002          2004          2006          2008          2010          2012           2014          2016
                                                2003          2005          2007          2009          2011           2013          2015          2017

                                                                      Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)
                                                                      News-based EPU Indext

Notes: This figure shows the time-average of PRisk i,t (standardized by its stan-
dard deviation in the time series) across firms in each quarter together with
the news-based Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index developed by Baker,
Bloom, and Davis (2016). The Pearson correlation between the two series is
0.821 with a p-value of 0.000. The Pearson correlation between the time-average
of PRisk i,t with the Chicago Board Options Volatility Index (CBOE VIX) is
0.608 with a p-value of 0.000.


                                    Figure 2: Variation in PRisk i,t around federal elections

                                         .1




                                     .05
  Coefficient




                                         0




                                    -.05
                                              -2                            -1                          0                             1                                         2

                                                                                                 Quarter


Notes: This figure plots the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a
regression of PRisk i,t (standardized) on dummy variables indicating quarters
with federal (i.e., presidential and congressional) elections, as well as two leads
and lags. The specification also controls for firm fixed effects and the log of firm
assets. PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm level.




                                                                                             38
                                                        Figure 3: PRisk i,t and sector exposure to politics

                                                              Panel A: Index of regulatory constraints

                                               6
   # of ''restrictions'' in CFR ('000)

                                               5




                                               4




                                               3




                                               2




                                               1                                  coeff=1.904 (se=0.193); N=2457
                                                    0               .5               1              1.5       2

                                                             Sector-year mean of PRiski,t (standardized)

                                                         Panel B: Share of revenue from federal government
   Mean share of revenue from government (%)




                                               1




                                               .8




                                               .6




                                               .4




                                               .2

                                                                                  coeff=0.478 (se=0.043); N=5685
                                                    0               .5               1              1.5       2

                                                             Sector-year mean of PRiski,t (standardized)

Notes: This figure shows binned scatterplots of the relationship between the sector-
year average of PRisk i,t (standardized) and two different measures of sector exposure
to politics. In Panels A and B the number of industries is 211 and 413, respectively. In
Panel A, the index of regulatory constraints is calculated as the sum for each sector-
year pair of the probability that a part of the Code of Federal Regulations is about that
sector multiplied by the number of occurrences of restrictive words—“shall,” “must,”
“may not,” “prohibited,” and “required”—in that part. For more details, see Al-
Ubaydli and McLaughlin (2015). In Panel B, the outcome variable is the sector-year
average of firms’ share of revenue that comes from the federal government. Firm i’s
share of revenue from the federal government is Federal contracts i,t (as measured in
Table 10) divided by total net sales. PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation.




                                                                                39
                                                                          Figure 4: Associations between PRisk i,t and corporate actions

                                 11.5                                                                                                  11.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.5
  (Ii,t/Ki,t-1)*100




                                                                                                        (Ii,t/Ki,t-1)*100
                                  11                                                                                                    11




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Ii,t/Ki,t-1)*100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               11




                                 10.5                                                                                                  10.5                                                                                                   10.5




                                  10            coeff=-0.162 (se=0.043); N=119853                                                       10            coeff=-0.159 (se=0.041); N=119734                                                        10            coeff=-0.188 (se=0.039); N=119392
                                         -1    -.5    0    .5   1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                          -1    -.5    0    .5   1    1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                          -1    -.5    0    .5   1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5

                                                     PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                               PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                                PRiski,t (standardized)

                                                         (a) No FE                                                                                 (b) Sector×time FE                                                                                     (c) Adding firm FE

                                  3                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               3
  (Δcapexgi,t/capexgi,t-1)*100




                                                                                                        (Δcapexgi,t/capexgi,t-1)*100




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Δcapexgi,t/capexgi,t-1)*100
                                 2.5                                                                                                   2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2.5


                                  2                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2


                                 1.5
                                                                                                                                       1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1.5


                                  1
                                                                                                                                        1                                                                                                      1


                                  .5
                                                                                                                                        .5                                                                                                     .5


                                  0
                                                     coeff=-0.347 (se=0.121); N=22520                                                   0                  coeff=-0.391 (se=0.117); N=22051                                                    0                  coeff=-0.337 (se=0.132); N=21788
                                        -1    -.5    0    .5    1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                         -1    -.5    0    .5    1    1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                         -1    -.5    0    .5    1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5

                                                    PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                               PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                                PRiski,t (standardized)

                                                         (d) No FE                                                                                 (e) Sector×time FE                                                                                     (f) Adding firm FE

                                 10                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
                                 9.5                                                                                                   9.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              9.5
  (Δempi,t/empi,t-1)*100




                                                                                                        (Δempi,t/empi,t-1)*100




                                  9                                                                                                     9
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (Δempi,t/empi,t-1)*100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               9
                                 8.5                                                                                                   8.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8.5
                                  8                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                 7.5
                                                                                                                                       7.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7.5
                                  7
                                                                                                                                        7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                 6.5
                                                                                                                                       6.5                                                                                                    6.5
                                  6
                                                                                                                                        6                                                                                                      6
                                 5.5
                                                                                                                                       5.5                                                                                                    5.5
                                  5
                                                     coeff=-0.857 (se=0.149); N=45930                                                   5                  coeff=-0.725 (se=0.155); N=45909                                                    5                  coeff=-0.772 (se=0.186); N=45070
                                        -1    -.5    0    .5    1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                         -1    -.5    0    .5    1    1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5                                         -1    -.5    0    .5    1   1.5   2   2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5

                                                    PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                               PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                                PRiski,t (standardized)

                                                         (g) No FE                                                                                 (h) Sector×time FE                                                                                     (i) Adding firm FE
Notes: This figure shows nine panels of binned added-variable plots for PRisk i,t (standardized). Going from top to bottom,
the panels are for investment, Ii,t /Ki,t−1 ∗100, (Panels a, b, and c), capex guidance, Δcapexg i,t /capegi,t−1 ∗100, (Panels d,
e, and f), and employment, Δemp i,t /empi,t−1 ∗ 100, (Panels g, h, and i). The left-hand panels show the relations without
fixed effects, the middle panels control for sector, time, and sector×time interactions, and the right-hand panels control,
in addition, for firm fixed effects (thus controlling simultaneously for time, sector, firm and sector × time fixed effects). All
specifications control for the log of firm assets. PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation.



                                                                                                                                                                      40
                              Figure 5: Dispersion of firm-level political risk

(a) Panel A: Time series of the cross-sectional standard deviation of P Riski,t

   1.2                                                                                   Obama reelected
                    Iraq war
                                                                                  Debt ceiling                        Brexit, Trump
                                                       Lehman, Obama elected

         1

                                Bush elected         Bear Stearns failed


       .8




       .6




       .4
             2002              2004           2006          2008           2010          2012           2014          2016
                       2003           2005           2007          2009           2011           2013          2015          2017
                                                                      Year

                                                            Standard deviation of residual
                                                            Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)


                          (b) Panel B: Distribution of the residual of P Riski,t

             1




             .8




             .6
   Density




             .4




             .2




             0
                  -4                     -2                    0                    2                      4                   6
                                                                      Residual


Notes: Panel A plots the mean of PRisk i,t (standardized) and the cross-sectional
standard deviation at each point in time of the residual from a projection of PRisk i,t
(standardized) on sector fixed effects, time fixed effects, and the interaction of time
and SIC2-digit sector fixed effects. A regression of the former on the latter yields a
coefficient of .989 (s.e. = .0672). PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation
in the panel. Panel B shows a histogram of the residuals from the above-mentioned
projection. The standard deviation of the distribution is .959; the skewness is 2.797.




                                                                   41
                                       Figure 6: Case studies

                             (a) Panel A: PRisk i,t of large energy firm




                    (b) Panel B: PRisk i,t of small information technology firm




Notes: This figure shows PRisk i,t (standardized) for two illustrative firms. Panel A shows PRisk i,t of a
large energy generation company that heavily invested in coal-burning furnaces of an older generation.
Panel B shows PRisk i,t of a small information technology firm specializing in secure voice-over-IP com-
munications systems. The bubbles in each figure give a summary of the political risks discussed in each
transcript.


                                                   42
                            Figure 7: Case studies: Debt ceiling, fiscal cliff, and government shutdown


                                                                                                                                .9
                      800                                                     Fiscal cliff
                                                                                                              Government
                                                                                                               shutdown




                                                                                                                                      (standardized)
                      600
                                                                                                                                .8
    # of occurences




                                                                                                                                     ep&b
                      400




                                                                                                                                      Mean of PRiski,t
                                              Debt ceiling

                                                                                                                                .7

                      200




                        0                                                                                                       .6
                        2010q1         2011q1                   2012q1               2013q1              2014q1            2015q1
                                                                         Quarter

                                                      ep&b
                                           PRiski,t          (standardized)                  "debt ceiling"
                                           "fiscal cliff"                                    "government shutdown"


Notes: This figure plots the total number of occurences of the terms “debt ceiling,” “fiscal cliff,” and “government
shutdown” across all transcripts within a given quarter together with the average across firms of our measure of political
                                                                 ep&b         ep&b
risk associated with the topic “economic policy & budget,” PRisk i,t  . PRisk i,t  is standardized by its standard deviation
in the panel.




                                                                          43
                                            Table 1: Summary statistics

 Panel A: Firm-quarter                                          Mean     Median    St. Dev.      Min        Max           N
 PRiski,t (standardized)                                        0.70      0.37       1.00        0.00       6.08       176,173
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)                                   0.90      0.85       1.00       -2.13       3.96       176,173
 Assetsi,t (millions)                                          15,271     1,217     97,502       0.13    3,069,706     173,887
 Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)                          1.52      1.27       1.00        0.21       8.31       162,153
 Implied volatilityi,t (standardized)                           2.05      1.82       1.00        0.46       6.31       115,059
 Earnings announcement surprise i,t                             -0.01      0.00       1.43     -235.83     301.81      161,403
 Stock return 7 days prior to earnings call i,t                  0.00      0.00       0.02      -0.24       0.40       148,196
 Ii,t /Ki,t−1                                                    0.11      0.09       0.11      -0.03       1.07       119,853
 Δcapexgi,t /capexgi,t−1                                         0.01      0.00       0.16      -0.44       0.87        22,520
 Δsalesi,t /salesi,t−1                                           0.05      0.02       0.35      -0.98       3.46       173,887
 Lobby expensei,t (thousands)                                  80.08      0.00      381.08       0.00    15,460.00     147,228
 Donation expensei,t (thousands)                                 5.13      0.00      27.71       0.00      924.50      176,173
 # of recipientsi,t                                              2.73      0.00      14.01       0.00      521.00      176,173
 Hedgei,t                                                        0.06      0.00       0.24       0.00       1.00       176,173
 Federal contractsi,t (thousands)                               3,516      0.00     49,488       0.00    3,841,392     162,124
 PRisk Economic Policy & Budget i,t (standardized)              0.48      0.22       1.00        0.00      64.75       176,173
 PRisk Environmenti,t (standardized)                            0.33      0.13       1.00        0.00      88.78       176,173
 PRisk Tradei,t (standardized)                                  0.30      0.10       1.00        0.00     164.55       176,173
 PRisk Institutions & Political Process i,t (standardized)      0.39      0.16       1.00        0.00      71.69       176,173
 PRisk Healthi,t (standardized)                                 0.27      0.10       1.00        0.00      73.02       176,173
 PRisk Security & Defense i,t (standardized)                    0.42      0.19       1.00        0.00     123.42       176,173
 PRisk Tax Policyi,t (standardized)                             0.37      0.15       1.00        0.00      97.37       176,173
 PRisk Technology & Infrastructure i,t (standardized)           0.41      0.17       1.00        0.00      66.67       176,173
 Panel B: Firm-year                                             Mean     Median    St. Dev.      Min        Max           N
 PRiski,t (standardized)                                        0.90       0.59       1.00      0.00        5.97        48,679
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)                                   1.09       1.05       1.00      -1.90       4.07        48,679
 Δempi,t /empi,t−1                                              0.07       0.03       0.30      -0.78       2.50        45,930
 Panel C: Firm-topic-quarter                                    Mean     Median    St. Dev.      Min        Max           N
 PRiskTi,t (standardized)                                       0.61       0.27       1.00       0.00       6.34      1,177,824
 LobbyTi,t (1)                                                  0.07       0.00       0.25       0.00       1.00      1,177,824

 Notes: This table shows the mean, median, standard deviation, minimum, maximum, and number of non-missing
observations of all variables that are used in the subsequent regression analyses. Panels A, B, and C show the relevant
statistics for the regression sample at the firm-year, firm-quarter, and firm-topic-quarter unit of analysis, respectively.
In Panel A, PRisk i,t is the average for a given firm and quarter of the transcript-based scores of political risk; in Panel
B, it is the average for a given firm and year; and in Panel C, PRisk Ti,t is the average for a given firm and quarter of
the transcript-based scores of topic T . Each of the three are capped at the 99th percentile and standardized by their
respective standard deviation. PSentiment i,t is capped at the 1st and 99th percentile and standardized by its standard
deviation. Realized volatility i,t is the standard deviation of 90-day stock holding returns of firm i in quarter t. Implied
volatilityi,t is for 90-day at-the-money options of firm i and time t. Both realized and implied volatility are winsorized at
the first and last percentile. Stock return 7 days prior to earnings call i,t is the average stock return for the 7 days prior to
the earnings call at date t. Earnings announcement surprise i,t is defined as (EPSi,t − EPSi,t−4 )/pricei,t , where EPSi,t is
earnings per share (basic) of firm i at time t, and pricei,t is the closing price of quarter t. Capital investment, Ii,t /Ki,t−1 ,
is a measure for capital expenditure, and is calculated recursively using a perpetual-inventory method and winsorized at
the first and last percentile. Capex guidance, Δcapexg i,t /capexgi,t−1 , is the quarter-to-quarter percentage change of the
capital expenditure guidance about the closest (usually current) fiscal year-end. We allow for a quarter gap if no guidance
(about the same fiscal year-end) was given in the preceding quarter and winsorize the resulting variable at the first and
last percentile. Δsales i,t /salesi,t−1 is the change in quarter-to-quarter sales over last quarter’s value, winsorized at the
first and last percentile. Lobby expense i,t is the total lobby expense during quarter t by firm i. Donation expensei,t is
the sum of all contributions paid to federal candidates in quarter t by firm i. # of recipientsi,t is defined as the total
number of recipients of donations made in quarter t by firm i. Hedgei,t is a dummy variable equal to one if donations to
Republicans over donations to Democrats are between the 25th and 75th percentile of the sample. Federal contracts i,t is
the net value from all federal contracts (excluding modifications) of firm i in quarter t. Net hiring, Δempi,t /empi,t−1 , is
the change in year-to-year employment over last year’s value and is winsorized at the 1st and 99th percentile. Finally,
PRisk Ti,t , where T = {Economic Policy & Budget, Environment, Trade, Institutions & Political Process, Health, Security
& Defense, Tax policy, Technology & Infrastructure}, are the separate topic scores, capped at the 99th percentile and
standardized by their respective standard deviation. All variables are restricted to the set of observations of the largest
regression sample that is reported in any of the subsequent tables.




                                                               44
            Table 2: Top 120 political bigrams used in construction of P Riski,t

 Bigram                  (fb,P /BP ) × 105   Frequency     Bigram                (fb,P /BP ) × 105   Frequency
 the constitution             201.15             9         governor and               26.79             11
 the states                   134.29            203        government the             26.39             56
 public opinion               119.05             4         this election              25.98             26
 interest groups              118.46             8         political party            25.80             5
 of government                115.53           316         american political         25.80             2
 the gop                      102.22              1        politics of                25.80              5
 in congress                   78.00            107        white house                25.80             21
 national government          68.03              7         the politics               25.80             31
 social policy                 62.16             1         general election           25.22             30
 the civil                     60.99             64        and political              25.22            985
 elected officials             60.40             3         policy is                  25.22            135
 politics is                   53.95              7        the islamic                25.04              1
 political parties            51.61              3         federal reserve            24.63            119
 office of                     51.02             58        judicial review            24.04              6
 the political                 51.02           1091        vote for                   23.46              6
 interest group                48.09             1         limits on                  23.46             53
 the bureaucracy               48.09             1         the faa                    23.28             22
 and senate                    46.33             19        the presidency             22.87              2
 government and                44.57            325        shall not                  22.87              4
 for governor                  41.48              2        the nation                 22.87             52
 executive branch              40.46             3         constitution and           22.87             3
 support for                   39.88            147        senate and                 22.87             28
 the epa                       39.15            139        the va                     22.65             77
 in government                 38.70            209        of citizens                22.28             12
 congress to                   36.95             19        any state                  22.28              7
 political process            36.36             18         the electoral              22.28             5
 care reform                   35.77            106        a president                21.70              6
 government in                 35.19             77        the governments            21.70            201
 due process                   35.19              6        clause of                  21.11              1
 president obama               34.60             7         and congress               21.11              7
 and social                    34.60            140        the partys                 21.11              1
 first amendment               34.01             1         the taliban                20.64              1
 congress the                  34.01              9        a yes                      20.64             12
 the republican                33.43            10         other nations              20.53              1
 tea party                     33.43              1        passed by                  20.53             13
 the legislative               33.43            92         states or                  20.53             40
 of civil                      32.84             14        free market                20.53             29
 court has                     32.84             30        that congress              20.53             30
 groups and                    32.25            109        national and               20.53            194
 struck down                   31.67              3        most americans             19.94              2
 shall have                    31.67              7        of religion                19.94              1
 civil war                     31.67              8        powers and                 19.94              3
 the congress                  31.67             50        a government               19.94             92
 the constitutional           29.91              9         politics and               19.94             22
 ruled that                    29.32             15        the south                  19.94            406
 the presidential              29.32           121         government is              19.94            235
 of representatives           28.74             10         yes vote                   19.39              1
 policy goals                  28.15              2        to enact                   19.35              6
 african americans            28.15              2         political system           19.35             6
 economic policy               28.15            15         proposed by                19.35             25
 of social                     28.15             31        the legislature            19.35             32
 a political                   28.15            121        the campaign               19.35             41
 of speech                     27.56              1        federal bureaucracy        18.77              3
 civil service                 27.56              2        and party                  18.77              2
 government policy            27.56             52         governor in                18.76              1
 federal courts                27.56             1         state the                  18.26             35
 argued that                   26.98              8        executive privilege        18.18              1
 the democratic                26.98             7         of politics                18.18              4
 islamic state                 26.92              1        the candidates             18.18             11
 president has                 26.86              7        national security          18.18             59


Notes: This table shows the top 120 bigrams with the highest term frequency (fb,P /BP ) and receiving the
highest weight in the construction of PRisk i,t . The frequency column reports the number of occurrences of the
bigram across all transcripts.



                                                      45
                                                  Table 3: Transcript excerpts with highest P Riski,t : Panel A

     Firm name                    Call date      P Riski,t Discussion of political risks associated with:                   Text surrounding bigram with highest weight (fb,P /BP )
                                                 (standardized)
     NEVADA GOLD CASI-           10-Sep-2008       51.94    – impact of statewide smoking ban on revenues;                  gaming industry is currently supporting a ballot initia-
     NOS INC                                                – ballot initiative to amend the constitution to remove caps    tive to amend the constitution to authorize an in-
                                                            on bets;                                                        crease in the —bet— limits allow additional
                                                            – EPA determinations concerning project development.
     Axis Capital Holdings       9-Feb-2010        48.70    – exposure of insurance portfolio to political risk in Spain,   accident year ratios the combined ratios we have talked
     Limited                                                Portugal, Greece, Ukraine, and Kazakhstan.                      about the political —risk— business particularly really
                                                                                                                            shouldnt be looked at on a
     Female Health               10-Feb-2009       44.17    – developments regarding USAID, a major customer;               market acceptance the economic and business environment
                                                            – FDA approval of company products;                             and the impact of government pressures currency —
                                                            – Senate vote on stimulus funding and government fund-          risks— capacity efficiency and supply constraints and
                                                            ing of AIDS/HIV prevention;                                     other
                                                            – restrictions on funding of organizations that permit abor-
                                                            tion.
     Employers Holdings Inc      01-May-2014       43.81    – passage of California Senate Bill on workers’s compen-        of —hazard— groups but as you start moving it around
                                                            sation.                                                         the states you can have an impact robert paun sidoti
                                                                                                                            company analyst
     National Mentor Hold-       12-Feb-2010       42.55    – state and federal budgets;                                    governments both president obamas budget proposal
     ings, Inc.                                             – federal stimulus package;                                     and separate legislation —pending— in congress




46
                                                            – funding of Medicaid.                                          would provide funding to continue the medicaid stim-
                                                                                                                            ulus for another
     Applied Energetics, Inc.    11-May-2009       41.12    – collaboration with Pentagon to develop technology to          of products and the —uncertainty— of the timing and
                                                            counter IED/roadside bombs;                                     magnitude of government funding and customer or-
                                                            – funding of weapons programs.                                  ders dependence on sales to government customers
     Calian Group Ltd            09-Feb-2011       41.05    – impact of revenues of government cost cutting initiatives.    sure benoit poirier desjardins securities analyst okay and
                                                                                                                            in terms of government cost cutting initiatives is there
                                                                                                                            any —risk— of missing consensus
     Insurance       Australia   23-Feb-2012       38.70    – Australian election for prime minister;                       leadership i just wondered if you had concerns about how
     Group Ltd                                              – likelihood of carbon tax introduction.                        the political —instability— might affect policies that
                                                                                                                            have ramifications for the industry
     FPIC Insurance Group,       30-Oct-2008       38.69    – impact of the composition of Congress on the likelihood       a —chance— for national tort reform and i dont see
     Inc.                                                   of tort reform;                                                 the constitution of congress changing in such a way
                                                            – Florida state politics.                                       after this election
     BANKFINANCIAL               4-Nov-2008        38.33    – TARP and CPP programs;                                        was an accurate metaphor and really given all the —
     CORP                                                   – developments in Freddie Mac;                                  uncertainties— of government involvement in oper-
                                                            – consequences of a change in administration and party in       ations and business activities and given the capital
                                                            power.


     Notes: This panel lists the top 10 transcripts sorted on PRisk i,t together with their associated firm name, earnings call date, PRisk i,t (standardized), a summary of
     relevant discussions of political risks in the transcript, and the text surrounding the bigram that has received the highest weight in the transcript. Bigrams for which
     b ∈ P\N are marked bold; the bigram that received the highest weight is precisely in the middle of the text excerpt. A synonym of “risk” or “uncertainty” is written in
     small caps and surrounded by dashes. PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation, but not capped because they are in the 99th percentile. Duplicate firms are
     removed from this top list.
                                                  Table 3: Transcript excerpts with highest P Riski,t : Panel B

     Firm name                     Call date      P Riski,t Discussion of political risks associated with:                 Text surrounding bigram with highest weight (fb,P /BP )
                                                  (standardized)
     Nanogen, Inc.                8-Aug-2007       37.20     – FDA approval of company products.                           a dip in revenues during q related to the —
                                                                                                                           uncertainty— of government approval for the phase
                                                                                                                           funding of the cdc contract additionally
     World Acceptance Cor-        25-Jul-2006      36.90     – impact of legislation in Texas and other states.            management analyst i wanted to followup on the regu-
     poration                                                                                                              latory front the states that you had mentioned the
                                                                                                                           —possibility— of some positive legislation
     United Refining Com-         23-Jul-2010      35.32     – effect of government tax refund on bottom line;             shape on asphalt the funding is very —iffy— in all the
     pany                                                    – state funding of infrastructure projects and the associ-    states so and the private work is very slow operator op-
                                                             ated demand for asphalt products.                             erator
     Magellan    Health    Ser-   29-Jul-2010      35.26     – actions of state Medicaid administrators and insurance      future so this is a time of quite —uncertainty— for the
     vices                                                   regulators;                                                   states they are not sure what the fmap will be if
                                                             – state procurement of healthcare reform and federal reg-
                                                             ulations;
                                                             – state gubernatorial elections;
                                                             – Affordable Care Act.
     Piraeus Bank SA              19-Mar-2015      34.45     – political situation in Greece;                              that this time around the process or the impact of the
                                                             – consequences of elections on bank deposits;                 political —uncertainty— has been a bit more subdued




47
                                                             – relations between EU and Greece, politics of Greece leav-   than last time
                                                             ing the Euro zone.
     Piedmont Natural Gas         9-Jun-2009       34.39     —                                                             your point as you will recall in all three of the states
                                                                                                                           that we have serve jim we are —exposed— only to
     Platinum Underwriters        18-Feb-2010      33.21     – politics and government decision-making in Kazakhstan       we have had historically had a very small participation in
     Holdings Ltd                                            and Ukraine;                                                  the political —risk— market backing only a couple of
                                                             – China’s ability to fulfill lending commitments.             players parties that
     Transcontinental Inc.        14-Sep-2006      31.81     – tax reform in Quebec.                                       magazines when you look at exports that we do to the
                                                                                                                           states no —doubt— that is affecting the top and the
                                                                                                                           bottom
     Hemisphere           Media   12-Aug-2014      31.70     – restructuring of government debt in Puerto Rico.            i think largely a result of the —uncertainty— regard-
     Group Inc                                                                                                             ing restructuring of government debt and the general
                                                                                                                           overhang on the weak economy in
     Pointer Telocation Ltd       30-May-2012      31.27     – political conditions in Israel.                             anticipated such —risks— and —uncertainties— in-
                                                                                                                           clude a dependence on economic and political con-
                                                                                                                           ditions in israel the impact of competition supply con-
                                                                                                                           straints as


     Notes: This panel lists the top 11-20 transcripts sorted on PRisk i,t together with their associated firm name, earnings call date, PRisk i,t (standardized), a summary of
     relevant discussions of political risks in the transcript, and the text surrounding the bigram that has received the highest weight in the transcript. Bigrams for which
     b ∈ P\N are marked bold; the bigram that received the highest weight is precisely in the middle of the text excerpt. A synonym of “risk” or “uncertainty” is written in
     small caps and surrounded by dashes. PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation, but not capped because they are in the 99th percentile. Duplicate firms are
     removed from this top list.
                        Table 4: Validation: Implied and realized volatility

 Panel A                                               Implied volatilityi,t (standardized)
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
 PRiski,t (standardized)               0.056***    0.034***     0.033***    0.025***    0.013***     0.016**
                                        (0.006)     (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.006)
 Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)                   0.262***
                                                    (0.004)
 R2                                      0.214       0.275       0.394        0.451       0.711      0.783
 N                                      115,059     115,059     115,059      115,059     115,059     18,060

 Panel B                                               Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)
                                          (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)          (5)        (6)
 PRiski,t (standardized)               0.048***    0.023***     0.020***    0.020***    0.014***     0.013**
                                        (0.005)     (0.004)      (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.002)     (0.006)
 Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)                   0.295***
                                                    (0.004)
 R2                                      0.140       0.224       0.406        0.438       0.621      0.709
 N                                      162,153     162,153     162,153      162,153     162,153     20,816

 Time FE                                   no          no          yes         yes         yes         yes
 Sector FE                                 no          no          no          yes         n/a         n/a
 Firm FE                                   no          no          no          no          yes         yes
 CEO FE                                    no          no          no          no          no          yes

 Notes: This table shows the results from regressions with realized and implied volatility as the
dependent variable in Panels A and B, respectively. Realized volatility i,t is the standard deviation of
90-day stock holding returns of firm i in quarter t and is winsorized at the first and last percentile.
Implied volatilityi,t is for 90-day at-the-money options of firm i and time t and is also winsorized at
the first and last percentile. PRisk i,t is our measure for firm-level political risk. All regressions control
for the log of firm assets. Realized volatility i,t , implied volatilityi,t , and PRisk i,t are standardized by
their respective standard deviation. The regression sample in the last column is based on the first
quarter of each year due to the annual frequency of CEO information. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                      48
                                                Table 5: Managing political risk

                                                    Ii,t                    Δcapexgi,t                 Δempi,t                  Δsalesi,t
 Panel A                                           Ki,t−1   * 100           capexgi,t−1   * 100        empi,t−1   * 100         salesi,t−1   * 100
                                                       (1)                         (2)                      (3)                        (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                            –0.159***                  –0.338***                 –0.769***                  –0.075
                                                     (0.041)                    (0.120)                   (0.155)                   (0.094)
 R2                                                   0.035                       0.041                    0.024                     0.016
 N                                                   119,853                     22,520                   45,930                    173,887

 Panel B                                    Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )    # of recipientsi,t+1            Hedgei,t+1           Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )
                                                       (1)                         (2)                      (3)                        (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                            0.087***                   0.462***                  0.007***                  0.186***
                                                     (0.018)                    (0.118)                   (0.001)                   (0.027)
 R2                                                   0.250                      0.147                     0.140                     0.268
 N                                                   176,173                    176,173                   176,173                   147,228
                                                    Ii,t                     Δempi,t
 Panel C                                           Ki,t−1   * 100            empi,t−1     * 100   Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )   Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )
                                                       (1)                         (2)                      (3)                        (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                            –0.223***                  –1.064***                   0.025                   0.168***
                                                     (0.059)                    (0.230)                   (0.016)                   (0.032)
 PRiski,t × 1{assetsi,t > median assets}              0.149*                    0.620**                  0.154***                    0.085
                                                     (0.081)                    (0.289)                   (0.039)                   (0.056)
 N                                                   119,853                     45,930                   176,173                   147,228

 Time FE                                               yes                         yes                      yes                        yes
 Sector FE                                             yes                         yes                      yes                        yes

 Notes: Panel A shows the results from regressions of capital investment (column 1), capital expenditure guidance (column 2), net hiring
(column 3), and net sales (column 4) on PRisk i,t . Capital investment, Ii,t /Ki,t−1 * 100, is calculated recursively using a perpetual-inventory
method. Capex guidance, Δcapexg i,t /capexgi,t−1 , is the quarter-to-quarter percentage change of the capital expenditure guidance about
the closest (usually current) fiscal year-end. We allow for a quarter gap if no guidance (about the same fiscal year-end) was given in the
preceding quarter. Net hiring, Δemp i,t /empi,t−1 * 100, is the change in year-to-year employment over last year’s value. Net sales is defined
similarly on quarterly data. Capital investment, net hiring, capital expenditure guidance, and net sales are all winsorized at the first and
last percentile. Panel B shows the results of regressions of lobbying and donation activity by firms on PRisk i,t . Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
(column 1) is the log of one plus the sum of all contributions paid to federal candidates; # of recipients i,t+1 (column 2) is defined as the
number of recipients of donations; Hedge i,t+1 (column 3) is a dummy variable equal to one if donations to Republicans over donations
to Democrats are between the 25th and 75th percentile of the sample; log(1+$ lobby i,t+1 ) (column 4) is the log of one plus total lobby
expense. In all regressions, PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation. All specifications control for the log of firm assets. Standard
errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                       49
                                      Table 6: Mean vs. variance of political shocks

                                                               Ii,t                                              Δempi,t
 Panel A                                                      Ki,t−1   * 100                                     empi,t−1   * 100
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                   –0.159***    –0.145***      –0.120***   –0.157***   –0.769***    –0.683***       –0.534***   –0.622***
                                            (0.041)       (0.041)       (0.041)     (0.046)     (0.155)       (0.156)        (0.156)     (0.163)
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)                            0.216***                                            1.181***
                                                          (0.043)                                             (0.155)
 Sentimenti,t (standardized)                                            0.454***                                            2.252***
                                                                         (0.048)                                             (0.161)
 Mean stock return 7 days prior i,t (%)                                              0.025                                               0.319*
                                                                                    (0.022)                                              (0.166)
 Earnings announcement surprise i,t                                                 0.058*                                              0.024***
                                                                                    (0.032)                                              (0.005)
 R2                                          0.035        0.035          0.036       0.037        0.024        0.026          0.029      0.026
 N                                          119,853      119,853        119,853     100,661      45,930       45,930         45,930      41,327

 Panel B                                                 Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )                              Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                    0.186***     0.199***       0.204***   0.217***    0.087***     0.094***        0.097***    0.100***
                                             (0.027)      (0.027)        (0.027)    (0.031)     (0.018)      (0.018)         (0.018)     (0.020)
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)                            0.203***                                           0.117***
                                                          (0.032)                                            (0.022)
 Sentimenti,t (standardized)                                            0.203***                                            0.115***
                                                                         (0.037)                                             (0.026)
 Mean stock return 7 days prior i,t (%)                                            0.028***                                             0.012***
                                                                                    (0.007)                                              (0.004)
 Earnings announcement surprise i,t                                                 –0.007                                               –0.003
                                                                                    (0.007)                                              (0.004)
 R2                                          0.268        0.269          0.269       0.291       0.250        0.251           0.251       0.282
 N                                          147,228      147,228        147,228     121,650     176,173      176,173         176,173     147,521

 Panel C                                                  # of recipientsi,t+1                                    Hedgei,t+1
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)            (7)         (8)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                    0.462***     0.491***       0.509***   0.512***    0.007***     0.007***        0.007***    0.008***
                                             (0.118)      (0.121)        (0.121)    (0.136)     (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.001)     (0.001)
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)                            0.474***                                           0.008***
                                                          (0.100)                                            (0.001)
 Sentimenti,t (standardized)                                            0.541***                                            0.007***
                                                                         (0.131)                                             (0.002)
 Mean stock return 7 days prior i,t (%)                                             0.032**                                              0.001**
                                                                                    (0.013)                                              (0.000)
 Earnings announcement surprise i,t                                                  0.011                                                –0.000
                                                                                    (0.013)                                              (0.000)
 R2                                          0.147        0.148          0.149       0.172       0.140        0.141           0.141       0.158
 N                                          176,173      176,173        176,173     147,521     176,173      176,173         176,173     147,521

 Notes: In all regressions, PRisk i,t , PSentiment i,t , and Sentimenti,t are standardized by their standard deviation. Mean stock return 7
days priori,t (%) is the average stock return for the 7 days prior to the earnings call of firm i at date t. Earnings announcement surprise i,t
is defined as (EPSi,t − EPSi,t−4 )/pricei,t , where EPSi,t is earnings per share (basic) of firm i at time t, and pricei,t is the closing price of
quarter t. The remaining variables are defined as in the preceding tables. All specifications control for the log of firm assets, sector, and
time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level,
respectively.




                                                                         50
      Table 7: Falsification exercise: Political risk, non-political risk, and overall risk

                                              Ii,t                                   Δempi,t
 Panel A                                     Ki,t−1   * 100                          empi,t−1   * 100
                                   (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)
 PRiski,t (standardized)       –0.143***      –0.082**        –0.071     –0.669***     –0.426***        –0.385**
                                (0.041)        (0.042)        (0.045)     (0.156)       (0.162)          (0.182)
 NPRiski,t (standardized)                     –0.256***                                –0.857***
                                               (0.043)                                  (0.166)
 Riski,t (standardized)                                       –0.138**                                  –0.516**
                                                               (0.059)                                   (0.209)
 R2                              0.035          0.036          0.035       0.026          0.027          0.026
 N                              119,853        119,853        119,853     45,930         45,930          45,930

 Panel B                                 Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )                Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
                                   (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        0.199***       0.205***       0.214***   0.095***       0.096***        0.109***
                                 (0.027)        (0.027)        (0.028)    (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.019)
 NPRiski,t (standardized)                       –0.025                                   –0.005
                                                (0.022)                                  (0.015)
 Riski,t (standardized)                                       –0.028                                    –0.026
                                                              (0.037)                                   (0.027)
 R2                              0.269          0.269          0.269       0.251         0.251           0.251
 N                              147,228        147,228        147,228     176,173       176,173         176,173

 Panel C                                 # of recipientsi,t+1                         Hedgei,t+1
                                   (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)            (6)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        0.495***       0.506***       0.446***   0.007***       0.008***        0.007***
                                 (0.121)        (0.122)        (0.109)    (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.001)
 NPRiski,t (standardized)                       –0.045                                   –0.001
                                                (0.052)                                  (0.001)
 Riski,t (standardized)                                        0.092                                     0.001
                                                              (0.101)                                   (0.002)
 R2                              0.148          0.148          0.148       0.141         0.141           0.141
 N                              176,173        176,173        176,173     176,173       176,173         176,173

 Notes: This table explores P Riskit ’s logical components.NPRisk i,t (non-political risk) is calculated
in the same way as as PRisk i,t , but based on non-political bigrams instead of political bigrams.
Risk i,t counts the number of synonyms of “risk,” “risky,” “uncertain,” or “uncertainty” irrespective
of whether they are near a political bigram. As with PRisk i,t , all measures are relative to the
transcript length. The dependent variables are defined as in the preceding tables. Each regression
specification controls for PSentiment i,t , the log of firm assets, as well as time and sector fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the
1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                        51
                      Table 8: Variance decomposition of PRisk it

                                                            (1)          (2)         (3)
Sector granularity                                   2-digit SIC 3-digit SIC 4-digit SIC

Time FE                                                  0.81%        0.81%       0.81%
Sector FE                                                4.38%        6.31%       6.87%
Sector × time FE                                         3.12%        9.95%      13.99%

“Firm-level”                                            91.69%      82.93%       78.33%

Permanent differences across firms within
sectors (Firm FE)                                       19.87%      17.52%      16.82%
Variation over time in identity of firms within
sectors most affected by political risk (residual)      71.82%      65.41%       61.51%

Number of sectors                                            65         258         407

 Notes: This table shows tabulations of the R2 from a projection of PRisk i,t on various
sets of fixed effects. Column 1 corresponds to our standard specification, using 65
(2-digit SIC) sectors. Columns 2 and 3 use a more granular definition of sectors at
the 3-digit and 4-digit SIC level, respectively. The “firm-level” variation at the annual
frequency is 89.47%, 82.12%, and 78.38% at the 2-digit, 3-digit, and 4-digit SIC level,
respectively.




                                           52
                                      Table 9: Measurement error

 Panel A: Overall variation                                   PRisk i,t (standardized)
                                             (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)
 PRiski,t−1 (standardized)                0.475***          0.924***         0.958***       0.813***
                                           (0.005)           (0.033)          (0.039)        (0.011)
 N                                         31,906            31,906           26,811          34,101
 Specification                              OLS                IV               IV             IV
 Instrument                                               PRisk10K i,t−1   PRisk10K i,t−2   PRisk i,t−2

 Implied share M.E.                                           0.485            0.496          0.406
                                                             (0.018)          (0.019)        (0.015)

 Panel B: Firm-level variation                                PRisk i,t (standardized)
                                             (1)               (2)              (3)            (4)
 PRiski,t−1 (standardized)                0.422***          0.913***         0.934***       0.781***
                                           (0.005)           (0.056)          (0.068)        (0.013)
 N                                         31,883            31,883           26,789          34,079
 Specification                              OLS                IV               IV             IV
 Instrument                                               PRisk10K i,t−1   PRisk10K i,t−2   PRisk i,t−2

 Implied share M.E.                                           0.538            0.541          0.445
                                                             (0.025)          (0.028)        (0.017)

 Notes: This table shows AR(1) regressions of PRisk i,t at the annual level. In columns 2-4, PRisk i,t
is instrumented by the variable indicated in the column. PRisk10K i,t is calculated in the same
manner as PRisk i,t but using the MD&A section of the firm’s 10K report. The implied share of
measurement error in columns 2-4 is calculated as 1 − (βbOLS /βbIV ) where βbOLS is the estimated
coefficient in PRisk i,t = α + βPRisk i,t−1 + ε and where βbIV is the coefficient on the instrumented
PRisk i,t in the same specification. To obtain bootstrapped standard errors, we repeat the following
procedure 500 times: draw a random sample of the same size (with replacement and clustered
by firm) from our regression sample, run the two regressions, and obtain the implied share of
measurement error. All specifications control for the log of firm assets. Standard errors are clustered
at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                     53
                                    Table 10: The nature of firm-level political risk

 Panel A                                                                           Implied volatilityi,t (standardized)
                                                               (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)
 PRiski,t (std.)                                            0.027***    0.026***   0.026***    0.027***    0.027***        0.029***   0.029***
                                                             (0.005)     (0.005)    (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.005)         (0.005)    (0.005)
 βi × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                             0.001
                                                                         (0.003)
 βi,t (2-year rolling) × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                    –0.000
                                                                                    (0.000)
 EPU betai × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                             0.414
                                                                                                (4.764)
 EPU beta (2-year rolling)i,t × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                      0.017
                                                                                                            (0.063)
 Log(1+$ federal contractsi,t )                                                                                           –0.013***    –0.006
                                                                                                                           (0.001)     (0.005)
 Log(1+$ federal contractsi,t ) × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                                              –0.001
                                                                                                                                       (0.001)
 R2                                                          0.501       0.502       0.500      0.501        0.501          0.506       0.506
 N                                                          115,059     114,999     110,164    114,979      114,617        115,059     115,059

 Panel B                                                                           Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)
                                                               (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)         (7)
 PRiski,t (std.)                                            0.020***    0.019***   0.020***    0.020***    0.020***        0.021***   0.021***
                                                             (0.004)     (0.004)    (0.004)     (0.004)     (0.004)         (0.003)    (0.003)
 βi × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                            –0.000
                                                                         (0.000)
 βi,t (2-year rolling) × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                     0.000
                                                                                    (0.000)
 EPU betai × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                           9.464***
                                                                                                (1.276)
 EPU beta (2-year rolling)i,t × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                   –0.163***
                                                                                                           (0.014)
 Log(1+$ federal contractsi,t )                                                                                           –0.010***     0.003
                                                                                                                           (0.001)     (0.004)
 Log(1+$ federal contractsi,t ) × mean of PRiski,t (std.)                                                                             –0.002***
                                                                                                                                       (0.001)
 R2                                                          0.490       0.490       0.495      0.490        0.489          0.492       0.493
 N                                                          162,153     161,884     153,003    162,153      160,516        162,153     162,153

 Time FE                                                       yes          yes       yes         yes         yes            yes         yes
 Sector FE                                                     yes          yes       yes         yes         yes            yes         yes
 Sector×time FE                                                yes          yes       yes         yes         yes            yes         yes

 Notes: This table is similar to Table 4. It shows results of regressions with realized and implied volatility as the dependent variable in
Panels A and B, respectively. βi is constructed for each firm by regressing P Riskit on its quarterly mean across firms. EPU beta i is an
alternative firm-specific beta obtained from a regression of the firm’s daily stock returns on Baker, Bloom, and Davis’ (2016) daily Economic
Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index; rolling betas are constructed by running these regressions using observations only from the 8 quarters
prior to the quarter at hand; mean of PRisk i,t is the cross-sectional average of PRisk i,t at each point in time (standardized by its standard
deviation in the time series); and log(1+$ federal contracts i,t ) is the total amount of federal contracts awarded to firm i in quarter t. All
regressions control for the log of firm assets. The dependent variables are defined as in Table 4. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                       54
          Table 11: Topic-specific lobbying and topic-specific political risk

 Panel A                                    1[lobbyingTi,t+1 > 0] ∗ 100
                               (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)      (5)
 PRiskTi,t (standardized)   1.350***    1.050***      0.794***     0.819***    0.114***
                             (0.094)     (0.093)       (0.047)      (0.048)     (0.029)
 R2                           0.105       0.127         0.311        0.316       0.647
 N                          1,177,824   1,177,824     1,177,824    1,177,824   1,177,824

 Panel B                                         Log(1+$ lobbyTi,t+1 )
                               (1)         (2)           (3)             (4)      (5)
 PRiskTi,t (standardized)   0.169***    0.133***      0.098***     0.101***    0.015***
                             (0.013)     (0.013)       (0.006)      (0.006)     (0.004)
 R2                           0.119       0.141         0.352        0.357       0.679
 N                          1,177,824   1,177,824     1,177,824    1,177,824   1,177,824

 Time FE                       yes         yes           yes             yes     yes
 Sector FE                     yes         yes           n/a             n/a     n/a
 Topic FE                      no          yes           yes             yes     yes
 Firm FE                       no          no            yes             yes     yes
 Sector×time FE                no          no            no              yes     yes
 Firm×topic FE                 no          no            no              no      yes

 Notes: This table shows the results from regressions of a dummy variable that equals
one if firm i lobbies on topic T in quarter t + 1 (Panel A) and the log of one plus the
firm’s lobbying expenditure on topic T in quarter t + 1 (Panel B) on the firm’s topic-
specific political risk in quarter t. The dependent variable in Panel B is calculated
under the assumption that firms spread their lobbying expenditure evenly across all
topics on which they lobby in a given quarter. Because the lobbying data are semi-
annual rather than quarterly before 2007, we drop the first and third quarters prior to
2007 from the sample and assign the outcome variable for the first half of the year to
the second quarter and to the fourth quarter for the second half of the year. PRisk Ti,t
is standardized by its standard deviation. All specifications control for the log of
firm assets. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                          55
                           Table 12: Case studies: Obama-era budget crises

 Panel A                                                                        Δ PRiskep&r
                                                                                       i,t                      PRiskep&r
                                                                                                                     i,t

                                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)                 (4)
 # of ’debt ceiling’                                                 0.257***    0.506***     0.468***
                                                                      (0.075)     (0.190)      (0.155)
 # of ’fiscal cliff’                                                               0.018
                                                                                  (0.048)
 # of ’government shutdown’                                                                   0.129***
                                                                                               (0.049)
 # of ’debt ceiling,’ ’fiscal cliff,’ and ’government shutdown’                                                  0.253***
                                                                                                                  (0.023)

 Time FE                                                                no          no          no                  yes
 Firm FE                                                                no          no          no                  yes
 Time×sector FE                                                         no          no          no                  yes
 Sample period                                                       2011-q3      2013-q1     2013-q4               All
 R2                                                                   0.009        0.007       0.027               0.316
 N                                                                    3,342        2,891       2,967              147,228

 Panel B                                                                1[lobbyingTi,t+1 > 0] ∗ 100      Log(1+$ lobbyingep&r
                                                                                                                         i,t )

                                                                        (1)         (2)         (3)                 (4)
 # of ’debt ceiling,’ ’fiscal cliff,’ and ’government shutdown’      0.698**
                                                                     (0.299)
 PRiskep&r
      i,t                                                                         0.183**     2.430***           0.303***
                                                                                  (0.084)      (0.937)            (0.106)

 Time FE                                                                yes         yes         yes                 yes
 Firm FE                                                                yes         yes         yes                 yes
 Time×sector FE                                                         yes         yes         yes                 yes
 Sample period                                                          All         All         All                 All
 Model                                                                 OLS         OLS           IV                 IV
 F-statistic on instruments                                                                    76.786             76.786
 R2                                                                   0.679        0.679       0.676               0.719
 N                                                                   147,228      147,228     147,228             147,228

Notes: The regressions in columns 1, 2, and 3 of Panel A are restricted to 2011-q3, 2013-q1, 2013-q4, respectively.
PRiskep&b
     i,t , where “ep&b” stands for topic “Economic Policy & Budget,” is standardized by its standard deviation. In
columns 3 and 4 of Panel B, PRisk ep&b i,t  is instrumented by # of ‘debt ceiling,’ # of ‘fiscal cliff,’ # of ‘government shutdown’;
# of ‘debt ceiling’, ‘fiscal cliff’, and ‘government shutdown’ together; and their second- and third-order polynomials. The
                                ep&r
dummy variable 1[lobbyingi,t+1         > 0] ∗ 100, where “ep&r” likewise stands for topic “Economic Policy & Budget,” is
multiplied by 100 for readability. Standard errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10% level, respectively. A pooled OLS regression of # of ’debt ceiling,’ ’fiscal cliff,’ and ’government shutdown’ on
a firm’s share in revenue from government contracts, using all firms and quarters, gives a coefficient (standard error) of
.154***(.059, clustered by firm).




                                                                56
                              Online Appendix
                                                    to
           “Firm-Level Political Risk: Measurement and Effects”
                                                    by
          Tarek A. Hassan, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun


A Data Appendix                                                                                          1
  A.1 Earnings conference call transcripts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   1
  A.2 Other data sources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2

B Training Libraries                                                                                     3

C Additional Validation: Manual Reading of Transcripts                                                   5

D Additional Figures and Tables                                                                          6


A     Data Appendix
A.1    Earnings conference call transcripts
We start with all conference call transcripts held between 2002 and 2016 from Thomson Reuters’
StreetEvents: N = 307,754. In the process, we lose:

    • 52,764 transcripts because they are not transcripts of earnings conference calls and/or duplicate
      transcripts;

    • 34,601 transcripts because we could not reliably fuzzy name match them to a company name in
      Compustat;

    • 2,334 transcripts because they are shorter than 50 words

We excluded (modified) the following bigrams from (in) transcripts:

    • We modify ”Bill” to ”bbill” to avoid inflating bill as in ”proposed law” with bill as in a person’s
      name;

    • We modify ”Constitution” to ”cconstitution” to avoid inflating ”constitution” as in ”the United
      States constitution” with ”constitution” as in ”a pipeline project”;

    • We remove ”risk officer”, ”risk credit officer” to avoid the synonym ”risk” catching these per-
      sons/positions;

    • We remove ”unknown speaker”, ”unknown participant”, ”unknown speaker”, ”unknown partici-
      pant”, ”unknown caller”, ”unknown operator”, and ”unknown firm analyst” to avoid the synonym
      ”unknown” catching these persons;

                                                     1
   • We remove ”in the states”.

In addition, we removed 17,750 ”safe harbor” snippets from transcripts. Specifically, if in a snippet
from the first half of the transcript, either more than 2 words are safe harbor key words (see next) or
less than 2 words are safe harbor key words and the word ”forwardlooking” is in the snippet, then the
snippet is removed. Safe harbor key words used: [‘safe’, ‘harbor’, ‘forwardlooking’, ‘forward’, ‘looking’,
‘actual’, ‘statements’, ‘statement’, ‘risk’, ‘risks’, ‘uncertainty’, ‘uncertainties’, ‘future’, ‘events’, ‘sec’,
‘results’]. Safe harbor statements use formulaic legal language to remind participants at the beginning
of the call that forward looking information disclosed in the call will not be considered fraudulent unless
it is made in bad faith or without reasonable basis.

A.2    Other data sources
Lobby and donation data. To obtain data on corporate lobby and donation expenditures, we
take advantage of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995, which requires lobbyists and lobbying firms
to file their lobbying activities with the Clerk of the House of Representatives and the Secretary of
the Senate. We rely on the Center for Responsive Politics (see http://www.OpenSecrets.org/lobby/,
a nonpartisan not-for-profit research group that obtains these reports and standardizes the names of
firms and a breakdown of the lobbying expenditures by issues or topics. Lobbying firms are required to
provide a good-faith estimate, rounded to the nearest USD 10,000, of all lobbying-related income from
each of their clients, as well as a list of topics on which each client lobbies. The Center assigns the value
of zero to all those cases in which the lobby expenditure falls below the disclosure threshold. We then
manually match the 80 issues from the disclosure forms to the eight topics our topic-based measure of
political risk encompasses; see Appendix Table 1 for the resulting mapping. To merge the lobbying data
with our main data set, we fuzzy name match lobbying organizations with firm names from Compustat.
Due to a change in the lobbying disclosure regulation, the data on lobbying is semi-annual prior to 2007
and quarterly thereafter.
    Our variables are defined as follows: Lobby expense i,t is the total lobby expense during quarter t
by firm i; Donation expensei,t is the sum of all contributions paid to federal candidates in quarter t by
firm i; # of recipientsi,t is the total number of recipients of donations made in quarter t by firm i; and
Hedgei,t is a dummy variable equal to one if donations to Republicans over donations to Democrats are
between the 25th and 75th percentile of the sample.

Implied volatility. We obtain implied volatility data from OptionMetrics. For European options,
OptionMetrics first calculates the theoretical option price as the midpoint of the best closing bid and offer
prices, and then computes the implied volatility by inverting the Black-Scholes formula. For American
options, OptionMetrics obtains implied volatilities by applying a proprietary pricing algorithm based
on the Cox-Ross-Rubinstein binomial tree model. We define Implied volatility i,t as the end-of-quarter
implied volatility from 90-day at-the-money options of firm i and quarter t. We winsorize the variable
at the first and last percentile.

Realized volatility and stock return. We obtain stock information and returns from the Center
for Research in Security Prices. We define Realized volatility i,t as the standard deviation of 90-day

                                                       2
stock holding returns of firm i in quarter t, winsozired at the first and last percentile. Stock return 7
days prior to earnings calli,t is the average stock return of firm i for the 7 days prior to its earnings call
in quarter t.

Investment rate, capital expenditure, sales, employment, and earnings announcement sur-
prise. We obtain data on earnings per share, capital expenditure, property, plant, and equipment,
investment, sales, and employment from Compustat. Our measure for capital expenditure, I i,t /Ki,t−1 ,
is calculated recursively using a perpetual-inventory method. Specifically, we calculate the investment
rate as follows: for t = 2, Capxy                       capxyt
                                Ppent1 , for t > 2, Recursive Kt−1 , where the denominator for t > 2 is calculated
                                     2


recursively as Recursive K t−1 = ΔpK ×δ×Recursive Kt−2 +Capxyt−1 , where Capxy is Compustat’s out-
of-the-box capital expenditure, PPent is Compustat’s out-of-the box property, plant, and equipment,
and ΔpK is the ratio of this period’s to last period’s Producer Price Index (obtained from FRED), and
δ is depreciation and set at 10%. We winzorize the variable at the first and last percentile. Change in
sales, Δsalesi,t /salesi,t−1 , is the change in quarter-to-quarter sales over last quarter’s value, winsorized
at the first and last percentile. Employment change, Δemp i,t /empi,t−1 , is the change in year-to-year
employment over last year’s value, winsorized at the first and last percentile. And Earnings announce-
ment surprisei,t is defined as (EPSi,t − EPSi,t−4 )/pricei,t , where EPSi,t is earnings per share (basic) of
firm i at time t, and pricei,t is the closing price of quarter t.

Capital expenditure guidance. We obtain data on capex guidance from I/B/E/S. Our measure of
the change in capital expenditure guidance, Δcapexg i,t /capexgi,t−1 , is the quarter-to-quarter percentage
change of the capital expenditure guidance about the closest (usually current) fiscal year-end. We allow
for a quarter gap if no guidance (about the same fiscal year-end) was given in the preceding quarter
and winsorize the resulting variable at the first and last percentile.

Government contracts. We retrieve data on government contracts from USAspending.gov, an of-
ficial government website. We use primary contract awards and take the sum of the net value of all
new contracts for a given firm and quarter in which the contract was signed. Using a fuzzy matching
algorithm, we match firm names with Compustat firm names. Altogether, 2,944 of the 7,357 unique
firms in our dataset receive federal contracts during our sample period. Federal contracts i,t is then
defined as the net value from all federal contracts (excluding modifications) of firm i in quarter t.


B     Training Libraries
As explained in the paper, in the construction of P Riski,t , we use training libraries of political (P) and
nonpolitical (N) text, earnings conference call transcripts, and a list of synonyms for “risk,” “risky,”
“uncertain,” and “uncertainty” from the Oxford dictionary.
   We use the following training libraries: (a) undergraduate textbooks: William T. Bianco and David
T. Canon’s American Politics Today (P) and Robert Libby, Patricia A. Libby, and Daniel G. Short’s
Financial Accounting (N), (b) newspaper articles, obtained through Factiva, published in the New York
Times, USA Today, the Wall Street Journal, and the Washington Post on the subject of “domestic pol-


                                                        3
itics” (P) and newspaper articles from the same sources on the subject of “performance,” “ownership
changes,” or “corporate actions” (N) (note: for P (N), we took the 100 most recent newspaper articles for
a given month (in January, April, July, and October; i.e. the “earnings season” months, in which most
U.S. firms announce their quarterly earnings) from 2002-2016), and (c) the Santa Barbara Corpus of
Spoken American English (http://www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/research/santa-barbara-corpus),
as part of (N), to filter out bigrams that are specific to spoken language (note: we exclude the following
episodes containing conversations related to politics: SBC004 (Raging Bureaucracy ), SBC011 (This
Retirement Bit ), SBC012 (American Democracy is Dying ), SBC019 (Doesn’t Work in this Household ),
SBC026 (Hundred Million Dollars ), SBC030 (Vision), SBC032 (Handshakes All Around ), SBC035 (Hold
My Breath), and SBC038 (Good Strong Dam)).

Using a part-of-speech tagger (i.e. the NLTK Perceptron Tagger), we remove all of the following bigrams
from the training libraries:
   • Of the form “pronoun pronoun,” where pronoun is for example [hers, herself, him, himself, it,
     itself, me, myself, etc];

   • Of the form “preposition preposition,” where preposition is for example [among, upon, whether,
     out, inside, pro, despite, on, by, throughout, below, etc];

   • Of the form “adverb adverb,” where adverb is for example [occasionally, unabatingly, maddeningly,
     adventurously, professedly, stirringly, etc];

   • Of the form “wh-adverb adverb,” where wh-adverb is for example [how, however, whence, wher-
     ever, where, whereby, whereever, wherein, whereof, etc];

   • Of the form “preposition adverb” or “adverb preposition”;

   • Of the form “preposition wh-adverb” or “wh-adverb preposition”;

   • Of the form “preposition determiner” or “determiner preposition,” where determiner is for exam-
     ple [all, an, another, any, both, del, each, either, every, half, many, etc];

   • Of the form “adverb wh-adverb” or “wh-adverb adverb”;

   • Of the form “adverb determiner” or “determiner adverb”;

   • Of the form “wh-adverb determiner” or “determiner wh-adverb”
In that same step, we additionally remove:
   • Bigrams that contain “i,” “ive,” “youve,” “weve,” “im,” “youre,” “were,” “id,” “youd,” “wed,”
     and “thats”;

   • “princeton university”

Synonyms
As mentioned in the main text, we removed “questions,” “question,” and “venture” from the list of
synonyms.

                                                    4
C     Additional Validation: Manual Reading of Transcripts
As an additional validation exercise we manually read excerpts of hundreds of transcripts to verify the
information content of P Riskit at various points of its distribution. As in Table 3, we selected the 20
transcripts that are at a given percentile of the distribution of P Riskit and read the snippet of text
surrounding the bigram with the highest term frequency. We then counted the number of transcripts
at that percentile that contain a clear discussion of risks associated with politics within that snippet.
     Although we emphasize that our algorithm should be judged in the context of the entire transcript,
here we focus only on that one snippet of 20 words within the transcript as an effective way of making
it feasible to quickly sample across hundreds of transcripts. For example, using this approach we count
18/20 instead of 19/20 true positives at the 100th percentile (Table 3), as the political content of the
discussion in one of the transcripts is not readily discernible from the snippet of text surrounding the
highest-scoring bigram.
     Appendix Figure 6 plots the share of true positives (as judged only by the text surrounding the top-
scoring snippet) at each percentile sampled along with the median transcript score at that percentile,
while also imposing the cap of the transcript score at the 99th percentile that we use in our regressions.
The figure shows a clear positive, near linear, relationship between the share of true positives and the
capped transcript score.




                                                    5
D   Additional Figures and Tables

    Appendix Figure 1: Term frequency of political bigrams (P \ N) in earnings call transcripts


                                                   .4




                                                   .3
                Fraction




                                                   .2




                                                   .1




                                                   0
                                                         0.37                1.00               2.72                7.39              20.09            54.60              148.41


             Notes: This figure plots a histogram of the log of bigram scores (fb,P /BP ) × 105 . The
             number of bigrams is 69,818. The mean, median, standard deviation, min, and max
             of (fb,P /BP ) × 105 are 1.048, 0.586, 2.128, 0.376, 201.15, respectively.


                                             Appendix Figure 2: Time-series of non-political risk (NPRisk i,t )

                                                                                            Lehman, Obama elected
                                                                                                                                                                          250

                                                   1                                                                                                                            News-based Economic Policy Uncertainty Indext
                Mean of NPRiski,t (standardized)




                                                                                                                                                                          200
                                                   .9



                                                                                                                                                                          150
                                                   .8
                                                         Iraq war starts                   Bear Stearns failed          Debt Obama
                                                                                                                             ceiling reelected
                                                                                                                                                        Brexit, Trump

                                                                      Bush elected                                                                                        100
                                                   .7




                                                   .6                                                                                                                     50
                                                        2002          2004          2006          2008           2010          2012           2014          2016
                                                               2003          2005          2007          2009           2011          2013           2015          2017
                                                                                                           Year

                                                                                     Mean of NPRiski,t (standardized)
                                                                                     News-based Economic Policy Uncertainty Indext



             Notes: This figure shows the mean of NPRisk i,t (standardized by its standard devia-
             tion in the time series) across firms in each quarter together with the news-based Eco-
             nomic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) Index developed by Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016).
             The Pearson correlation between the two series is 0.538 with a p-value of 0.000. The
             Pearson correlation between the mean of NPRisk i,t and the Chicago Board Options
             Exchange Volatility Index (CBOE VIX) is 0.846 with a p-value of 0.000.



                                                                                                                6
              Appendix Figure 3: Mean of PRisk i,t across sectors

            Panel A: 1-digit SIC sectors with highest mean of PRisk i,t

   Finance, Insurance, Real Estate


                     Construction


                            Mining


                         Services


   Transportation, Communications


                    Manufacturing


                 Wholesale Trade


                      Retail Trade
                                      .4                 .6                      .8         1
                                                                  Coefficient


            Panel B: 2-digit SIC sectors with highest mean of PRisk i,t

                          Insurance Carriers


                          Tobacco Products


        Insurance Agents, Brokers & Service


         Heavy Constrcution Except Building


              Security & Commodity Brokers


            Nondepository Credit Institutions


                      Depository Institutions


    Local/Suburban Transit & Hwy Passenger
                                                .8            1            1.2        1.4       1.6
                                                                       Coefficient


Notes: This figure plots the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a projection
of PRisk i,t (standardized) on a complete set of sector dummies without a constant. In
Panel A, we use a dummy for each 1-digit SIC division; in Panel B, we use a dummy
for each 2-digit SIC sector. In both panels we plot the top 8 coefficients. PRisk i,t is
standardized by its standard deviation.




                                                     7
Appendix Figure 4: Distribution of t-statistics from placebo regressions

                           Panel A: Firm-quarter unit of analysis

              .15




               .1
   Fraction




              .05




               0
                    -4           -2                0                2                  4
                                               t-statistic


                         Panel B: Firm-topic-quarter unit of analysis

              .15




               .1
   Fraction




              .05




               0
                    -4                -2                     0                 2
                                               t-statistic


Notes: Panel A plots a histogram of the t-statistics from 500 regressions of realized
volatilityi,t (standardized) on PRisk i,t (as in column 4 of Table 4) where the time series
of PRisk i,t belonging to a given firm has been randomly assigned (with replacement).
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The number of false positives and
negatives at the two-sided 95% confidence interval is 2.6 and 1.60 percent, respectively.
Panel B plots a histogram of the t-statistics from 500 regressions of 1[lobbyingTi,t+1 >
0] ∗ 100 on PRisk Ti,t (as in column 3 of Table 11) where the time series of PRisk Ti,t
belonging to a given firm-topic unit has been randomly assigned (with replacement).
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. The number of false positives and
negatives at the two-sided 95% confidence interval is 2 and 2.60 percent, respectively.




                                              8
Appendix Figure 5: Elasticity of lobbying with respect to topic-specific political risk

                                                                               Health


                                                           Economic Policy & Budget


                                                                          Environment


                                                                    Security & Defense


                                                                            Tax Policy


                                                                                Trade


                                                          Technology & Infrastructure


                               Institutions & Political Process
                                                                                         -1                  0                   1                       2                   3
                                                                                                                            Coefficient



            Notes: This figure plots the coefficients and their 95% confidence in-
            tervals of topic T × PRisk Ti,t for T = {1, . . . , 8} from a regression of
            1[lobbyingTi,t+1 > 0] ∗ 100 on topic T × PRisk Ti,t (standardized) for
            T = {1, . . . , 8}, firm, topic, time fixed effects, and log of firm assets.
            topic T is a set of dummy variables for each given topic. PRisk Ti,t is
            standardized by its standard deviation. Standard errors are double
            clustered at the firm and topic level.


Appendix Figure 6: Distribution of correctly identified positives over median scores

                                                           20
               Number of correctly identified positives




                                                           15




                                                           10




                                                            5



                                                                                                                                            Correctly identified positives
                                                                                                                                            Linear fit
                                                            0
                                                                0                                 2                                  4                                   6
                                                                                              Median of PRiski,t (standardized) within top 20



            Notes: This figures shows the results of an additional validation ex-
            ercise where we manually read excerpts of hundreds of transcripts to
            verify the information content of P Riskit at various points of its distri-
            bution. As in Table 3, we selected the 20 transcripts that are at a given
            percentile of the distribution of P Riskit and read only the snippet of
            text surrounding the bigram with the highest term frequency. The fig-
            ure plots the number (out of 20) of true positives (identified only based
            on the top snippet) pertaining to political risk (vertical axis) over the
            median of PRisk i,t within different percentiles of PRisk i,t (horizontal
            axis). The median score of PRisk i,t for the 100th and 99.5th percentile
            is capped at the 99th percentile (6.084).




                                                                                                                 9
Appendix Table 1: Mapping of political topics to Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) lobbying issues

  Political topic           Lobbying issues

  Economic Policy &         Accounting; Advertising; Apparel, Clothing, & Textiles; Arts & Entertainment;
  Budget                    Automotive Industry; Aviation, Airlines & Airports; Banking; Bankruptcy;
                            Beverage Industry; Chemical Industry; Consumer Product Safety; Copyright,
                            Patent & Trademark; District of Columbia; Economics & Economic Devel-
                            opment; Federal Budget & Appropriations; Finance; Food Industry; Gaming,
                            Gambling & Casinos; Manufacturing, Insurance; Labor, Antitrust & Work-
                            place; Marine, Boats & Fisheries; Media Information & Publishing; Mint-
                            ing/Money/Gold Standard; Radio & TV Broadcasting; Railroads; Roads &
                            Highways; Small Business; Telecommunications; Tobacco; Transportation;
                            Travel & Tourism; Trucking & Shipping; Unemployment
  Environment               Agriculture; Animals; Clean Air & Water; Environment & Superfund; Fuel,
                            Gas & Oil; Hazardous & Solid Waste; Natural Resources; Real Estate & Land
                            Use; Utilities
  Trade                     Commodities; Foreign Relations; Postal; Tariffs; Trade
  Institutions &            Government Issues; Torts
  Political Process
  Health                    Health Issues; Medicare & Medicaid; Medical Research & Clinical Labs; Phar-
                            macy
  Security & Defense        Defense; Disaster & Emergency Planning; Homeland Security; Intelligence;
                            Veterans Affairs
  Tax Policy                Taxes
  Technology &              Aerospace; Computers & Information Technology; Science & Technology
  Infrastructure

Notes: This table shows our manual mapping between our eight political topics (left column) and lobbying issues as given
in the lobbying data from the Center for Responsive Politics (CRP) (right column). Note that the lobbying issues in the
CRP lobbying data are the same as in the original Senate’s Office of Public Records (SOPR) data.




                                                          10
       Appendix Table 2: Top 100 positive and negative sentiment words in PSentiment i,t


           word      frequency                 word      frequency               word      frequency               word      frequency

             good    2,641,408               exciting    125,149                    loss   467,845          negatively       58,012
           strong    1,722,126             achieving     124,735               decline     429,914     unemployment          56,743
             great   1,062,140                 enable    120,768              difficult    389,060                 worse     56,076
            better   1,044,778         successfully      116,105              against      317,498                     lag   55,132
 opportunities       943,258            efficiencies     110,269             negative      310,768                wrong      55,089
              able   828,658                     easy    102,912      restructuring        268,455                bridge     54,903
         positive    801,637            strengthen       98,139           challenges       251,140              delayed      54,439
        progress     767,047               enhanced      88,684                   force    214,267                severe     53,619
  opportunity        761,564          encouraging        80,381                     late   208,239             dropped       51,672
              best   586,648        strengthening        79,861                closing     201,021              volatile     50,101
 improvement         578,902             innovative      78,270              declined      190,489                    lose   49,996
           benefit   545,925                stability    74,459                  losses    186,988            disclosed      49,461
         improve     491,591              excellence     72,222                critical    176,951                   shut    48,688
          pleased    472,508           satisfaction      70,475          challenging       172,838        complicated        46,154
      improved       399,832                pleasure     69,950                   weak     147,742         breakdown         45,190
     improving       393,062                winning      69,761                 closed     141,847              slowing      44,031
          success    372,656                superior     68,689              problem       141,206               serious     43,591
         effective   337,530                  gaining    68,179                 claims     140,602          difficulties     42,743
  profitability      326,058                  perfect    66,669                  break     126,092              disclose     42,695
      successful     305,358                    easier   65,672                    slow    121,636                 losing    41,206
          greater    304,344                 alliance    60,327                  recall    119,959               slowed      40,555
        stronger     301,302         collaboration       60,090            challenge       118,675                 stress    40,184
        strength     299,641                 enabled     59,525                  delay     114,017              caution      39,621
     advantage       281,246            advantages       54,330           concerned        113,522          disruption       39,382
     leadership      273,733           exceptional       53,971                     bad    113,416       discontinued        38,879
          achieve    259,392                stabilize    51,977                      cut   109,198                failure    38,639
          despite    250,814                   gained    51,765               concern      108,700          challenged       37,776
       confident     246,215               strongest     49,524            problems        108,547          downward         37,597
improvements         244,112        accomplished         48,676            litigation      105,754                   poor    36,464
        achieved     241,412             enhancing       47,817            weakness        103,443                deficit    34,792
          excited    236,622                  enables    47,758             volatility     103,236              suspect      34,719
       favorable     229,367                valuable     47,491             difficulty     99,148                 slowly     33,622
            stable   226,222             impressive      46,205                     lost   98,587      nonperforming         33,240
          leading    220,624           progressing       45,966                   crisis   97,581         unfavorable        33,165
       efficiency    219,873         strengthened        44,440             concerns       93,580       deterioration        30,689
              gain   215,827                    enjoy    43,041              declines      91,712       opportunistic        30,593
            happy    212,745              positively     42,027                weaker      89,910         termination        29,859
     optimistic      184,364              efficiently    41,960                 delays     87,772                    miss    29,821
             gains   182,624               exclusive     41,163         impairment         83,706        investigation       29,702
      profitable     168,303          achievement        41,120              opposed       81,317             breaking       29,454
    innovation       163,060               strengths     41,004             recession      75,221             shortage       29,249
        excellent    161,468                enabling     39,380           slowdown         74,771             attrition      28,658
   encouraged        153,800                    easily   38,297            downturn        74,492              damage        28,519
      attractive     151,848              stabilized     38,076                 slower     68,496            chargeoffs      28,456
               win   147,404                satisfied    37,099                closure     67,907                   worst    28,432
         efficient   146,568            accomplish       36,791                    lack    67,044                    drag    28,308
       benefited     132,346              benefiting     36,606      unfortunately         65,115                    hurt    27,999
          highest    131,666     accomplishments         36,427                missed      64,440        disappointed        27,415
  tremendous         130,119         transparency        35,139            declining       62,109         bankruptcy         26,730
         enhance     126,034               diligently    33,363               adverse      58,552            shutdown        26,657

                                             Total sentiment words found: 40,207,559

  This table shows the frequency across all transcripts of all positive and negative sentiment words from Loughran and
  McDonald (2011), excluding “question,” “questions,” and “ill” that appear within 10 words of a political but not non-
  political bigram.




                                                                     11
Appendix Table 3: All synonyms of “risk,” “risky,” “uncertain,” and “uncer-
tainty” found when measuring PRisk i,t


            word      frequency                 word      frequency                word      frequency

               risk   413,925           jeopardize        1,821                riskiness     135
             risks    106,858             unsettled       1,664           treacherous        130
   uncertainty        91,775       unpredictability       1,563             oscillating      112
         variable     68,138               dilemma        1,547                 perilous     92
          chance      60,863            skepticism        1,502        tentativeness         85
     possibility      57,599              hesitancy       1,491         unreliability        72
        pending       53,318                   riskier    1,352                wariness      70
  uncertainties       51,092            unresolved        1,214             vagueness        59
      uncertain       39,191                  unsure      1,151                   dodgy      58
            doubt     39,022               irregular      1,123         equivocation         55
        prospect      30,926               jeopardy       1,077              indecisive      43
               bet    21,279              suspicion       1,027                  chancy      40
     variability      21,215                  risking     863                    menace      38
        exposed       19,553                     peril    660                     qualm      35
      likelihood      19,280             hesitating       628               vacillating      33
           threat     19,021                   risked     577                     gnarly     32
   probability        15,791             unreliable       550                   disquiet     30
       unknown        12,050                  unsafe      486            ambivalence         30
         varying      9,442                      hazy     472                    imperil     28
          unclear     9,036          apprehension         466               vacillation      22
 unpredictable        8,467          unforeseeable        466            incalculable        17
   speculative        8,132                  halting      453         untrustworthy          17
              fear    7,939                    wager      446           equivocating         15
    reservation       7,026                       torn    437                   diffident    15
        hesitant      6,275             precarious        362                 fickleness     11
          gamble      6,065          undetermined         349                misgiving       11
             risky    5,227              insecurity       348          changeability         11
     instability      4,762              debatable        346         undependable           9
        doubtful      4,736             undecided         341              incertitude       8
          hazard      4,626                     dicey     330                       fitful   8
            tricky    4,359              indecision       324                    parlous     8
            sticky    4,325                wavering       266            unconfident         6
     dangerous        4,297                        iffy   235              defenseless       5
       tentative      4,018                faltering      212              unsureness        3
     hazardous        3,155               endanger        205                 fluctuant      3
          queries     2,676               quandary        204                      niggle    3
          danger      2,465                 insecure      189                diffidence      3
    fluctuating       2,462            changeable         189         precariousness         1
        unstable      2,440                  riskiest     183           doubtfulness         1
            vague     2,427                     hairy     177
           erratic    1,876            ambivalent         169
            query     1,826                 dubious       158

                                  Total synonyms found: 1,287,932

   This table shows the frequency across all transcripts of all single-word synonyms of
   “risk,” “risky,” “uncertain,” and “uncertainty” as given in the Oxford Dictionary (ex-
   cluding “question,” “questions,” and “venture”) that appear within 10 words of a po-
   litical but not non-political bigram.




                                                   12
                   Appendix Table 4: Event studies: Brexit and Trump’s tweeting

                                                                   ΔPRisk i,t (standardized)
                                                                       (1)              (2)
                  # of ’brexit’                                    0.028***
                                                                    (0.006)
                  # of ’trump’ and (’twitter’ or ’tweet’)                           0.140***
                                                                                     (0.038)

                  # of firms with regressor > 0                        954               5
                  Sample period                                     2016q3             2016q4
                  R2                                                  0.009            0.001
                  N                                                   3,573            3,527

                   Notes: This table shows regressions of ΔPRisk i,t (the difference of a firm’s
                  PRisk it to the previous quarter) on word counts of ’brexit’ (column 1) and
                  word counts of ’trump’ together with ’twitter’ or ’tweet’ (column 2). The
                  regression samples are restricted to 2016-q3 (column 1) and 2016-q4 (column
                  2). The average number of mentions (for firms with at least one mention) is 6.15
                  (’brexit’) and 6.4 (’trump’ and ’twitter,’ or ’trump’ and ’tweet’). Multiplying
                  these numbers with the coefficients above yields the average increases cited in
                  the text: 6.15×0.029 = 0.178 and 6.40×0.197 = 0.1260, respectively. Standard
                  errors are robust. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and
                  10% level, respectively.




                   Appendix Table 5: Standard errors: Firm-quarter specifications

                                                     Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)
                                  (1)                 (2)                        (3)                      (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)      0.020***            0.020***                    0.020***                 0.020***
                               (0.002)             (0.007)                     (0.002)                  (0.004)

 Standard error                robust       clustered by sector       clustered by quarter         clustered by firm
 Time FE                          yes                 yes                        yes                      yes
 Sector FE                        yes                 yes                        yes                      yes
 R2                             0.438               0.438                      0.438                    0.438
 N                             162,153             162,153                    162,153                  162,153

Notes: PRisk i,t is standardized by its standard deviation. All specifications include log of firm
assets as a control. Standard errors are robust in column 1, clustered at the SIC-2 level in column
2, clustered by year-quarter in column 3, and clustered at the firm level in column 4. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.



                                                            13
                   Appendix Table 6: Annualized PRisk i,t and PRisk10Ki,t

 Panel A                        Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)   Implied volatility i,t (standardized)
                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)                    (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        0.025***                                0.038***
                                 (0.006)                                 (0.008)
 PRisk10Ki,t (standardized)                            0.012*                                  0.020**
                                                       (0.006)                                 (0.008)
 N                               44,039                 36,871           31,307                 26,627
                                              Ii,t                                  Δempi,t
 Panel B                                     Ki,t−1   * 100                         empi,t−1   * 100
                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)                    (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        –0.792***                               –0.769***
                                 (0.216)                                 (0.155)
 PRisk10Ki,t (standardized)                            –0.321                                    0.000
                                                       (0.250)                                  (0.189)
 N                               42,958                 33,535           45,930                 36,715

 Panel C                                  Log(1+$ lobbyi,t )                  Log(1+$ donationsi,t )
                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)                    (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        0.286***                                0.135***
                                 (0.037)                                 (0.027)
 PRisk10Ki,t (standardized)                            0.291***                                0.212***
                                                        (0.053)                                 (0.042)
 N                               48,679                 38,038           48,679                 38,038

 Panel D                                   # of recipientsi,t                         Hedgei,t
                                   (1)                   (2)               (3)                    (4)
 PRiski,t (standardized)        0.617***                                0.010***
                                 (0.144)                                 (0.002)
 PRisk10Ki,t (standardized)                            1.028***                                0.013***
                                                        (0.211)                                 (0.002)
 N                               48,679                 38,038           48,679                 38,038

 Notes: This table shows regressions at the firm-year level. PRisk i,t is our standard measure of political
risk aggregated to the annual frequency; PRisk10K i,t is calculated as PRisk i,t but based on the MD&A
section of the company’s (annual) 10-K report. All other variables are defined as in the preceding tables.
Each regression specification controls for the log of firm assets, as well as time and sector fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5,
and 10% level, respectively.




                                                       14
                                             Appendix Table 7: Transcript excerpts with highest PSentiment i,t

     Firm name              Call date     PSentiment i,t    Discussion of political news associated with:                 Text surrounding bigram with high weight (fb,P /BP )
                                          (standardized)
     Central    Vermont    11-May-2006        20.934        – Firm lobbying and applying for various favorable regu-      (strength) to choose the (best) options for the companys
     Public Service                                         latory changes on electricity rates, etc.                     and the states future energy supply all of these goals
                                                                                                                          are interdependent and
     InterContinental      08-May-2013        14.689        – Dip in China business due to tightened government           impacted by the change in (leadership) with a (greater)
     Hotels Group PLC                                       spending in particular areas expected to be temporary.        proportion of government business in these regions trad-
                                                                                                                          ing in resort locations was (stronger)
     China       Telecom   19-Aug-2015        14.034        – Company expects to benefit from national macro policy       continue the establishment of nationwide centralized
     Corp Ltd                                               of Made-in-China 2025 and Internet+.                          mss to drive management reform and (enhance) (ef-
                                                                                                                          ficiency) third (improve) cost control to (enhance) cost
                                                                                                                          structure
     Mercury General       3-Aug-2009         13.820        – Anticipated benefits from proposed legislation for har-     with one set of rules and standards for all of the states
                                                            monized national insurance regulation.                        that we do business would probably be a (positive) as
     Catalyst Health So-   29-Jul-2004        13.319        – Confident about prospects of securing additional govern-    the pharmacy (benefit) can certainly help the state
     lutions, Inc.                                          ment contracts, federal drug benefit program likely to also   most of the states are under significant budget pressures
                                                            have positive effects.                                        and they are looking for
     China     Unicom      17-Aug-2016        12.045        False positive                                                create new growth drivers to deploy premium network
     Hong Kong Ltd                                                                                                        and (strengthen) support for frontline and customer
                                                                                                                          services to (strengthen) (innovation) in systems and




15
     Real Goods Solar      23-Aug-2016        11.867        False positive                                                growth by making key adjustments to our business to (bet-
     Inc                                                                                                                  ter) address the evolving hawaii solar market we made
                                                                                                                          key additions to our
     NiSource Inc          03-Aug-2015        11.847        – Improved opportunities from regulatory efforts in various   pureplay utility our regulatory efforts continue to play
                                                            states, including Indiana and Washington.                     out across the states and were very (encouraged) by
                                                                                                                          the (opportunities) we see in
     Dover Downs Gam-      27-Oct-2005        11.816        – Expect favorable regulatory decision to expand gambling     pretty (good) as well and there was some talk by the leg-
     ing and Entertain-                                     operations, favorable legislation on race tracks.             islature of passing some initiatives to help the race-
     ment, Inc.                                                                                                           tracks out without
     Central    Vermont    09-Nov-2011        11.661        – Improved public support for merger in Vermont Public        ensure that the deal is in their (best) interest and the
     Public Service Corp                                    Service Board, approval from DOJ and FTC for merger.          states (best) interest and we are (confident) that the
                                                                                                                          public service
     Yanzhou Coal Min-     31-Aug-2015        11.595        – Secured government subsidy, favorable effect of new im-     number three we are (able) to offer a high amount of gov-
     ing Co Ltd                                             port restrictions, positive government actions to combat      ernment subsidy to be applied in the first half zhongyin
                                                            illegal mining.                                               financing
     Global Options        14-May-2008        11.346        – Recruitment of executive with extensive government con-     (success) in building businesses managing contracts and a
                                                            tacts.                                                        robust rolodex of government contacts were (confident)
                                                                                                                          he will be (able) to (improve) the


     Notes: This table lists the top 12 transcripts sorted on PSentiment i,t together with their associated firm name, earnings call date, PSentiment i,t (standardized), a
     summary of relevant discussions of political news in the transcript, and the text surrounding one of top three bigrams that have received the highest weight in the
     transcript. Bigrams for which b ∈ P\N are marked bold; the bigram for which the weight is used is precisely in the middle of the text excerpt. PSentiment i,t is
     standardized by its standard deviation, but not capped because all transcripts shown are in the 99th percentile. Duplicate firms are removed from this top list.
                                              Appendix Table 8: Transcript excerpts with lowest PSentiment i,t

     Firm name              Call date     PSentiment i,t    Discussion of political news associated with:                  Text surrounding bigram with high weight (fb,P /BP )
                                          (standardized)
     ARCTIC                12-May-2009       −15.914        – Antitrust action against US packaged ice industry.           production of documents to the doj ((antitrust)) division
     GLACIER       IN-                                                                                                     and to the states attorneys general and is in the pro-
     COME FD                                                                                                               cess of providing the
     Gabriel Resources     7-May-2008        −15.078        – Romanian government delays environmental impact as-          year later we are being quite candid on these instances of
     Ltd.                                                   sessment, obstructs.                                           government ((inaction)) as they are symptoms of the
                                                                                                                           ((concerns)) held more
     Arbitron Inc.         21-Oct-2008       −14.692        – Firm under investigation for insider trading, false adver-   middlesex county ((alleging)) ((violations)) of new
                                                            tising, and deceptive bushiness practices.                     jersey consumer ((fraud)) and civil rights laws in each
                                                                                                                           case relating to the marketing and commercialization
     Omega HealthCare      5-Nov-2008        −14.001        – Negative impact of state fiscal situation on Medicaid        state medicaid rates as you know many states are
     Investors, Inc.                                        rates.                                                         projecting budget ((deficits)) the most significant pro-
                                                                                                                           jected ((deficits)) where omega owns facilities are
     Polaris   Materials   22-Mar-2012       −13.931        – Government program for surface transportation not re-        by the general (improvements) in california where ((seri-
     Corp                                                   authorized.                                                    ous)) ((concerns)) over the states ability to handle its
                                                                                                                           debt appeared to be ((easing)) ((unfortunately))
     Natural Gas Ser-      10-May-2012       −13.715        – Regulatory action regarding ground water contamination       after the epa ((dropped)) their case the railroad com-
     vices Group Inc                                        from fracking.                                                 mission ((accused)) the epa of quote —fear— mongering
                                                                                                                           gross ((negligence)) and ((severe)) ((mishandling)) un-




16
                                                                                                                           quote
     Vector Group Ltd      24-Feb-2012       −13.632        – FDA action against tobacco industry, regulators not tak-     to date have not been (successful) and the florida supreme
                                                            ing action on competitors’ tax evasion.                        court has ((declined)) to review ((verdicts)) ((against))
                                                                                                                           the tobacco industry ((defendants)) while
     Empresas ICA SAB      30-Mar-2016       −13.554        False positive                                                 of operating concessions and our subsidiary for airport
     de CV                                                                                                                 operation oma the civil construction business is where
                                                                                                                           our biggest ((challenge)) lies civil construction
     Radcom Ltd.           19-Jul-2004       −13.154        False positive                                                 of our expectation due to ((poor)) sales in north america
                                                                                                                           the states and canada are ((critical)) markets for us and
                                                                                                                           we must
     COMFORCE              23-Mar-2010       −12.582        – Negative expected effects of depletion of state unemploy-    high ((unemployment)) tax rates for a while because
     CORP                                                   ment funds.                                                    many of the states funds are ((depleted)) and until they
                                                                                                                           get restored the states
     Assured   Guaranty    06-Nov-2015       −12.270        – Concerns about Puerto Rico bankruptcy proceedings.           it ((claims)) the only viable solution is for the us congress
     Ltd                                                                                                                   to permit a wholesale ((abrogation)) of contracts many
                                                                                                                           of which are
     Symmetricom           27-Apr-2006       −12.260        – Negative financial consequences of delay in government       of the quarter while we were ((disappointed)) in the ((de-
                                                            orders, costs associated with complying to EU regulations.     lay)) of government orders in the timing test amp mea-
                                                                                                                           surement division which reduced


     Notes: This table lists the bottom 12 transcripts sorted on PSentiment i,t together with their associated firm name, earnings call date, PSentiment i,t (standardized),
     a summary of relevant discussions of political news in the transcript, and the text surrounding one of bottom three bigrams that have received the highest weight in
     the transcript. Bigrams for which b ∈ P\N are marked bold; the bigram for which the weight is used is precisely in the middle of the text excerpt. PSentiment i,t is
     standardized by its standard deviation, but not capped because all transcripts shown are in the 1st percentile. Duplicate firms are removed from this top list.
             Appendix Table 9: Validation of PSentiment i,t

 Panel A                                Average return 7 days priori,t (%)
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)       0.033***   0.027***                 –0.010
                                     (0.005)    (0.005)                 (0.006)
 Sentimenti,t (standardized)                               0.058***    0.065***
                                                            (0.005)     (0.006)
 NPSentimenti,t (standardized)                 0.019***
                                                (0.005)
 R2                                  0.046       0.046       0.047       0.047
 N                                  148,202     148,202     148,202     148,202

 Panel B                               Average return 30 days priori,t (%)
                                       (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)
 PSentimenti,t (standardized)       0.029***   0.024***                 –0.003
                                     (0.002)    (0.002)                 (0.003)
 Sentimenti,t (standardized)                               0.046***    0.048***
                                                            (0.002)     (0.003)
 NPSentimenti,t (standardized)                 0.017***
                                                (0.002)
 R2                                  0.182       0.182       0.183       0.183
 N                                  148,304     148,304     148,304     148,304

 Notes: Stock return X days prior i,t is the average stock return for the 7
days (Panel A) or 30 days (Panel B) prior to the earnings call at date t. In all
regressions, Sentiment i,t and PSentiment i,t are standardized by their standard
deviation. All specifications control for the log of firm assets, sector, and time
fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                       17
                        Appendix Table 10: Interactions with Sentiment i,t

                                                                    Ii,t                                    Δempi,t
 Panel A                                                           Ki,t−1   * 100                           empi,t−1   * 100
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t (std.)                                     –0.150***      –0.121***       –0.154***   –0.717***    –0.585***         –0.617***
                                                       (0.042)       (0.041)         (0.046)      (0.158)     (0.158)           (0.163)
 PSentimenti,t (std.)                                 0.221***                                   1.226***
                                                       (0.044)                                    (0.159)
 PRiski,t (std.)×PSentimenti,t (std.)                  –0.024                                     –0.165
                                                       (0.026)                                    (0.106)
 Sentimenti,t (std.)                                                0.454***                                  2.259***
                                                                     (0.048)                                   (0.161)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Sentimenti,t (std.)                                 –0.003                                    –0.175
                                                                     (0.036)                                   (0.122)
 Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                                     2.683                                    30.460*
                                                                                     (2.241)                                   (16.690)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                    –0.679                                      2.501
                                                                                     (1.876)                                   (11.850)
 R2                                                    0.035           0.036          0.037      0.026         0.029            0.025
 N                                                    119,853         119,853        100,951     45,930        45,930           41,431

 Panel B                                                       Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )                 Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t (std.)                                      0.196***      0.205***        0.215***    0.095***      0.103***         0.099***
                                                       (0.027)       (0.027)         (0.031)     (0.018)       (0.018)          (0.020)
 PSentimenti,t (std.)                                 0.207***                                  0.117***
                                                       (0.032)                                   (0.022)
 PRiski,t (std.)×PSentimenti,t (std.)                  –0.015                                     0.003
                                                       (0.016)                                   (0.010)
 Sentimenti,t (std.)                                                0.202***                                  0.115***
                                                                     (0.037)                                   (0.026)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Sentimenti,t (std.)                                  0.005                                     0.024
                                                                     (0.022)                                   (0.015)
 Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                                   2.682***                                   1.170***
                                                                                     (0.727)                                    (0.402)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                     0.887                                     –0.018
                                                                                     (0.643)                                    (0.376)
 R2                                                    0.269           0.269          0.290       0.251         0.251            0.281
 N                                                    147,228         147,228        122,170     176,173       176,173          148,202

 Panel C                                                       # of recipientsi,t+1                          Hedgei,t+1
                                                         (1)            (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t (std.)                                      0.496***      0.542***        0.508***    0.007***      0.008***         0.008***
                                                       (0.124)       (0.132)         (0.136)     (0.001)       (0.001)          (0.001)
 PSentimenti,t (std.)                                 0.468***                                  0.008***
                                                       (0.098)                                   (0.001)
 PRiski,t (std.)×PSentimenti,t (std.)                   0.023                                     0.001
                                                       (0.047)                                   (0.001)
 Sentimenti,t (std.)                                                0.537***                                  0.007***
                                                                     (0.131)                                   (0.002)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Sentimenti,t (std.)                                 0.124*                                    0.002*
                                                                     (0.074)                                   (0.001)
 Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                                    3.038**                                    0.059**
                                                                                     (1.285)                                    (0.027)
 PRiski,t (std.)×Av stock return 7 days prior i,t                                     –0.696                                     0.021
                                                                                     (1.126)                                    (0.028)
 R2                                                    0.148           0.149          0.171       0.141         0.141            0.157
 N                                                    176,173         176,173        148,202     176,173       176,173          148,202

 Notes: This table shows regressions at the firm-year level (columns 4-6 of Panel A) and firm-quarter level (all other
columns). All interactions are centered to ease interpretation. The variables are defined as in the previous tables. All
specifications control for the log of firm assets, sector, and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                 18
               Appendix Table 11: Interactions with Sentiment i,t (alternative)

                                                                          Ii,t                                    Δempi,t
 Panel A                                                                 Ki,t−1   * 100                           empi,t−1   * 100
                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t                                                  –0.165***     –0.236***        –0.159***   –0.791***    –0.815***         –0.809***
                                                            (0.056)       (0.054)          (0.048)     (0.232)      (0.224)           (0.204)
 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                 –0.248***                                  –2.152***
                                                            (0.080)                                    (0.306)
 PRiski,t × 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                        0.019                                      0.122
                                                            (0.071)                                    (0.292)
 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                                –0.608***                                 –3.117***
                                                                          (0.088)                                   (0.315)
 PRiski,t × 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                       0.143*                                    0.282
                                                                          (0.073)                                   (0.289)
 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                              –0.073                                    –0.890***
                                                                                           (0.069)                                    (0.284)
 PRiski,t × 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                   –0.000                                      0.091
                                                                                           (0.066)                                    (0.278)
 R2                                                          0.035          0.036           0.035      0.026         0.027            0.025
 N                                                          119,853        119,853         119,853     45,930        45,930           45,930

 Panel B                                                            Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )                  Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t                                                   0.189***      0.179***        0.169***    0.103***      0.105***         0.076***
                                                             (0.033)       (0.033)         (0.029)     (0.022)       (0.024)          (0.019)
 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                 –0.341***                                  –0.197***
                                                             (0.054)                                   (0.037)
 PRiski,t × 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                         0.005                                     –0.022
                                                             (0.037)                                   (0.024)
 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                                –0.282***                                 –0.149***
                                                                          (0.061)                                   (0.041)
 PRiski,t × 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                       0.027                                     –0.023
                                                                          (0.041)                                   (0.028)
 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                             0.213***                                   0.122***
                                                                                           (0.037)                                    (0.024)
 PRiski,t × 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                    0.040                                      0.026
                                                                                           (0.026)                                    (0.017)
 R2                                                          0.269          0.268           0.268       0.251         0.250            0.250
 N                                                          147,228        147,228         147,228     176,173       176,173          176,173

 Panel C                                                            # of recipientsi,t+1                           Hedgei,t+1
                                                              (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)
 PRiski,t                                                   0.553***      0.576***        0.471***    0.008***      0.008***         0.006***
                                                             (0.152)       (0.178)         (0.131)     (0.001)       (0.002)          (0.001)
 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                 –0.832***                                  –0.012***
                                                             (0.183)                                   (0.002)
 PRiski,t × 1(PSentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                        –0.133                                     –0.002
                                                             (0.116)                                   (0.002)
 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                                –0.755***                                 –0.009***
                                                                          (0.199)                                   (0.002)
 PRiski,t × 1(Sentimenti,t ≤ r(p50))                                       –0.149                                    –0.002
                                                                          (0.142)                                   (0.002)
 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                               0.157                                    0.005***
                                                                                           (0.112)                                    (0.002)
 PRiski,t × 1(Av stock return 7 days prior i,t ≤ r(p50))                                   –0.022                                      0.001
                                                                                           (0.086)                                    (0.001)
 R2                                                          0.148          0.148           0.147       0.141         0.140            0.140
 N                                                          176,173        176,173         176,173     176,173       176,173          176,173

 Notes: This table reports estimates of regressions at the firm-year level (columns 4-6 of Panel A) and firm-quarter level (all
other columns). In all specifications, 1(X ≤ r(p50)) is an indicator equal to one if X is weakly below the median of X in the
regression sample. All interactions are centered to ease interpretation. The variables are defined as in the previous tables. In
all specifications, PRisk i,t , PSentiment i,t , and Sentiment i,t are all standardized by their standard deviation. All specifications
control for the log of firm assets, sector, and time fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and *
denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                                    19
                                    Appendix Table 12: Alternative implementations of PRisk it : Correlations

                                   PRiski,t   Textbook-based PRiski,t    Newspaper-based PRiski,t     Unweighted PRiski,t     PRiski,t w/o stopwords    Firm-level EPU i,t (1)
      PRiski,t                      1.000
      Textbook-based PRiski,t       0.970              1.000
      Newspaper-based PRiski,t      0.663              0.519                        1.000
      Unweighted PRiski,t           0.759              0.681                        0.784                     1.000
      PRiski,t w/o stopwords        0.628              0.584                        0.596                     0.669                    1.000
                                    0.190              0.180                        0.172                     0.199                    0.210                     1.000




20
      Firm-level EPUi,t (1)

      Notes: This table reports correlations between various alternative implementations of PRisk i,t . PRisk i,t (standardized) is defined as before; Textbook-based PRisk i,t
     (standardized) is like PRisk i,t but based on a list of political bigrams from the textbook-based library that is not appended with political bigrams from the newspaper-
     based library; Newspaper-based PRisk i,t (standardized) is like PRisk i,t but based on a list of political bigrams from only the newspaper-based library; Unweighted
     PRisk i,t (standardized) counts, like PRisk i,t , the number of political bigrams near synonyms divided by the transcript length, but unlike PRisk i,t the numerator is
     not weighted by the scores of the bigrams; PRiski,t w/o stopwords (standardized) is constructed exactly as PRisk i,t but based on a version of the training library and
     earnings transcripts that have been cleaned from a list of stopwords; and Firm level EPU i,t (1) is a dummy variable equal to one if the transcript has at least one of
     the word combinations specificed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). PRisk i,t , Textbook-based PRisk i,t , Newspaper-based PRisk i,t , Unweighted PRisk i,t , and PRisk i,t
     w/o stopwords are standardized by their respective standard deviations.
                                                  Appendix Table 13: Alternative implementations of PRisk it : Estimations

      Panel A                                                                       Implied volatilityi,t (standardized)                                                              Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)
      PRiski,t (standardized)                        0.025***                                                                                  0.186***
                                                      (0.005)                                                                                   (0.027)
      Textbook-based PRiski,t (standardized)                      0.022***                                                                                  0.163***
                                                                   (0.005)                                                                                   (0.026)
      Newspaper-based PRiski,t (standardized)                                 0.028***                                                                                   0.209***
                                                                               (0.005)                                                                                    (0.027)
      PRiski,t (standardized, not capped)                                                 0.018***                                                                                    0.153***
                                                                                           (0.005)                                                                                     (0.029)
      Unweighted PRiski,t (standardized)                                                                0.042***                                                                                   0.174***
                                                                                                         (0.006)                                                                                    (0.031)
      PRiski,t (standardized) w/o stopwords                                                                         0.016***                                                                                    0.214***
                                                                                                                     (0.005)                                                                                     (0.027)
      Firm level EPUi,t (1)                                                                                                        0.019                                                                                     0.695***
                                                                                                                                  (0.013)                                                                                     (0.083)
      N                                              115,059      115,059      115,059     115,059       115,059     115,059      115,059      147,228      147,228      147,228      147,228      147,228      147,228      147,228

      Panel B                                                                                 Ii,t /Ki,t−1 * 100                                                                    Δempi,t /empi,t−1 * 100
                                                        (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)         (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)         (13)         (14)
      PRiski,t (standardized)                       –0.159***                                                                                 –0.769***




21
                                                     (0.041)                                                                                   (0.155)
      Textbook-based PRiski,t (standardized)                     –0.161***                                                                                 –0.730***
                                                                  (0.040)                                                                                   (0.151)
      Newspaper-based PRiski,t (standardized)                                 –0.096**                                                                                  –0.715***
                                                                               (0.045)                                                                                   (0.162)
      PRiski,t (standardized, not capped)                                                 –0.146***                                                                                  –0.560***
                                                                                           (0.042)                                                                                    (0.180)
      Unweighted PRiski,t (standardized)                                                               –0.175***                                                                                  –0.935***
                                                                                                        (0.049)                                                                                    (0.176)
      PRiski,t (standardized) w/o stopwords                                                                         –0.127***                                                                                  –0.795***
                                                                                                                     (0.042)                                                                                    (0.152)
      Firm level EPUi,t (1)                                                                                                      –0.303***                                                                                  –2.577***
                                                                                                                                  (0.114)                                                                                    (0.672)
      N                                              119,853      119,853      119,853     119,853       119,853     119,853      119,853       45,930       45,930       45,930       45,930       45,930       45,930       45,930

      Time FE                                           yes          yes         yes         yes           yes         yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes       yes
      Sector FE                                         yes          yes         yes         yes           yes         yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes          yes       yes

      Notes: This table reports estimation results from replications of key findings using alternative implementations of PRisk i,t . PRisk i,t (standardized) is defined as before; Textbook-based PRisk i,t (standardized) is like PRisk i,t
     but based on a list of political bigrams from the textbook-based library that is not appended with political bigrams from the newspaper-based library; Newspaper-based PRisk i,t (standardized) is like PRisk i,t but based
     on a list of political bigrams from only the newspaper-based library; Unweighted PRisk i,t (standardized) counts, like PRisk i,t , the number of political bigrams near synonyms divided by the transcript length, but unlike
     PRisk i,t the numerator is not weighted by the scores of the bigrams; PRisk i,t (standardized) w/o stopwords is constructed exactly as PRisk i,t but based on a version of the training library and earnings transcripts that
     have been cleaned from a list of stopwords; and Firm level EPU i,t (1) is a dummy variable equal to one if the transcript has at least one of the word combinations specificed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). Implied
     volatility, investment, employment, and lobbying are defined as before. PRisk i,t , Textbook-based PRisk i,t , Newspaper-based PRisk i,t , Unweighted PRisk i,t , and PRisk i,t w/o stopwords are standardized by their respective
     standard deviations. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.
          Appendix Table 14: Horse-race between PRisk it and Firm-level EPU i,t (1)

 Panel A: Volatility regressions         Realized volatilityi,t (standardized)   Implied volatility i,t (standardized)
                                             (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
 Firm level EPUi,t (1)                    0.026**               0.016              0.019               0.006
                                          (0.010)              (0.010)            (0.013)             (0.013)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                                      0.019***                               0.025***
                                                               (0.004)                                (0.005)
 N                                        162,153              162,153            115,059             115,059

 Panel B: Corporate outcomes                        Ii,t /Ki,t−1 * 100                Δempi,t /empi,t−1 * 100
                                             (1)                  (2)               (3)                 (4)
 Firm level EPUi,t (1)                   –0.303***             –0.230**          –2.577***          –1.921***
                                          (0.114)               (0.115)           (0.672)            (0.692)
 PRiski,t (standardized)                                      –0.148***                             –0.681***
                                                                (0.042)                              (0.159)
 N                                        119,853              119,853            45,930              45,930

 Time FE                                    yes                   yes               yes                 yes
 Sector FE                                  yes                   yes               yes                 yes

 Notes: Firm level EPUi,t (1) is a dummy variable equal to one if the transcript has at least one of the word
combinations specificed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2016). PRisk i,t , realized and implied volatility, investment,
and employment are defined as before. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***, **, and * denote
statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                         22
    Appendix Table 15: Firm-level political risk and firm actions: Alternative definitions of sectors

                                                              2-digit SIC                 3-digit SIC                4-digit SIC
                                               (1)          (2)             (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)             (7)
  Ii,t
 Ki,t−1   * 100                             –0.162***   –0.159***        –0.188***   –0.182***    –0.179***     –0.205***    –0.188***
                                             (0.043)     (0.042)          (0.039)     (0.045)      (0.043)       (0.048)      (0.045)

 Δcapexgi,t
 capexgi,t−1   * 100                        –0.347***   –0.391***        –0.337**    –0.427***        –0.346*   –0.517***        –0.373*
                                             (0.121)      (0.124)         (0.141)     (0.155)         (0.181)    (0.169)         (0.195)

 Δempi,t
 empi,t−1   * 100                           –0.806***   –0.725***        –0.772***   –0.810***    –0.774***     –0.846***    –0.762***
                                             (0.149)      (0.156)         (0.188)     (0.164)         (0.197)    (0.170)         (0.201)

 Sector FE                                     no           yes            n/a          yes            n/a         yes            n/a
 Time FE                                       no           yes            yes          yes            yes         yes            yes
 Sector×time FE                                no           yes            yes          yes            yes         yes            yes
 Firm FE                                       no           no             yes          no             yes         no             yes

 # of sectors                                                       65                          258                        407
 Variance decomposition
 Firm-level variation                                             91.69%                      82.93%                     78.33%
 Permanent differences across
 firms within sector (Firm FE)                                    19.87%                      17.52%                     16.82%
 Variation over time in identity of firms
 within sector most affected (residual)                           71.82%                      65.41%                     61.51%

 Notes: This table shows results from regressions of the variable indicated in the most left column on P Riskit using different
industry classifications — 2-digit (columns 2-3), 3-digit (columns 4-5), and 4-digit SIC (columns 6-7) — as fixed effects. Capital
investment, capital expenditure guidance, and net hiring are defined as in Table 5. In all regressions, PRisk i,t is standardized by
its standard deviation. All specifications control for the log of firm assets. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***,
**, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively. The lower panel of the table shows tabulations
of the R2 from a projection of PRisk i,t on various sets of fixed effects.




                                                                  23
                       Appendix Table 16: Explained variation of main outcomes

                                                           Ii,t            Δempi,t            Δcapexgi,t
                                                          Ki,t−1   * 100   empi,t−1   * 100   capexgi,t−1   * 100
                                                              (1)               (2)                  (3)
 PRiski,t - PRisks,t                                      –0.159***         –0.721***            –0.400***
                                                           (0.034)           (0.149)              (0.140)
 PRisks,t                                                  –0.202*          –1.486***              –0.070
                                                           (0.113)           (0.419)              (0.318)
 N                                                          119,853           45,930               22,520

 Share firm-level variation in P Riski,t                     0.917             0.884                0.838
 Share sector×time variation in P Riski,t                    0.083             0.116                0.162
 Share of explained variation at firm level                  0.872             0.642               0.994
 Share of explained variation at sector×time level           0.128             0.358               0.006

 Notes: This table shows the estimated
                                              coefficients from firm-time level regressions of the form
yi,t = α + βf PRiski,t − PRisks,t + βst PRisks,t + εi,t where yi,t is the outcome indicated on top of
the respective column, and PRisks,t is the sector×time average of PRiski,t . The share of firm-level
variation is defined as var(PRiski,t − PRisks,t )/(var(PRiski,t − PRisks,t ) + var(PRisks,t )), while the
share of explained variation at firm level is defined as βbf2 ×var(PRiski,t −PRisks,t )/(βbf2 ×var(PRiski,t −
PRisks,t ) + βb2 × var(PRisks,t )). The share of sector-time level variance and variation are defined
              st
similarly. All variables are defined on PRisk i,t that is standardized and capped as in previous tables.
All specifications control for the log of firm assets. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level.
***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                                     24
Appendix Table 17: Specifications of Table 10 using other firm-level outcomes

                                    (1)         (2)            (3)               (4)         (5)
                                                           Ii,t
     Panel A                                              Ki,t−1    * 100
     PRiski,t (standardized)    –0.159***    –0.181***     –0.167***          –0.153***   –0.155***
                                 (0.042)      (0.043)       (0.044)            (0.042)     (0.042)
     R2                           0.076        0.078         0.078              0.076       0.076
     N                           119,853      113,169       110,313            119,853     119,853
                                                        Δcapexgi,t
     Panel B                                            capexgi,t−1   * 100

     PRiski,t (standardized)    –0.391***    –0.405***     –0.435***          –0.389***   –0.391***
                                 (0.124)      (0.125)       (0.126)            (0.124)     (0.124)
     R2                            0.183        0.187         0.189             0.183      0.183
     N                            22,520       21,738        21,136            22,520      22,520
                                                         Δempi,t
     Panel C                                             empi,t−1     * 100

     PRiski,t (standardized)    –0.725***    –0.619***     –0.725***          –0.660***   –0.662***
                                 (0.156)      (0.163)       (0.156)            (0.156)     (0.157)
     R2                            0.056        0.057         0.056             0.058      0.058
     N                            45,930       43,312        45,930            45,930      45,930

     Panel D                                      Log(1+$ donationsi,t+1 )
     PRiski,t (standardized)    0.086***     0.093***      0.096***           0.070***    0.070***
                                 (0.018)      (0.019)       (0.019)            (0.018)     (0.018)
     R2                           0.264        0.281         0.288              0.292       0.292
     N                           176,173      166,923       161,581            176,173     176,173

     Panel E                                          # of recipientsi,t+1
     PRiski,t (standardized)    0.468***     0.495***      0.506***           0.413***    0.411***
                                 (0.120)      (0.127)       (0.131)            (0.114)     (0.114)
     R2                           0.163        0.174         0.182              0.182       0.182
     N                           176,173      166,923       161,581            176,173     176,173

     Panel F                                              Hedgei,t+1
     PRiski,t (standardized)    0.007***     0.007***      0.007***           0.006***    0.006***
                                 (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)            (0.001)     (0.001)
     R2                           0.160        0.171         0.174              0.176       0.176
     N                           176,173      166,923       161,581            176,173     176,173

     Panel G                                          Log(1+$ lobbyi,t+1 )
     PRiski,t (standardized)    0.184***     0.196***      0.207***           0.159***    0.159***
                                 (0.028)      (0.029)       (0.029)            (0.026)     (0.026)
     R2                           0.282        0.295         0.300              0.317       0.317
     N                           147,228      139,004       133,994            147,228     147,228

     Time FE                       yes          yes            yes               yes         yes
     Sector FE                     yes          yes            yes               yes         yes
     Sector×time FE                yes          yes            yes               yes         yes

     Notes: This table is similar to Table 10; it shows results of the same regressions,
    but instead of using realized and implied volatility as outcome, we use the outcome
    specified above the respective panel. We only report the coefficient of PRisk i,t . All
    remaining variables and regression specifications are defined as in Table 10 (for example,
    all specifications control for the log of firm assets). Standard errors are clustered at the
    firm level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level,
    respectively.
                                                25
                 Appendix Table 18: Dispersion of firm-level political risk

                                                    Standard deviation of residual
                                         (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)
 Mean of PRiski,t (standardized)      0.790***                0.875***   0.843***    0.820***
                                       (0.056)                 (0.057)    (0.080)     (0.054)
 Real GDP growtht (% change)                        –2.804*   2.789***
                                                    (1.670)    (0.829)

 R2                                    0.777         0.046     0.814      0.656       0.808
 N                                       60            60        60         60          58

 This table reports estimates from OLS regressions using the standard deviation of the
residual from a projection of PRisk i,t (standardized) on firm, time, and sector × time fixed
effects, calculated by quarter, as dependent variable. Column 1 corresponds to the data
plotted in Figure 5. Mean of PRisk i,t is the time-average of capped PRisk i,t , standardized
by its standard deviation in the time series. Column 2 uses real GDP growth t (% change)
instead of the mean of PRisk i,t . Column 3 adds both. Column 4 replicates column 1 but
restricts the data to firms with non-missing data at least 58 of the 60 quarters. Column 5
replicates column 1 and controls for EPU beta (2-year rolling) i,t × mean of PRisk i,t when
projecting PRisk i,t on the set of fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at the firm
level. ***, **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level, respectively.




                                               26
           Appendix Table 19: Mapping of political topics to topics given by OnTheIssues.org

  Political topic                                      OnTheIssues.org topics
  Economic Policy & Budget                             Budget & Economy; Jobs; Corporations
  Environment                                          Energy & Oil; Environment
  Trade                                                Free Trade
  Institutions & Political Process                     Government Reform
  Health                                               Health Care
  Security & Defense                                   Homeland Security; War & Peace
  Tax Policy                                           Tax Reform
  Technology & Infrastructure                          Technology & Infrastructure
                                                       Not used: Abortion; Civil Rights; Crime; Drugs; Edu-
                                                       cation; Families & Children; Foreign Policy; Gun Con-
                                                       trol; Immigration; Principles & Values; Social Secu-
                                                       rity; Welfare & Poverty

Notes: This table shows the mapping between the final eight political topics we converged on (left column) and our raw
training libraries, which are based on the 24 topics as defined by OnTheIssues.org (right column).




                                                         27
                          Appendix Table 20: Top bigrams and transcript excerpts for each topic-specific measure of political risk

     Topic name           Top fifteen bigrams                   Top three text snippets

     Economic Policy,     minimum wage, balanced budget,        1) “of the states arent really that significant for us reza vahabzadeh lehman brothers analyst okay but i mean away
     Budget &             legislation provides, bankruptcy      from minimum wage rates in texas are you seeing wage rates going higher just because of scarcity of labor by any
     Regulation           bill, medicaid matching, time         —chance— tilman” (Landry’s Restaurants on 10-May-2006)
                          congress, emergency economic,         2) “before its all about for many of our franchisees the level of —uncertainty — whether it be on the political
                          and discourages, surpluses in, in     front minimum wage different bills being introduced that may impact their profitability that concern still exists for
                          aid, create jobs, government          many and while we remain pretty” (Dunkin’ Brands Group Inc on 21-Jul-2016)
                          when, congress does, waste by,        3) “to obtain there are a number of encouraging indicators of government support for the institutional construction
                          government taxes                      sector in order to create jobs and invest in an aging infrastructure however with the new administration there
                                                                remains shortterm —uncertainty— also the residential housing market” (Ashtead Group plc on 9-Dec-2008)
     Trade                free trade, trade agreement, trade    1) “the —risks— moving forward are what happens with the state of government intervention around the world
                          agreements, trade barriers,           as it pertains to free trade as it pertains to taxing and changing of tax structure of multinational companies
                          freetrade agreement, up markets,      and we are obviously trying to influence” (Procter Gamble Company on 27-Oct-2010)
                          the andean, globalization is, labor   2) “we continue to look at that project and do what we can while were waiting for approval of our nonfree trade
                          standards, all trade, policy          agreement permit that is —pending— with the government and were hopeful well get that permit approved soon
                          objectives, jordan the, american      in the meantime we” (Exxon Mobil Corp on 31-Oct-2013)
                          free, trade relations, duties on      3) “on safety in upper without there is some inherent degree of —unpredictability— associated with legislative
                                                                processes weve been working with the trade associations in europe which is comprised of other companies
                                                                and other interest groups associated with building the case around healthcare” (Becton, Dickinson and Company
                                                                on 24-Jul-2003)




28
     Technology &         street station, fairness doctrine,    1) “act on their own ultimately letting the courts decide it eschelon wants the states to set rates because we
     Infrastructure       cyber warfare, on highways,           —fear — the fcc will leave special access rates alone while states might insist on costbased rates which is what
                          faithbased organizations, human       we prefer a decision” (Eschelon Telecom, Inc. on 15-May-2006)
                          services, require public, and         2) “i think theres a lot of —uncertainty — out there regarding the regulatory situation both in congress and
                          faithbased, proposals during,         the courts at the fcc and a lot has happened this year and i would tell you that the vast majority of it has
                          private entities, the fcc,            been” (XO HLDGS INC on 29-Oct-2002)
                          structurally deficient, hightech      3) “with the monthly audience up yearonyear to million in the fall of according to fom public opinion foundation the
                          jobs, highspeed rail, every           frequency of internet use grew as well the number of search —queries— on yandex increased yearonyear in fourth
                          government                            quarter while we maintained our” (Yandex NV on 22-Feb-2012)
     Security &           on terror, from iraq, bin laden,      1) “the defense side of aerospace defense markets continue to have —uncertainty— for due to limited budgets
     Defense              nuclear weapons, our troops,          and the winding down of military activities in iraq and afghanistan and we continue to watch for the effects
                          commander in, in chief, al qaeda,     of government budget cuts specifically we are” (CIRCOR International Inc on 05-May-2011)
                          weapons of, mass destruction, of      2) “that are really relevant in todays defense and intelligence market there are vagaries and —uncertainties— to
                          military, in afghanistan,             the government budget but the intelligence and surveillance and reconnaissance the isr world will remain a high
                          constitution to, osama bin, to        area of government investment as we move forward and” (PAR Technology Corp on 30-Mar-2016)
                          authorize                             3) “all of our markets since businesses have less clarity about the future the impact of a struggling economy
                                                                the —threat — of war along with record budget deficits in many of the states where we operate is proving to be
                                                                as challenging as” (PS Business Parks on 28-Feb-2003)

                                                                                                                                                                 fb,P
                                                                                                                                                                      T
     Notes: This table lists the topic name (column 1), the top 15 bigrams most indicative of each of our eight political topics (the bigrams with the highest   BP
                                                                                                                                                                          log(Z/fb,Z )) (column
                                                                                                                                                                    T
     2), and the text surrounding the highest-scoring bigrams within the three highest-scoring transcripts for each topic (column 3). The bigram in question is underlined and in the
     middle of the text excerpt, topic bigrams are in italic, and political bigrams (such that b ∈ P\N) are in bold. A synonym of “risk” or “uncertainty’ is written in small caps and
     surrounded by dashes. Duplicate firms are removed from the text excerpt list.
                        Appendix Table 20: Top bigrams and transcript excerpts for each topic-specific measure of political risk (continued)

     Topic name                Top fifteen bigrams                     Top three text snippets

     Health                    prescription drug, cut medicare,        1) “the internet site of the commission at httpwwwsecgov these —risks— and —uncertainties— include among
                               government takeover, drug plan,         others the impact of the medicare prescription drug improvement act of and other healthcare reforms and
                               for lowincome, health care, human       initiatives possible reductions of changes in reimbursements from form ph of government ” (Medcath Corporation
                               services, medicare prescription,        on 12-Aug-2004)
                               have health, generic drugs, schip       2) “rate reduction built into the states fiscal budget for later this year and the state has also reinstated its child
                               benefits, like medicaid, provide        health insurance plan program there is still the rate reduction —pending— for this october that we have to
                               health, of health, health insurance     contend with our team” (American Dental Partners on 27-Jul-2010)
                                                                       3) “remain —uncertain— however are the regulations that will govern such changes to the healthcare in-
                                                                       dustry reimbursement rate expansion of government health insurance programs new payment systems the
                                                                       effectiveness and lasting power of valuebased reimbursement and payforperformance incentives and the cost of
                                                                       the” (Healthcare Realty Trust Inc on 02-May-2012)
     Environment               air act, from renewable, climate        1) “from convincing to compelling the most recent scientific report issued by the united nations foundation has
                               change, clean air, states rights,       dispelled any lingering —doubt— climate change is real it is pervasive and the time to begin acting is now
                               greenhouse gas, nuclear power,          both public opinion and the body politic” (Exelon Corporation on 25-Apr-2007)
                               nations energy, foreign oil, with       2) “to be the case for that will be very similar to or virtually identical to thereafter we are —unsure— the clean
                               opec, global warming, energy            air act program provides that the states should figure out how to do this and how they will go about it” (GenOn
                               independence, legislators are,          Energy Inc on 09-Nov-2011)
                               emissions from, carbon emissions        3) “stabilize is that throughout the three states or have you seen —varying— improvements in the different
                                                                       regions tom skains piedmont natural gas chairmen president ceo yes we believe its what weve noticed and our




29
                                                                       observation is its proportional among the states that” (Piedmont Natural Gas on 9-Sep-2010)
     Tax Policy                estate tax, tax relief, bush tax,       1) “quantitative easing coming to an end a budget crisis coming theres been a lot of government money being
                               the estate, middleclass tax,            thrown around tax relief thrown around thats stimulating spending i think there is a lot of —uncertainty — on
                               continued unfair, full repeal,          okay what is going to happen” (Novellus Systems Inc on 27-Apr-2011)
                               typical american, increase taxes,       2) “there are theres the —suspicion — that there will be in congress an attempt to remove the sunset provision
                               raise taxes, tax cuts, largest          from the estate tax as you know the way its currently drafted it goes away in for one year and comes back into
                               budget, repeals the, tax reform,        full” (Manulife Financial Corporation on 4-Feb-2003)
                               tax cut                                 3) “corp president i wouldnt equate the potential win by de blasio in november as in any way connected to real
                                                                       estate tax increase i think everyone always has a —fear— with incumbents and with new administrations that
                                                                       real estate taxes become a” (SL Green Realty Corp on 24-Oct-2013)
     Institutions &            campaign finance, constitution to,      1) “president and ceo absolutely yes andrew marcus deutsche banc securities analyst i —doubt— for obviously
     Political Process         finance reform, federal elections,      there has been some campaign finance reform how do you think it is going to affect the political trends in david
                               appropriations bills, political         j barrett hearstargyle television inc president” (Hearst-Argyle Television, Inc. on 30-Oct-2002)
                               system, constitution and, public        2) “introduced during our visits on the hill we continue to hear a resounding support for private capital in overall
                               financing, of voters, in politics, on   housing finance reform efforts obviously the fha has already taken steps to decrease its —risk— and the
                               immigration, constitution the,          ultimate —risk— to taxpayers by implementing” (Radian Group Inc on 05-May-2011)
                               presidential elections, federal         3) “states that awards are —pending— meaning our fees have come out and the states are making decisions
                               election, political parties             we hope to be considered if not win more than half of those so i think we are going to see more rac activity
                                                                       throughout” (HMS Holdings Corp on 29-Apr-2011)

     Notes: This table (continued from the previous page) lists the topic name (column 1), the top 15 bigrams most indicative of each of our eight political topics (the bigrams with the
               fb,P
                    T
     highest   BP
                        log(Z/fb,Z )) (column 2), and the text surrounding the highest-scoring bigrams within the three highest-scoring transcripts for each topic (column 3). The bigram in
                  T
     question is underlined and in the middle of the text excerpt, topic bigrams are in italic, and political bigrams (such that b ∈ P\N) are in bold. A synonym of “risk” or “uncertainty’
     is written in small caps and surrounded by dashes. Duplicate firms are removed from the text excerpt list.
Appendix Table 21: Timing of associations between lobbying and topic-specific political risk

                                                     1[lobbyingTi,t+1 > 0] ∗ 100
                                                        (1)        (2)        (3)
                  PRiskTi,t   (standardized)   0.098***         0.081***
                                                (0.030)          (0.030)
                  PRiskTi,t+1   (standardized) 0.069** 0.072** 0.064**
                                                (0.032) (0.032) (0.030)
                  PRiskTi,t+2   (standardized)           0.051    0.048
                                                        (0.031) (0.031)

                  Time FE                               yes       yes         yes
                  Sector FE                             n/a       n/a         n/a
                  Topic FE                              yes       yes         yes
                  Firm FE                               yes       yes         yes
                  Firm×topic FE                         yes       yes         yes
                  Number of firms                       5962      5626       5626
                  Number of periods                      36        35         35
                  Number of topics                        8         8          8
                  R2                                 0.702   0.721   0.721
                  N                                 860,504 791,568 791,568

                   This table shows the results from a regression of 1[lobbyingTi,t+1 >
                  0] ∗ 100 on two leads of PRisk Ti,t . PRisk Ti,t is standardized by
                  its standard deviation. Lobbying is semi-annual for all pre-2008
                  quarters; the quarters for which there is no lobby expense are
                  excluded from the regression. All specifications control for the log
                  of firm assets. Standard errors are clustered at the firm level. ***,
                  **, and * denote statistical significance at the 1, 5, and 10% level,
                  respectively.




                                                   30
