                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CHARACTERIZING THE DRUG DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE FOR PRECISION
                              MEDICINES

                                     Amitabh Chandra
                                     Craig Garthwaite
                                     Ariel Dora Stern

                                     Working Paper 24026
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24026


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2017, Revised May 2018




We are grateful to Brian Alexander, Can Huang, Jennifer Kao, Rebecca Sachs, Mark Trusheim, a
helpful anonymous reviewer, and participants in workshops for the NBER Project on Economic
Dimensions of Personalized and Precision Medicine, the NBER-AIEA Conference, and the Bates
White Life Sciences Symposium, for helpful comments. Ben Berger, Holly Breuer, Lila Kelso,
Andrew Marder, Caroline Marra, and Alice Ndikumana provided excellent research and
programming assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Amitabh Chandra, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel Dora Stern. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Characterizing the Drug Development Pipeline for Precision Medicines
Amitabh Chandra, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel Dora Stern
NBER Working Paper No. 24026
November 2017, Revised May 2018
JEL No. I1,L5,O3

                                          ABSTRACT

Precision medicines – therapies that rely on the use of genetic, epigenetic, and protein biomarkers
– create a better match between patients with specific disease subtypes and medications that are
more effective for those patients. This heterogeneity in response has implications for the decision
to develop therapies, their pricing, the design of clinical trials, and the relative importance of
smaller biotech companies versus more traditional companies in pursuing early stage R&D. To
understand the scope of these effects, we use a comprehensive database of over 130,000 global
clinical trials and describe the drug development pipeline for precision medicines over the past
two decades. We identify clinical trials for likely precision medicines (LPMs) as those that use
one or more relevant biomarkers. We then further segment trials based on the nature of the
biomarker(s) used and other trial features with economic implications. Since cancers represent a
disease setting in which precision therapies are already successfully used, and since cancer
applications of precision medicine are expected to grow rapidly over the coming years, we
separately characterize cancer LPMs. Finally, we consider the types of firms pursuing R&D in
precision medicines, considering how LPM R&D activities have evolved over recent years.


Amitabh Chandra                                  Ariel Dora Stern
John F. Kennedy School of Government             Harvard Business School
Harvard University                               Morgan Hall 433
79 JFK Street                                    Boston, MA 02163
Cambridge, MA 02138                              astern@hbs.edu
and NBER
amitabh_chandra@harvard.edu

Craig Garthwaite
Department of Strategy
Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
c-garthwaite@kellogg.northwestern.edu
1.! INTRODUCTION
    While lacking a universally agreed upon definition, Precision Medicine is broadly understood to be an
approach to disease treatment and prevention that takes into account variability in environment, lifestyle,
and genes for each person.1 Although the concept of targeted interventions for certain types of patients
has a long history across the practice of medicine, recent technological advancements in genetic sequenc-
ing, large-scale data storage and analysis, and computing power have made it increasingly possible to tailor
the development and utilization of medical technologies. This possibility has drawn attention and funding
from beyond traditionally interested parties such as firms and investors in the biotech and pharmaceutical
industries. For example, in early 2015, the White House announced a “bold new research effort to revolu-
tionize how we improve health and treat disease,” and launched a Precision Medicine Initiative with a $215
million investment in 2016.2 Other countries such as France and China have also announced major public
investments ranging from the equivalent of several hundreds of millions to several billions of U.S. dollars
over coming years. Major investments to advance precision medicine have also been announced by a num-
ber of U.S. research institutions such as Harvard University and the University of California San Francisco.3
    Below, we consider a subset of the broad set of practices encompassed by “precision medicine” and
focus specifically on the clinical development of precision medicines, i.e. those therapies focused on bi-
omarker-defined patient subgroups. Precision medicines – therapies that rely on genetic, epigenetic, and
protein biomarkers – can help patients by using identifiable biological features (biomarkers) to define dis-
ease subtypes. The technology to rapidly and accurately sequence genes has increasingly facilitated an un-
derstanding of the “-omic” (i.e. genomic and proteomic) characteristics of disease in recent years. This, in
turn, has broadened the scope for drug development focusing on targeted therapies for newly-identifiable
sub-groups of patients. Notably, the public efforts noted above have lagged private endeavors in this area:




1 https://www.nih.gov/research-training/allofus-research-program
2 https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/30/fact-sheet-president-obama-s-precision-medicine-initiative
3 http://solidarites-sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/genomic_medicine_france_2025.pdf

  https://www.genomeweb.com/clinical-translational/france-plans-invest-670m-genomics-personalized-medicine
  https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2015/01/30/fact-sheet-president-obama-s-precision-medicine-initiative
  http://www.nature.com/news/china-embraces-precision-medicine-on-a-massive-scale-1.19108
  http://www.hbs.edu/news/releases/Pages/kraft-family-foundation-establishes-endowment.aspx
  https://www.ucsf.edu/news/2015/08/131341/new-center-will-advance-life-saving-genome-based-diagnostic-tools




                                                           1
the pharmaceutical industry4 has already commercialized almost 150 drugs with pharmacogenomic infor-
mation in their label, according to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),5 suggesting there are
already substantial economic incentives for private firms to invest in the development of precision medi-
cines.
    We focus on precision medicines because in theory they allow for a better match between individuals
with specific disease sub-types and medications that are more effective for those sub-types. While the
science underlying these medicines is broadly interesting and is the subject of a growing body of research,
the ability to (more) precisely match patients and medications based on likely efficacy also fundamentally
changes many of the economic incentives that pharmaceutical manufacturers face in the drug development
process. Given the growing importance of these medicines, changing incentives can have far-reaching
implications on the entire pharmaceutical industry.
    Perhaps most importantly, the ability to develop more targeted products may influence the decision
process that determines which new drugs firms attempt to bring to market. These decisions will then
subsequently be reflected in the equilibrium prices and availability of new pharmaceutical products. For
example, almost by definition, precision medicines tend to target smaller patient populations than more
traditional medicines. This may mean that manufacturers will shift their attention to the subset of products
able to command high(er) prices, all else equal – and thus are more likely to justify the fixed costs of
developing the medication. These higher priced products are likely to include those with large clinical
benefits, which may be more apparent in readily identifiable patient populations. In addition, since these
drugs are more efficacious within a smaller patient population, the marginal customer is expected to have
a greater willingness to pay, allowing for higher profit maximizing prices on the part of manufacturers.
These two factors together provide an economic rationale for the broadly higher prices observed for pre-
cision medicines.
    Economic incentives could also, all else held equal, result in some products no longer being brought
to market because manufacturers don’t believe they can reasonably expect to recuperate their research and
development (R&D) expenditures from the relatively small target patient populations. For example, with


4 Throughout the chapter, reference to the pharmaceutical industry and pharmaceutical manufacturers refers to all firms
developing drugs to treat medical conditions, including pharmaceutical and biotechnology firms
5             http://www.personalizedmedicinecoalition.org/Userfiles/PMC-Corporate/file/pmc_personalized_medi-
cine_by_the_numbers.pdf



                                                             2
increasingly small patient populations we might expect a decrease in brand-brand competition for partic-
ular patients as new potential entrants find the prospects of competing for a small(er) market to be an
unattractive economic opportunity. Perhaps more concerning for price competition, a similar dynamic
could exist for the eventual generic and biosimilar markets for precision medicines, which would extend
the period of pricing power far beyond the period of patent protection.
    Potentially counteracting this effect is manufacturers’ ability to create identifiable subgroups of patients
based on their willingness to pay, so-called “indication-based pricing.” Such an ability on the part of man-
ufacturers increases the scope for future price-discrimination as manufacturers could, theoretically, more
easily charge higher prices for high-value indications and lower prices for indications or patients where
therapies will work less well (Chandra and Garthwaite, 2017). This would (weakly) increase the profits
from any particular product with an existing biomarker and increase the subset of early-stage products that
pharmaceutical manufacturers would consider as candidates for commercialization.
    In addition, greater expected therapeutic benefit may result in smaller and/or shorter clinical trials
because fewer patients would be needed and/or shorter periods of time would be sufficient for demon-
strating statistically significant improvements in outcomes. Smaller and/or faster trials would both decrease
the costs of bringing a drug to market and could increase the drug’s effective patent length,6 increasing the
set of pipeline drugs considered as potentially worthwhile R&D investments. These factors together, along
with innovations in clinical trial designs – such as adaptive platform trials, which are particularly well-suited
to precision medicine approaches – could counteract some of the negative entry incentives that might be
created by small patient populations, however the costs associated with trial recruiting are likely to be
higher than traditional “all-comers” trials that include a broad set of patients with a given disease.
    Despite the potential for precision medicines to both reduce some of the costs of drug development
and also increase the patient value created by new products, markets for some medicines may still be so
small that private firms will lack the necessary incentives for bringing therapies to market. This would




6 Patent life for a drug in the U.S. is generally 20 years from the date the application is filed, and manufacturers can file a
patent application any time before or during a drug’s development process. Therefore, the time that a drug spends in
clinical trials (i.e. before the drug can be marketed) are typically counted against the 20-year patent life. Marketing exclu-
sivity is different from patent life and is granted by the FDA upon drug approval. Exclusivity typically lasts for 5 years,
though there are extensions to exclusivity for certain cases, such as orphan drugs and pediatric indications.
(https://www.fda.gov/downloads/drugs/developmentapprovalprocess/smallbusinessassistance/ucm447307.pdf)



                                                                 3
create a potential role for government funding of research in these areas from sources such as the National
Institutes of Health (NIH).
    Finally, the emergence of a new technology could create opportunities for additional specialization of
firms into different stages of the development process and/or create new markets for mergers and acqui-
sitions (M&A) among pharmaceutical companies. This could, for example, lead to early-stage drug dis-
covery being increasingly pursued by a subset of highly specialized (e.g. small, research-focused) firms.
More generally, it is possible that the emergence of precision medicines will shift the division of labor
between small biotechnology companies and large pharmaceutical companies across different stages of the
R&D process.
    To help understand this collection of potential economic implications of precision medicines, we aim
to provide a detailed characterization of the existing drug development efforts in this area. We begin at a
broad level by examining the aggregate patterns in development efforts of likely precision medicines
(LPMs), those pipeline drugs whose clinical trials have signature features of precision medicine R&D. We
identify and report on the frequency of clinical trials for such products by therapeutic area and over time.
Since cancers represent a set of diseases in which precision therapies are already successfully used, and
since cancer applications of precision medicine are expected to grow rapidly over the coming years, we
separately characterize cancer LPMs. Understanding the nature of these innovations provides first order
information on the wide-ranging health care spending implications of these emerging medications.
    We then examine other aspects of clinical trials that provide additional insight into the economic
mechanisms of drug development that are shaping the nature of innovation in this area. We consider the
characteristics (e.g. geography, indication, sponsorship) of clinical research between LPM vs. non-LPM
trials over the years covered in our data. Finally, we consider the types of firms pursuing clinical trials in
LPMs, considering how LPM R&D activities have evolved over recent years.




2.! PRECISION MEDICINES AND THE DRUG DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
    As discussed above, we focus here on the development of precision medicines – those products that
use biomarkers to target particular subgroups of patients. To better understand how these products are




                                                        4
defined and developed, we begin by providing some background information on the science of biomarkers
and their use by various economic actors in the drug development process.


Precision medicines and biomarkers
    The FDA defines a “biomarker” as “a characteristic that is objectively measured and evaluated as an
indicator of normal biological processes, pathogenic processes, or biological responses to a therapeutic
intervention.” 7 A familiar example can be seen in the common medical practice of using glycated hemo-
globin (HbA1c), an indicator of average blood glucose levels over time, as a measure of the effectiveness
of a therapeutic agent in controlling diabetes. In this example, the biomarker (which indicates therapeutic
efficacy) is HbA1c. However, biomarkers can also be used to carve out patient subtypes of diseases, as a
treatment may work differently in patients who vary in their biomarker subtypes. In this case, a biomarker
can be used predictively to determine ex ante how likely a given patient is to benefit from a therapy. For
example, among patients with non-small cell lung cancer, those with the ALK (anaplastic lymphoma ki-
nase) gene mutation will benefit more from therapies like alectinib (Alecensa®) than patients without this
mutation. Similarly, the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) modulator ivacaftor
(Kalydeco®) has been approved for people with cystic fibrosis (CF) who have at least one of thirty-eight
CF mutations, out of more than 1700 mutations in the gene that causes the disease. This amounts to
approximately 3,500 potential patients in the United States.8
    Many of the biomarkers that are associated with the use of precision medicines are genomic in nature.
The FDA defines a genomic biomarker as “a measurable DNA and/or RNA characteristic that is an indi-
cator of normal biologic processes, pathogenic processes, and/or response to therapeutic or other inter-
ventions” and can be a measurement of the expression, function, or regulation of a gene (FDA, 2008). In
recent years, there have been large-scale public gene sequencing efforts – e.g. the NIH’s funding of The
Cancer Genome Atlas.9 At the same time, a host of new genomics companies have sprung up, providing
genetic sequencing technologies, including both software and hardware. An early 2017 report found that


7 https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/NewsEvents/ucm424545.htm
8 Since Kalydeco® (ivacaftor) was initially approved in 2012 for patients with the G551D mutation, the FDA has subse-
quently approved its use for patients with any 1 of 38 mutations. According to the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, recent
approvals in May 2017 and August 2017 added an estimated 900 and 600 patients in the US to the estimated 2,000 who
were already eligible for treatment with ivacaftor. (https://www.cff.org/News)
9 https://cancergenome.nih.gov




                                                            5
companies in genomics and sequencing raised more money in 2016 than any other category of digital
health companies (Rock Health, 2017).
     In response to the growing therapeutic market and the scientific and regulatory knowledge needed to
commercialize such technologies, public funding organizations and regulators have joined forces to har-
monize language around biomarkers; in 2015, the joint leadership council of the FDA and NIH identified
“the harmonization of terms used in translational science and medical product development…with a focus
on terms related to study endpoints and biomarkers” as a priority need. One product of this effort was the
publication of the BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource in December 2016 (FDA
and NIH, 2016). Appendix A lists the biomarker definitions established to-date by the FDA-NIH Bi-
omarker Working group.
     Yet these broad discussions about biomarkers often fail to differentiate among a diverse set of bi-
omarker applications, each of which may have different economic implications. Biomarkers can reveal
useful information about disease diagnosis and prognosis. They can also be used to predict the treatment
efficacy or toxicity of a therapy, serve as markers of disease progression, and can serve as auxiliary (or so-
called “surrogate”) endpoints in clinical trials. Further, some biomarkers can be used in more than one
way, while others have just one known role.10
     Other work has discussed how different parties in the U.S. health care system are (or are not) incen-
tivized to develop biomarkers – including discovery and establishment (see, for example, Stern, Alexander,
and Chandra, 2018). While all of these applications of biomarkers have the potential to shape the practice
of personalized medicine and may help improve drug development and clinical practice, only a small subset
will have the potential to assist in the development of precision medicines, those therapies targeted at specific
patient populations who are more likely to benefit. For the development of precision medicines, it is useful
to consider which subset of biomarkers are likely to be of value to pharmaceutical innovators in bringing
new therapies to market – either because the use of biomarkers will lead to a higher probability of drug
approval or higher expected profits, given approval. In both cases, these tend to be the types of biomarkers
that can be used for diagnosis and prognosis as well as predictive biomarkers, which are those that can be




10Biomarkers come in many types (genomic, proteomic, cellular, biochemical, structural, etc.) and can take on a range of
roles (uses) in both drug development and clinical practice. These are explained below and listed in Tables 2 and 3.



                                                             6
“used to identify individuals who are more likely than similar individuals without the biomarker to experi-
ence a favorable or unfavorable effect from exposure to a medical product.” (FDA-NIH, 2016) It is these
latter groups of biomarkers – and the clinical trials driven by their use – that we specifically consider in the
empirical analysis below.
    A key opportunity in precision medicine is therapeutic innovation. As we improve our understanding
of the genetic and cellular basis of disease, it will be possible to use genetic and protein biomarkers to
classify patients into increasingly more specific subtypes where specific medicines will be more effective.
In addition, biomarkers that can serve as surrogate endpoints can lead to faster completion of clinical trials,
which may influence decisions about whether to pursue treatments for specific diseases (Budish, Roin, and
Williams 2015). However, the development of drugs that rely on biomarkers can also introduce challenges
to the traditional clinical trial process, such as increased difficulty in trial recruitment due to smaller and
harder-to-find target patient populations. Additionally, trial design and execution can be significantly more
complex when a companion diagnostic (used to measure and/or identify the biomarker itself) needs to be
approved alongside the drug (Fridlyand, et.al 2013). Regardless of the specific application, an increase in
the use of biomarkers has the potential to markedly change the development and approval process for
pharmaceutical innovation.


The drug development pipeline
    To describe the drug development pipeline for precision medicines, we characterize all phases of de-
velopment-oriented clinical trials for new drug candidates over 22 recent years. Clinical trials oriented
towards drug development typically consist of three main phases, which commence following a manufac-
turer’s successful completion of preclinical studies and submission of an Investigational New Drug (IND)
application. Phase I is primarily designed to assess product safety and appropriate dosage. Phase I trials
run for several months and typically include 20-100 healthy volunteers or individuals with the target dis-
ease. Phase II trials are much larger, enrolling up to several hundred individuals with the target disease and
typically lasting between several months to two years. Phase II trials are intended to study drug efficacy
and side effects. Phase III trials – usually the final stage of pre-market clinical research – are the largest,
enrolling anywhere from a few hundred to a few thousand individuals with the target disease. These trials
are designed to study clinical efficacy and to monitor and collect data on adverse reactions to new drugs.



                                                         7
Sometimes also referred to as “pivotal studies,” Phase III trials typically take 1-4 years to run, but can take
far longer (or shorter) depending on the normal progression of the disease studied.11 Once Phase III results
are available, manufacturers submit a New Drug Application (NDA) or Biologics License Application
(BLA) to the FDA that includes the full set of results from the product’s preclinical and clinical studies.
The FDA then has up to 10 months to review the application and determine whether to grant marketing
approval.12


The role of major pharmaceutical R&D actors
     Clinical trials can be funded by private companies – both small privately-financed and large publicly-
listed organizations – as well as by universities/academic medical centers, and by public actors such as the
NIH. The latter has historically been more focused on early-stage research, with a particular focus on basic
science. 13 This focus stems from the economic role of the NIH as not only the world’s largest funder of
biomedical research (with nearly $32.3 billion invested in 201614), but also a provider of public goods in
the form of investments in basic research.15
     How might we expect patterns of investment to differ among LPM trials? LPM trials may be more
innovative and closer to the frontier of biomedical research, a fact that should increase their likelihood of
being supported by a competitive research grant. On the other hand, in many cases, these trials are spon-
sored by for-profit companies looking to commercialize targeted therapies, which can potentially be sold
at higher prices, making even small markets more financially attractive (Stern, Alexander, and Chandra,



11 https://www.fda.gov/ForPatients/Approvals/Drugs/ucm405622.htm
12 In recent decades, the FDA has introduced several expedited approval programs for drugs intended to treat serious
conditions. The “Fast Track” designation allows for frequent meetings with an FDA review team and is for drugs for
which there is evidence of addressing an unmet medical need or treating an infectious disease. The “Breakthrough Ther-
apy” designation is given for drugs that have preliminary clinical evidence indicating substantial improvement over availa-
ble therapies and guarantees intensive guidance from the FDA as early as Phase I, while also providing several opportuni-
ties for expedited and rolling review of results. The “Accelerated Approval” pathway is used for drugs that demonstrate
an effect on a surrogate endpoint that is reasonably likely to predict clinical benefit and provides the potential for approval
based on that surrogate endpoint or an intermediate clinical endpoint. Finally, “Priority Review” requires the FDA to
review marketing applications within six months rather than the standard 10, and is available in a number of circumstances.
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/Guidances/UCM358301.pdf
13 Therefore, to the extent NIH-funded studies lead to drug development projects, one would expect NIH support to be

more likely to appear in the context of earlier-stage clinical trials.
https://nexus.od.nih.gov/all/2016/03/25/nihs-commitment-to-basic-science/
14 https://www.hhs.gov/about/budget/budget-in-brief/nih/index.html
15 The stated mission of the NIH is “to seek fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living systems and

the application of that knowledge to enhance health, lengthen life, and reduce illness and disability.”



                                                                 8
2017). In this case, private market interest in R&D projects for LPMs may amplify any additional propen-
sity for such projects to receive other sources of funding. Further, as trials target increasingly specific sub-
populations of patients, the operational costs and complexity of running clinical trials may increase, either
of which could further shift small companies towards specializing in early-stage R&D activities and letting
larger, more established (e.g. publicly-listed) focus on the final stages of regulatory approval and product
commercialization. We study the role played by large firm actors in the development of LPMs and ask if
these roles have changed over recent decades.


3.! THE ECONOMICS OF PRECISION MEDICINE
     As noted above, not all biomarker uses are associated with precision medicines. Here, we outline some
simple economics of precision medicine to better understand how and why biomarkers are important for
understanding the potential future of the pharmaceutical market.
     Biomarkers that constitute surrogate endpoints help manufacturers by speeding up clinical trials – e.g.
through the use of the FDA’s accelerated approval process, whereby a product can be approved on the
basis of intermediate patient outcomes that are a good proxy for a therapy’s ultimate effectiveness.16 This
increase in the speed of clinical trials may provide the incentive for pharmaceutical manufacturers to target
drugs for different conditions, thus potentially bringing new innovation to the market (Budish, Roin, and
Williams, 2015). Conditional on approval, however, such drugs may be priced lower because the evidence
base for their approval was less certain.17 For the most part, the effect of the types of biomarkers that can
be used as surrogate trial endpoints has been and is likely to remain limited to changes in the length of the
drug development process (via the ability to run shorter clinical trials).18
     In contrast, biomarkers that predict treatment benefit (by defining the subset of patients who are most
appropriate for therapy) can have far-reaching consequences. These include the ability to run faster trials,
since a therapeutic effect will be easier to detect as a result of the greater putative efficacy in the indicated
population, as well as a tendency to change expected market sizes once the frequency of that biomarker in

16 https://www.fda.gov/drugs/resourcesforyou/healthprofessionals/ucm313768.htm
17 This may be particularly true, for example, in cases where precision medicines are approved based on limited data and/or
surrogate endpoints. Additional evidence substantiating their benefit on actual patient outcomes is likely to be required
before clinicians and health organizations adopt these medications and reimbursement levels are determined (Dzau and
Ginsburg 2016).
18 For a detailed discussion of how the use of surrogate endpoints impacts drug development incentives, see Budish, Roin,

and Williams (2015).



                                                               9
the broader disease population is known. Further, as we have noted elsewhere, such biomarkers could
facilitate indication-based pricing, which could expand access to some patients, but would also mean that
higher prices could be charged for patients with a biomarker that indicates the drug will be more effective
(Chandra and Garthwaite, 2017).
       In this setting, biomarkers can facilitate a drug market being segmented into identifiable groups based
on the expected efficacy of the product, and as a result a segmentation of patients by willingness to pay
for the product. When pharmaceutical manufacturers are able to charge only a single price, the existence
of known, distinct patient subgroups would effectively allow firms to choose which patients to serve. For
example, where the population receiving lower (but positive) value is quite large, the manufacturer may
choose to set a low price and sell to a larger market. However, when the lower-value population is quite
small, the manufacturer may instead choose a higher price and forgo sales to those patients who derive the
least value from the product. Economists will note that this represents the classic monopolist’s dilemma,
where pharmaceutical firms trade margins for quantity.
       For this reason, firms often attempt to find ways to sell the same product to different customers based
on their valuation – a strategy known as price discrimination. If firms develop a mechanism for charging
indication-based prices, the existence of well-established, readily identifiable biomarkers will become an
important tool for facilitating price discrimination. When such price discrimination is feasible, the most
extreme outcome is that a manufacturer would be able to capture all of the surplus as profits. Depending
on the distribution of patients, this could (but need not) expand access to lower-value indications.
       In a world where a product with a biomarker exists, an indication-based pricing strategy weakly in-
creases the profits of firms. As a result, the expanded use of biomarkers has the potential to provide
additional incentives to develop products that would otherwise not be commercialized. The broad con-
tours of this type of price-discrimination are illustrated through a fictional example presented in Appendix
B.19
       However, the profit implications of the decision to pursue a biomarker-based product in the first place
is more complicated. First, it is important to note that the assumption that price discrimination is weakly
profit maximizing for an innovator firm is based on the fact that this firm always has the ability to abandon

19This figure depicts the monetary value of a hypothetical product for three different indications (for example, patient
populations defined by the presence of biomarkers), the size of the patient populations affected by each indication, and
the prices charged for the product under different pricing regimes.



                                                             10
a price discrimination scheme if it proves to be unprofitable. However, a firm cannot as easily discard
information about the efficacy of a product that is commercialized through a biomarker-driven trial. Thus,
depending on the distribution of customers and the relative efficacy of the drug across sub populations, it
could be that ex post a firm finds that the use of a biomarker as part of its R&D strategy decreases the
profits from a drug compared to a counterfactual where the drug was only priced based on the average
efficacy of the product in the broad patient population (i.e. one where the knowledge from the biomarker
did not exist).
     Yet firms must choose whether or not to pursue use of a biomarker for patient selection under some
degree of uncertainty about its likely consequences. As a result, the set of trials that use biomarkers in
pursuit of new therapeutic approvals is likely to be a systemically selected sub-set of the possible trials that
could have used biomarkers for patient selection, as firms make educated guesses about how the use of a
biomarker will affect the size of their eligible patient population and the probability of new product ap-
proval – where the two factors are likely to work in opposite directions.
     This type of trade-off is not simply a theoretically point; a situation with many of these features has
played-out in recent development projects for PD-1 inhibitors pembrolizumab (Keytruda) and nivolumab
(Opdivo), anti-cancer immunotherapies from Merck and Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), respectively.20 BMS
pursued “all-comers” trials for nivolumab – i.e. the firm decided to forego biomarker selection in favor of
broader indications. Merck, however, opted to commercialize pembrolizumab through a series of bi-
omarker-enriched trials (the trials selected for patients with positive PD-L1 expression). Ultimately,
Merck’s drug has been more successful – in part due to a series of blanket approvals by the FDA in mid-
2017 for patients with any cancer with a specific molecular signature, the FDA’s “first tissue/site agnostic
indication” approval.21 22 Thus, although the use of biomarkers for selection led to a more profitable drug




20 PD-1 is a checkpoint protein, which prevents a patient’s T-cells from attacking cancer and other cells in the body. PD-
1 is described as being something like an “off switch,” which binds to PD-L1, a protein that is on both normal and cancer
cells. Monoclonal antibodies can be used therapeutically to bind to either the PD-1 checkpoint protein or PD-L1, prevent-
ing binding and allowing the immune system to target cancer cells. (https://www.cancer.org/treatment/treatments-and-
side-effects/treatment-types/immunotherapy/immune-checkpoint-inhibitors.html)
21 https://www.fda.gov/drugs/informationondrugs/approveddrugs/ucm560040.htm
22 For a detailed account of the pembrolizumab development process, see:

https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidshaywitz/2017/07/26/the-startling-history-behind-mercks-new-cancer-
blockbuster/#7ef5cbb8948d



                                                              11
for Merck, it was not clear, ex ante that this would be the case. More generally, personalization may, in
certain cases, ultimately reduce profitability – but not necessarily costs – of some therapies.
     Pricing aside, biomarkers that predict treatment efficacy reduce market size, which in turn may reduce
some of the incentives for innovation. At the same time, some biomarkers could allow manufacturers to
more easily qualify for an “orphan drug” designation through the Orphan Drug Act of 1983 (ODA) by
focusing on developing a therapy for a disease sub-population of fewer than 200,000 patients. If a medicine
receives FDA approval for a new drug (a “new molecular entity”) that treats an orphan condition, it re-
ceives tax credits equaling 50% of clinical trial expenses and seven years of marketing exclusivity (two years
longer than the standard five years granted for non-orphan drugs). These incentives have been shown to
be powerful: more than 516 medicines for over 450 different rare diseases have been approved through
the ODA,23 and in 2015 alone, 47% of novel drugs approved were orphan drugs.24 When an approval
happens, it will also raise spending and reduce price competition over the medium-term due to the (ex-
tended) protections from generic competition offered by the ODA, and the fact that smaller markets will
attract less follow-on competition.25 In particular, in small markets, brand-brand competition will likely be
far less robust than in large markets, as potential entrants see little expected benefit in competing. To some
extent this phenomenon has already been observed in early biosimilar competition in the European Union
(Scott Morton, et al., 2018; Berndt and Trusheim, 2015). Thus, even after exclusivity periods end, there
may not be a large enough market to stimulate price competition through follow-on (i.e. generic or bio-
similar) entry.26 As a result, a major shift in new therapeutics towards precision medicines could result in
less price competition through a meaningful decline in the attractiveness of follow-on competition and, as
a result, a meaningful increase in total drug spending.
     While conventional wisdom suggests that the use of biomarkers will lead to smaller target markets, we
note, that there are settings in which the use of biomarkers might serve to expand the size of the potential
patient market. This would happen if a drug has side-effects that discourage physicians from using it, but



23 https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/opdlisting/oopd/index.cfm
24 http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/DrugInnovation/ucm474696.htm
25 For additional discussion of the implications of the ODA, see Bagley, Berger, Chandra, Garthwaite, and Stern (2018).
26 Competition in follow-on drug markets has been discussed by a number of researchers (e.g. Scott Morton, 1999) and in

recent years by Berndt, Conti, and Murphy (2017), Scott Morton, Stern, and Stern (2017), and others. More generally,
larger markets attract more entrants while smaller markets have been shown to attract less competition, all else equal
(DuBois et al., 2015; Acemoglu and Linn, 2004).



                                                            12
a biomarker identifies patients who do not suffer these side-effects or in whom the drug is particularly
effective. Such approvals are likely to become more common through the growth and adoption of new
clinical trial designs such as “basket trials.” In a basket trials, patients are enrolled based on a shared muta-
tion, regardless of their disease type – i.e. patients with colon and lung cancer as well as the same mutation
in a particular gene would be included in the same trial (West, 2017). When a certain mutation or protein
expression is relatively common across cancers or autoimmune diseases, biomarker-enriched trials may
ultimately serve to drive additional indications, or faster approvals. Both would increase market-size be-
cause manufacturers will not have to seek indications on an individual basis. However, such “market ex-
panding” precision therapies are still relatively rare (notably, the FDA’s first tissue/site agnostic indication
only occurred in 2017). While biomarker-driven market expansion may be important looking ahead, we
expect the LPM development pipeline in the years we study here to mostly be characterized by the types
of products that are likely to shrink rather than expand target patient populations.
    Finally, the complexity of developing products in this space combined with the use of new and emerg-
ing technologies may result in greater specialization within stages of the drug development process. This
could involve a greater share of products beginning their lifecycle at small, research-focused firms than
would be true in more traditional segments of the pharmaceutical industry.




4.! DATA
    We use data from the Cortellis Competitive Intelligence Clinical Trials Database (Cortellis), which is
compiled by Clarivate (and formerly by Thompson Reuters). The database includes over 270,000 global
and U.S.-based clinical trials. Cortellis includes full coverage of 24 clinical trial registries from around the
world, including clinicaltrials.gov, which is maintained by the National Institutes of Health (NIH), and the
European Clinical Trials Database (EudraCT), which is maintained by the European Medicines Agency
(EMA). Biomedical researchers are strongly encouraged to register trials for publication in medical journals
and, as of 2005, trials must be registered to an approved public clinical trial registry prior to patient enroll-
ment in order to be considered for publication in any International Committee of Medical Journal Editors
(ICMJE) member journals (De Angelis, Catherine, et al., 2004).




                                                         13
     Because both publication and registration are integral parts of the new drug development process, the
set of registered trials included in Cortellis should capture relevant development efforts – in particular, in
the years since 2005, after which time the ICMJE required trial registration in order to publish the results
of clinical trials in member journals.27 Cortellis has full coverage of all ICMJE approved trial registries
(Clinical Trial Registration, 2016) and Cortellis data have been used in several published studies in peer
reviewed biomedical journals such as Lancet Infectious Disease (Phyo, Aung Pyae, et al., 2016) and Nature
Reviews Drug Discovery (Bespalov, Anton, et al., 2016). Appendix C includes a detailed timeline of im-
portant dates related to the registration of clinical trials and the establishment of the U.S. clinical trial
registry clinicaltrials.gov.


Data composition and summary statistics
     We queried the Cortellis database for all clinical trials with a launch date between January 1, 1995 and
December 31, 2016, for a total of 22 calendar years of clinical trial starts. We identify the full set of known
phase I, II, and III28 clinical trials, along with other detailed information associated with each trial. A few
facts are notable: first, the total number of registered trials worldwide has grown over time for each phase
of clinical research (Figure 1), and in particular for phase II trials.29 In 2016, roughly 6,000 phase II trials
were launched globally, nearly double the number of registered trials launched a decade earlier in 2006.
     For each trial, the Cortellis database also provides information on the trial’s intended disease indica-
tion(s), any biomarkers used in the trial, and the trial’s sponsors. In addition, we are able to classify trials
according to a broad set of descriptive categories – in particular, the presence (or absence) of one or more
biomarker(s) used in the trial. For each biomarker, we are separately able to categorize its type and use


27 We believe that coverage of registered trials is comprehensive and we further expect a high share of trials to be registered
in the post-2004 period (De Angelis, Catherine, et al., 2004). However, we note that certain types of trials – e.g. smaller
trials without regulatory oversight – may still be missing in our data. Kao (2017), describes these types of trials and how
they may be designed to signal “off-label usability” to physicians. While an understanding of these types of unregistered
trials is important for understanding pharmaceutical firm strategy, we do not believe they are likely to be the types of trials
that we attempt to identify in this study, which are those specifically intended to commercialize targeted therapies.
28 For the simplest classification of trials into phases, we assign combined trials (e.g. combined Phase II & Phase III) to

the lower of the two phases involved. For example, a combined Phase II/ Phase III trial would be classified as having
started as Phase II in the year that the trial launched. In robustness tests, we create separate sub-categories for combined
Phase I/II and II/III trials and include controls for these combined trials in regression analyses. Subsequent regression
results are not sensitive to this distinction, so we use the simplified 3-phase classification in tables and figures for simplicity.
29 The recent spike in the number of global clinical trials (and Phase II trials in particular) is driven by growth in non-US

trials (see Appendix tables for a version of Figure 1 that presents only U.S. trials).




                                                                   14
(role). We also capture key information about the clinical trial’s sponsors. Trial sponsors are identified by
name and type, including academic investigators, government, non-government, company, and other
sponsors. A complete list of the descriptive variables we consider and their frequencies in the clinical trials
data set are provided in Table 1.
     To aggregate the detailed indications reported in the Cortellis database into more usable categories, we
used a dataset30 of standardized indications matched to ICD-9 codes to link each trial in our dataset to a
3-digit ICD-9 code. The matched indication-ICD-9 dataset was independently checked for accuracy by
three research assistants using an online ICD-9 medical coding reference manual,31 and any discrepancies
between their matches were resolved by a fourth research assistant. Each indication was ultimately assigned
to one ICD-9 code, corresponding to a total of 65 ICD-9 sub-chapters (listed in Appendix D). Trials with
any indications matching ICD-9 codes 140-239 were classified as cancer trials.
     The categorical variable “biomarker type” indicates the biological feature that a given biomarker iden-
tifies. Biomarker types include genomic, proteomic, biochemical, cellular, physiological, structural, and an-
thropomorphic biomarkers. Definitions of biomarker types and their frequencies of use in clinical trials
both a) overall and b) over time are reported in Table 2. Importantly, these types are not mutually exclusive,
since a given biomarker – e.g. a receptor such as EGFR (epidermal growth factor receptor) – can be both
a genomic and proteomic biomarker. This is because genomic characteristics will lead to differential ex-
pression of EGFR, making it a biomarker of particular genomic features, but EGFR is itself a protein and
therefore a proteomic biomarker as well. For this reason, there can be correlation in the presence of bi-
omarkers types across trials.


Biomarker data and defining pipeline precision medicines
     The Cortellis data include fairly broad categories of biomarker uses, as they relate to clinical trials.
These include disease markers, toxic effect markers, and therapeutic effect markers. Disease-related bi-
omarkers indicate if a disease already exists (diagnostic biomarker), or how such a disease may develop in
an individual case regardless of the type of treatment (prognostic biomarker). Therapeutic effect-related


30 We are grateful to Manuel Hermosilla, Craig Garthwaite, and David Dranove, who generously shared their version of a
3-digit ICD-9 crosswalk dataset with us. This dataset was assembled through the use of two independent medical coders
separately constructing a crosswalk. Discrepancies were adjudicated by a third expert and additional outside research.
31 ICD9Data.com




                                                            15
biomarkers provide an indication of the progress of a product on the patient during treatment. Toxic
effect-related biomarkers indicate a treatment-related adverse reaction. Other biomarker roles are “not
determined” because they do not have any of the roles described above in a particular trial. In practice, we
are interested in a subset of the trials that use disease-related biomarkers – namely, those in which we
observe the unambiguous features of products that would likely come to market as targeted therapeutics
upon successful progression through the R&D process. This is because this subset of biomarkers facilitates
ad hoc patient selection for therapy.
    Our working definition of likely precision medicines (LPMs) is that they encompass the set of pipeline
products that are being developed using the types of disease-related biomarkers that are relevant for iden-
tifying subpopulations that are likely to be more (or less) responsive to medications. We therefore employ
a second, biomarker-specific database from Clarivate in order to link biomarkers to their detailed roles in
clinical trials. The detailed biomarkers database (DBD) from Clarivate includes additional detail (in the
form of “detailed biomarker roles”) on all known clinical biomarkers and their paired uses and indications
in clinical research. For example, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) is a (genomic) bi-
omarker that can be used for a) selection for therapy and b) predicting treatment efficacy. In the database,
both of these are included as detailed biomarker roles for using the biomarker HER2 in studies of breast
cancer (the indication). In the Cortellis database, we can then link DBD data as follows: given a trial’s
“breast cancer” indication and knowing that the HER2 biomarker was used in that clinical trial, one can
assign both a biomarker type and a detailed biomarker role (or, in some cases, more than one) to that trial.
In this way, assignment of biomarker roles (from the DBD) to trials (in Cortellis) is achieved via a matching
algorithm that requires a precise match between both the indication and biomarker. For example, in order
to link trail x to biomarker role y, we would match as follows:

          trialx + biomarkerBIO + indicationIND !" biomarkerBIO + indicationIND + biomarker roley
where the terms on the left represent variables in the Cortellis database, the terms on the right represent
variables in the DBD, and the underlined terms (indicationIND and biomarkerBIO) are used as exact match-
ing criteria.
    Definitions of detailed biomarker roles and the frequencies of their use in clinical trials are reported in
Table 3. A biomarker may have multiple associated uses, making it important to correctly link a biomarker




                                                        16
associated with a given clinical trial and indication to its use in that setting. Therefore, the process of match-
ing a biomarker-indication pair from the Cortellis clinical trials data with a biomarker-indication pair from
the DBD is a crucial step in correctly assigning biomarker roles to individual clinical trials. We define LPMs
in two ways using these detailed biomarker roles. These classifications are consistent with the NIH-FDA
definitions of biomarkers and how they are employed.32
     In the first, “generous” definition of LPMs, we identify trials using biomarkers whose roles include
diagnosis, differential diagnosis, predicting drug resistance, predicting treatment efficacy, predicting treat-
ment toxicity, screening, and selection for therapy. The rationale for the generous definition is that all of
these biomarkers can be used in the development of targeted therapeutics and are likely to be associated
with the development of precision medicines. In the second, “restrictive” definition of LPMs, we identify
the subset of “generous” trials that specifically employ biomarkers for prediction (these include biomarkers whose
roles include: predicting drug resistance, predicting treatment efficacy, and predicting treatment toxicity),
with the vast majority of these trials identified as LPM trials due to the use of biomarkers that can help
predict treatment efficacy (Table 3). To be clear, both definitions measure likely precision-medicine trials,
but the former, more inclusive definition includes trials in which biomarkers were used to define and select
patient populations for the trial and this role may not fit everyone’s perception of a precision medicine
trial (for example, selecting patients with a certain disease type or patients whose presentation of a bi-
omarker, such a protein, is measured as above/below a cutoff relevant to disease diagnosis).




5.! CHARACTERIZING THE LPM DEVELOPMENT PIPELINE
     We characterize the number and type of drugs using biomarkers in their clinical trials as well as those
that can be considered LPMs by therapeutic area and over time. Since cancers represent a set of diseases
in which precision therapies are already successfully used, and since cancer applications of precision med-
icine are expected to grow in coming years, we separately characterize the cancer applications of pipeline
precision medicines in detail.




32The classification definitions were also separately discussed with an oncologist, who at the time of writing was serving
as the principal investigator on a biomarker-driven clinical trial.



                                                              17
Biomarkers and LPMs in clinical trials
    We begin at perhaps the broadest point, by first identifying all trials that use one or more biomarker(s)
of any kind (Figure 2). Notably, both the share and total number of clinical trials employing biomarkers
has increased markedly over recent decades. We next focus only on the subset of trials with biomarker
uses that are associated with LPMs, by both the generous and restrictive definitions (Figure 3). Both the
number and percentage of LPM trials increased over our period of observation, as seen in Figure 3. We
further note that the two definitions of LPMs track each other closely over time – both in Figure 3 as well
as in the subsequent sub-sample analyses described below. Table 4 presents the count (column 1) and
percentage (column 2) of LPMs in clinical trials in each year of our data. Columns 3-8 present the same
results by clinical trial phase. Even by the most restrictive definition of LPM trials, by 2016, approximately
7.5% of trials were for LPMs, roughly double the percentage observed a decade earlier (3.8%).
    LPM trials are associated with the use of different types of biomarkers, and the relative and absolute
frequencies of these types have evolved over time. Biomarker types are not mutually exclusive; for exam-
ple, there is extremely high overlap between proteomic and genomic biomarkers, since the vast majority
of genomic mutations (e.g. in cancer) manifest themselves through differences in protein expression. Fig-
ure 4 shows how these types were represented in each phase over our years of observation. Genomic/pro-
teomic biomarkers were the most commonly used in recent years and featured in the vast majority of LPM
trials, a fact that is consistent with LPMs being driven primarily by understanding gene and protein expres-
sion and how these factors predict the likely success of medications.


Pipeline precision cancer therapies
    Figure 5 and Table 5 present data on the frequency of LPMs in cancer trials only. Several features of
these trials are notable, especially when compared with one another. First, LPM trials are more than an
order of magnitude more common in cancer indications; in 2015 and 2016, roughly 25% (or more) of all
cancer drug trials were LPM trials, but only 1-2% of trials for non-cancer indications were LPM trials. In
regression analysis (Table 8), we also see that a cancer indication is a strong statistical predictor of an LPM
trial and the growth of LPMs among cancer drugs explains the lion’s share of growth in LPM trials over
the past two decades. These results accord with the commonly held belief that the majority of applications
of precision medicines in coming years will be in the context of targeted therapies for cancer.



                                                        18
Institutional factors
     Next, we consider the LPM development pipeline in light of a number of other institutional factors.
We consider U.S.-based vs. non-U.S.-based trials. The United States is by far the world’s largest pharma-
ceutical consumer (International Trade Administration, 2016) and it would therefore be reasonable to ex-
pect trials for LPMs to be driven to by both local demand (Costinot et al., 2016) as well as local regulations
(FDA, 2004). Figure 6 shows the number and share of U.S. LPM trials. The total number of LPM trials
conducted within the United States is comparable to the total number conducted abroad, but the share of
LPM trials among U.S. trials is roughly double that of international trials. This finding is consistent with
the fact that U.S. drug prices are typically higher than those of other countries (Kanavos et al., 2013),
making it more appealing for pharmaceutical manufacturers to conduct clinical research in order to bring
drugs to market in the United States as soon as possible. These facts are also reflected in our regression
analysis (Table 8) which indicates that U.S. trials are, on average, roughly one percentage point more likely
to involve LPMs at any point in time relative to their non-U.S. counterparts in the same year, all else equal.
Off of a relatively low overall share of LPM trials, this difference represents a double-digit percentage
increase in the likelihood of observing an LPM trial.
     In addition, we briefly consider whether LPM trials appear to be related to disease severity.33 We use
the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation’s Global Health Data Exchange to collect data on “global
burden of disease” for all cancers.34 For both the United States (alone) as well as globally, we assemble
data on years of life lost (YLL) due to each cancer.35 For all cancers, we identify the relevant ICD-9 code
and match YLL to the cancer trials in our data (as described above and in the 11 cancer ICD-9 subchapters
presented in Appendix D). Table 6 presents results from two sets of t-tests of differences in means with
unequal variances. We find evidence that among cancer trials, LPM trials are associated with significantly
more U.S. and global YLL for the product’s intended indication than non-LPM trials on average.
     Finally, we consider the types of firms – namely publicly listed companies vs. (typically smaller) pri-
vately held firms – engaging in the development of LPMs (Figure 7 and Tables 7a and 7b). The correct



33 We are grateful to NBER conference participants for this suggestion.
34 These data are publicly available at http://www.healthdata.org/gbd
35 We use this measure because it is one of the only metrics that has yearly data dating back to the 1990s.




                                                               19
assignment of individual trials to their sponsor firms (and according firm types) is both difficult and fun-
damental for our analysis. Because acquisitions are common and firm ownership may change over time,
we use imputation to assign each trial in our dataset to the firm that sponsored the trial and its type (e.g.
publicly listed vs. privately held) at the time the trial was launched. Although we are not able to assign these
types with complete accuracy, we are mathematically able to construct upper and lower bounds for whether
each sponsor firm was publicly listed at the time of a trial. Aggregating our data, we are able to construct
upper and lower bounds for the share of publicly listed firms over time and across phases (Figure 7). Ap-
pendix E presents details how these bounds were calculated and a short proof of the bounding exercise.
Overall, we find that publicly listed firms are significantly more likely to pursue LPM trials, regardless of
whether we use the upper or lower bound for the measure for whether or not a firm was (already) publicly
listed at the time of a given trial’s launch.
     We conclude with regression analyses (Tables 8-9).36 We are circumspect in interpreting our regression
results; the coefficients calculated are not causally estimated; rather they represent differences between
categories in our sample, controlling for other factors. However, the coefficients are useful in that they
allow for interpretation of multivariate associations. Tables 8a and 8b present linear probability models
using facets of trials to predict the likelihood that any given trial is an LPM using the generous and restric-
tive definitions as binary outcomes, respectively.
     Through both panels, a set of statistical relationships emerge. For example, the linear probability mod-
els presented in Tables 8a-8b indicate that the total share of LPM trials has been increasing over time by
between 0.3 and 0.5 percentage points per year, with slightly higher point estimates from models focusing
on the most recent 12 years of data only. We also find that precision-trials are likely to be spread across all
phases of trial development (it’s not the case that they are significantly less common in later phases relative
to their frequency in Phase I trials). Other relationships seen in the trends presented in earlier tables and
figures are also apparent: most prominent among these is the importance of cancer trials; trials for cancer
indications are 13-15 percentage points more likely to be LPM trials than those for non-cancer indications.




36As noted above, in our analyses we assign combined trials (e.g. combined Phase II & Phase III) to the lower of the two
phases involved. In robustness tests, we create separate sub-categories for combined Phase I/II and II/III trials and
include controls for these combined trials in regression analyses. Results are not sensitive to this distinction, so we use the
more parsimonious 3-phase classification in tables and figures for simplicity.



                                                                20
Off of an average share of LPM trials that only first reached 10% in recent years, this means that condi-
tional on having a cancer trail, the probability that the trial is for an LPM more than doubles. Indeed, the
coefficient on the binary indicator for whether a trial is a cancer trial is an order of magnitude larger than
the association between time, location, trial phase or firm type. Trials with U.S. sites are more likely than
non-U.S. trials to be LPM trials, but only by about one percentage point – in other words, comparing this
result to the overall time trend in the data, U.S. trials seem to be about 2-3 years “ahead” of non-U.S. trials
in their inclusion of LPMs. We also find that the role of publicly listed firms is similar in magnitude and
direction; trials pursued by publicly listed firms are 1-2 percentage points more likely to be LPM trials than
those of privately held firms, all else equal.
    We conclude our regression analysis by briefly considering predictors of trial duration. One implication
of precision medicine is that trials themselves can be conducted more efficiently, if effect sizes are expected
to be large. Efficiency improvements could occur on the dimension of enrollment (fewer patients required)
or on the dimension of trial duration (less time needed to draw statistically sound evidence); we consider
only the latter possibility here. Table 9 presents results from a set of linear regression models predicting
trial duration. These models include a number of trial features as regressors and present multivariate asso-
ciations in our dataset. As above, these coefficients cannot be interpreted causally; rather, they represent
average associations between features of clinical trials and the amount of time required for trial completion.
    The first three columns of Table 9 present models predicting trial duration in LPM trials, while the
last three columns present identical models in non-LPM trials. A number of interesting differences emerge.
First, we note the difference in the coefficient on the intercept in the two sets of linear models; LPM trials
take roughly 20 months longer to complete relative to non-precision trials, all else equal. This may be due
to the challenges of enrolling patients with less common sub-types of a disease as well as the fact that non-
precision trials include a number of shorter studies (e.g. for antibiotics) that can be run extremely quickly,
thereby lowering the average time to completion in the second group of trials. As in Table 8, phase I trials
are the omitted category in all models. For LPM trials, phase II trials are, all else equal, only about two
months longer than phase I trials, on average, and this differences is not statistically significant in any of
the three specifications. This is quite different than what is observed in non-precision trials, where phase
II studies take 5-6 months longer than phase I studies to complete. Among LPM trials, phase III studies
have durations over a year longer than their phase I and phase II counterparts, a bigger difference than



                                                        21
among non-precision trials, where phase III studies are only 7-9 months longer on average. This suggests
that although LPM trials may be longer on average, the use of biomarkers may be able to close the gap
between Phase 1 and later phases to some extent.
    Interestingly, although cancer trials appear to always take longer to complete on average than non-
cancer trials, the additional trial length associated with LPM cancer trials is 6-7 months less than the addi-
tional trial length associated with non-precision cancer trials in these models. One interpretation of this is
that precision medicines perhaps speed up cancer trials because of surrogate endpoints or enrichment. We
are cautious not to o ver-interpretation this relationship, because it does not hold up when examined in
further detail; in Appendix Table III we consider the same sets of models for cancer trials alone and show
similar patterns across many coefficients in the regression models, but differences in the estimated con-
stants between LPM trials vs. non-precision trials in cancer. Finally, we note that as economic incentives
would predict, trials sponsored by publicly listed firms have shorter durations, on average (e.g. such firms
are likely under pressure from investors to bring products to market). While none of these facts provide
conclusive evidence on the causes of differences in trial length, the associations are intriguing and suggest
the value of future research into the determinants of clinical trial length – especially since clinical trials
represent a significant component of both the time and financial cost associated with new drug develop-
ment.




6.! CONCLUSION
    By taking a detailed view of the global clinical trial pipeline over recent decades, we are able to describe
a number of trends and industry-level changes. Beyond growth in the number of registered clinical trials,
we document a number of patterns that have implications for cost-growth in health care and pharmaceu-
tical pricing. First, we show that the use of biomarkers in clinical trials has grown significantly, with an
important subset representing the types of biomarkers that have the potential to be used in the develop-
ment of targeted therapies. Such therapies are likely to be more effective, but will also frequently come
with higher prices. Although the raw numbers of trials using biomarkers in the development of precision
medicines is still dwarfed by the total number of clinical trials for new therapeutics, the growth in likely




                                                        22
precision medicine trials has been large in percentage terms, approximately doubling every decade over the
past 22 years.
     Our results should be interpreted with a number of caveats. Firstly, the findings presented here are
only as representative as the global registries on which our primary clinical trial dataset is based. While we
have noted above that there are good reasons to believe that these registries are representative of the set
of pipeline drugs pursuing regulatory approvals in the dozen most recent years of our data, there may be
more selection in trial reporting in earlier years. In particular, we believe that the data in the years after
2004 are more likely to capture most clinical trials conducted in pursuit of new product approvals, due to
changes in trial registration requirements for academic journal publication (discussed above). Unfortu-
nately, we do not have tractable a way of estimating the type and direction of selection into trial registries
that may have occurred.
     Secondly, we note that our characterization of trials as either LPM or non-LPM trials is, by nature,
probabilistic, based on observable features of these trials and the biomarkers employed in them. While the
categories we use are unambiguously more conservative than simply considering any use of biomarkers in
clinical trials, they may still capture some trials and pipeline products that do not, in fact, represent preci-
sion medicines.
     Finally, and perhaps most importantly, we have characterized the drug development pipeline, which is
not necessarily synonymous with characterizing the actual set of products that are subsequently commercial-
ized. If failure rates in clinical research are endogenously determined with other characteristics related to
commercialization strategies (e.g. single-product vs. multi-product firms, as seen in Guedj and Scharfstein,
2004), characterizing trials may not accurately reflect the future products that emerge from those trials. To
the extent that there is selection in R&D project discontinuations based on features that are not included
in our analysis, the set of products that ultimately comes to market may look different than the late-stage
clinical trial pipeline would suggest.37
     Yet we believe that we have also made progress in characterizing recent trends and developments in
clinical research related to precision medicines. By taking a big-picture view of global clinical trials, we can
observe how trials for LPMs have grown in number and share over recent decades. We can also bring

37On average, the success rate for a drug entering clinical trials is approximately 10%. This rate is even lower for oncol-
ogy therapeutics, at roughly 5%. (https://www.bio.org/sites/default/files/Clinical%20Development%20Suc-
cess%20Rates%202006-2015%20-%20BIO,%20Biomedtracker,%20Amplion%202016.pdf)



                                                               23
empirical data to bear on predictions from medicine and economics, which would suggest that certain
types of drugs (e.g. for cancers) and certain markets (e.g. in the United Sates) are likely to have a greater
share of LPMs. Within LPMs, we see a large and growing share of products that incorporate genomic and
proteomic biomarkers in their development, suggesting the growing importance of sequencing technolo-
gies for both R&D and patient care. Further, recent trajectories have implications for health care spending;
to the extent that precision medicines grow in market share, they will drive up costs for many of the drugs
that target specific groups of patients and also open up opportunities for previously difficult-to-implement
firm strategies such as indication-based pricing. Such developments will also underscore the impact of
strategic decisions regarding when and how to run biomarker-driven clinical trials during the therapeutic
development process.




                                                       24
References:
Acemoglu, Daron, and Joshua Linn. "Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the Pharma-
    ceutical Industry." Quarterly journal of economics 3 (2004): 1049-1090.
Bagley, Nicholas, Benjamin Berger, Amitabh Chandra, Craig Garthwaite, and Ariel D. Stern. The Orphan
    Drug Act at 35: Challenges and Opportunities for the 21st Century. Forthcoming (2018).
Berndt, E.R., Conti, R.M. and Murphy, S.J., 2017. The Landscape of US Generic Prescription Drug Markets, 2004-
    2016 (No. w23640). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Bespalov, Anton, et al. "Failed trials for central nervous system disorders do not necessarily invalidate
    preclinical models and drug targets." Nature Reviews Drug Discovery (2016).
Berndt, Ernst R., and Mark R. Trusheim. "Biosimilar and Biobetter Scenarios for the US and Europe:
    What Should We Expect?." In Biobetters, pp. 315-360. Springer New York, 2015.
Budish, Eric, Benjamin N. Roin, and Heidi Williams. "Do firms underinvest in long-term research? Evi-
    dence from cancer clinical trials." The American economic review 105.7 (2015): 2044-2085.
Chandra, A. and Garthwaite, C., 2017. The Economics of Indication-Based Drug Pricing. New England
    Journal of Medicine, 377(2), pp.103-106.
Costinot, A., Donaldson, D., Kyle, M. and Williams, H., 2016. The more we die, the more we sell? a simple
    test of the home-market effect (No. w22538). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cohen, Joshua P., and Abigail E. Felix. "Personalized medicine’s bottleneck: diagnostic test evidence and
    reimbursement." Journal of personalized medicine 4.2 (2014): 163-175.
De Angelis, Catherine, et al. "Clinical trial registration: a statement from the International Committee of
    Medical Journal Editors." New England Journal of Medicine 351.12 (2004): 1250-1251.
Dubois, Pierre, Olivier de Mouzon, Fiona Scot Morton, and Paul Seabright. "Market size and pharmaceu-
    tical innovation." The RAND Journal of Economics 46, no. 4 (2015): 844-871.
Dzau, V.J., Ginsburg, G.S. Realizing the Full Potential of Precision Medicine in Health and Health
    Care. JAMA. 2016; 316(16):1659–1660.
FDA, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. “Guid-
    ance for Industry: Information Program on Clinical Trials for Serious or Life-Threatening Diseases
    and Conditions.” (Draft Guidance) U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Admin-
    istration (2004).



                                                        25
FDA, Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research. “Guid-
    ance for Industry E15 Definitions for Genomic Biomarkers, Pharmacogenomics, Pharmacogenetics,
    Genomic Data and Sample Coding Categories.” U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Food and
    Drug Administration (2008).
Fridlyand, J., Simon, R., Walrath, J., Roach, N., Buller, R., Schenkein, D., Flaherty, K., Allen, J., Sigal, E.,
    & Scher, H. 2013, Considerations for the successful co-development of targeted cancer therapies and
    companion diagnostics, Nature Reviews Drug Discovery, 12, 10, pp. 743-755
Guedj, I., & Scharfstein, D. (2004). Organizational scope and investment: Evidence from the drug development strategies
    and performance of biopharmaceutical firms (No. w10933). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hegde, Deepak, and Bhaven Sampat. "Can private money buy public science? Disease group lobbying and
    federal funding for biomedical research." Management Science 61, no. 10 (2015): 2281-2298.
International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce. 2016 ITA Pharmaceuticals Top Markets
    Report." (2016).
Kanavos, Panos, Alessandra Ferrario, Sotiris Vandoros, and Gerard F. Anderson. "Higher US branded
    drug prices and spending compared to other countries may stem partly from quick uptake of new
    drugs." Health affairs 32, no. 4 (2013): 753-761.
Kao, Jennifer L. “R&D Decisions for New Medical Technologies: Evidence from New Use Approvals
    and Off-Label Uses.” Working Paper (2017).
Phyo, Aung Pyae, et al. "Antimalarial activity of artefenomel (OZ439), a novel synthetic antimalarial en-
    doperoxide, in patients with Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium vivax malaria: an open-label
    phase 2 trial." The Lancet Infectious Diseases 16.1 (2016): 61-69.
Rock Health “2016 Year End Funding Report” Available at https://rockhealth.com/reports/2016-year-
    end-funding-report-a-reality-check-for-digital-health (2017).
Scott Morton, Fiona M. "Entry decisions in the generic pharmaceutical industry." The Rand journal of
    economics (1999): 421-440.
Scott Morton, Fiona M., Ariel Dora Stern, and Scott Stern. “The impact of the entry of biosimilars: evi-
    dence from Europe.” Review of Industrial Organization (Forthcoming, 2018). DOI: 10.1007/s11151-
    018-9630-3




                                                            26
Stern, Ariel D., Brian M. Alexander, and Amitabh Chandra, 2017. How economics can shape precision
   medicines. Science, 355(6330), pp.1131-1133.
Stern, Ariel D., Brian M. Alexander, and Amitabh Chandra. "Innovation Incentives and Biomarkers."
   Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics (2017).
West, Howard Jack. "Novel Precision Medicine Trial Designs: Umbrellas and Baskets." JAMA oncology
   3, no. 3 (2017): 423-423.




                                                  27
Figures

                                              Figure 1: Clinical trials over time

                                                 Number of registered Phase I−III trials (1995−2016)
                             6,000

          Number of trials


                             4,000




                             2,000




                                0
                                       199
                                       199
                                       199
                                       199
                                       199
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       200
                                       201
                                       201
                                       201
                                       201
                                       201
                                       201
                                       201
                                           5
                                           6
                                           7
                                           8
                                           9
                                           0
                                           1
                                           2
                                           3
                                           4
                                           5
                                           6
                                           7
                                           8
                                           9
                                           0
                                           1
                                           2
                                           3
                                           4
                                           5
                                           6
                                                     Phase I              Phase II             Phase III



                                           Growth in number of registered Phase I−III trials since 1995
                             2000
                             1800
                             1600
                             1400
          Growth (%)




                             1200
                             1000
                              800
                              600
                              400
                              200
                                0
                                    1995             2000            2005             2010             2015
                                                                     Start year

                                                     Phase I              Phase II             Phase III




                                                                   28
                                Figure 2: Clinical trials employing biomarkers

                                   Number of registered Phase I−III trials using at least one biomarker
                      4,000



                      3,000
Number of trials




                      2,000



                      1,000



                            0
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                       5
                                       6
                                       7
                                       8
                                       9
                                       0
                                       1
                                       2
                                       3
                                       4
                                       5
                                       6
                                       7
                                       8
                                       9
                                       0
                                       1
                                       2
                                       3
                                       4
                                       5
                                       6
                                               Phase I              Phase II              Phase III



                                            Share of trials using at least one biomarker
                      100
                       90
                       80
                       70
Share of trials (%)




                       60
                       50
                       40
                       30
                       20
                       10
                        0
                            1995              2000             2005              2010                2015
                                                               Start year

                                              Phase I              Phase II              Phase III




                                                             29
                                                                     Figure 3: Clinical trials for LPMs

                         Number of registered LPM (generous definition) trials by phase                                             Share of trials with LPM biomarkers (generous definition)
                   500                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                        10
                   400
                                                                                                                        9




                                                                                                  Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                        8
                   300                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                        5
                   200
                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                        3
                   100                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                        1
                    0                                                                                                   0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                             1995           2000             2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                             Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                   Phase I               Phase II              Phase III                                                     Phase I             Phase II             Phase III


                         Number of registered LPM (restrictive definition) trials by phase                                          Share of trials with LPM biomarkers (restrictive definition)
                   500                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                        11
                                                                                                                        10
                   400
                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                  Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                        8
                   300                                                                                                  7
                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                        5
                   200
                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                                                        3
                   100                                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                        1
                    0                                                                                                   0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                             1995           2000             2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                             Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                   Phase I               Phase II              Phase III                                                     Phase I             Phase II             Phase III




                                                                                             30
                                                              Figure 4: Types of biomarkers used in LPM trials

                          Number of Phase I LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                                   Number of Phase I LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                          500


                   400                                                                                                          400
Number of trials




                                                                                                             Number of trials
                   300                                                                                                          300


                   200                                                                                                          200


                   100                                                                                                          100


                    0                                                                                                            0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                     1995             2000              2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                                    Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical             Cellular                                               Anthropomorphic                Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological           Proteomic                                              Genomic                        Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                         Structural (imaging)


                          Number of Phase II LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                                  Number of Phase II LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                          500


                   400                                                                                                          400
Number of trials




                                                                                                             Number of trials




                   300                                                                                                          300


                   200                                                                                                          200


                   100                                                                                                          100


                    0                                                                                                            0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                     1995             2000              2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                                    Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical             Cellular                                               Anthropomorphic                Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological           Proteomic                                              Genomic                        Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                         Structural (imaging)


                         Number of Phase III LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                                 Number of Phase III LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                          500


                   400                                                                                                          400
Number of trials




                                                                                                             Number of trials




                   300                                                                                                          300


                   200                                                                                                          200


                   100                                                                                                          100


                    0                                                                                                            0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                     1995             2000              2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                                    Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical             Cellular                                               Anthropomorphic                Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological           Proteomic                                              Genomic                        Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                         Structural (imaging)




                                                                                                        31
                                                       Figure 5: Clinical trials for LPMs, cancer indications only

                         Number of registered LPM (generous definition) trials by phase: cancer trials                                       Share of cancer drug trials with LPM biomarkers (generous definition)
                                                                                                                                       50
                   400
                                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                       40
                   300                                                                                                                 35




                                                                                                                 Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                                       30
                                                                                                                                       25
                   200
                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                       15
                   100                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                        5

                     0                                                                                                                  0
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201




                                                                                                                                            1995            2000            2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                                            Start year
                               5
                               6
                               7
                               8
                               9
                               0
                               1
                               2
                               3
                               4
                               5
                               6
                               7
                               8
                               9
                               0
                               1
                               2
                               3
                               4
                               5
                               6




                                          Phase I               Phase II               Phase III                                                             Phase I            Phase II             Phase III


                         Number of registered LPM (restrictive definition) trials by phase: cancer trials                                    Share of cancer drug trials with LPM biomarkers (restrictive definition)
                   400                                                                                                                 50
                                                                                                                                       45
                                                                                                                                       40
                   300
                                                                                                                                       35
                                                                                                                 Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                                       30

                   200                                                                                                                 25
                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                       15
                   100
                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                        5

                    0                                                                                                                   0
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           199
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           200
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201
                           201




                                                                                                                                            1995            2000            2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                                            Start year
                               5
                               6
                               7
                               8
                               9
                               0
                               1
                               2
                               3
                               4
                               5
                               6
                               7
                               8
                               9
                               0
                               1
                               2
                               3
                               4
                               5
                               6




                                          Phase I               Phase II               Phase III                                                             Phase I            Phase II             Phase III




                                                                                                            32
                                                            Figure 6: Clinical trials for LPMs, U.S. trials only

                         Number of registered LPM (generous definition) trials by phase: US trials                                        Share of US drug trials with LPM biomarkers (generous definition)
                   250                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                   18

                   200                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                   14




                                                                                                             Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                   150                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                   10

                   100                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                   6

                    50                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                   2

                     0                                                                                                             0
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201




                                                                                                                                        1995           2000            2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                                       Start year
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6




                                         Phase I              Phase II               Phase III                                                          Phase I            Phase II             Phase III


                         Number of registered LPM (restrictive definition) trials by phase: US trials                                     Share of US drug trials with LPM biomarkers (restrictive definition)
                   250                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                   18

                   200                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                   14
                                                                                                             Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                   150                                                                                                             12
                                                                                                                                   10

                   100                                                                                                             8
                                                                                                                                   6

                   50                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                   2

                    0                                                                                                              0
                          200
                          200
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          201
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          199
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200
                          200




                                                                                                                                        1995           2000            2005             2010                2015
                                                                                                                                                                       Start year
                              7
                              8
                              9
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6
                              5
                              6
                              7
                              8
                              9
                              0
                              1
                              2
                              3
                              4
                              5
                              6




                                        Phase I               Phase II               Phase III                                                          Phase I            Phase II             Phase III




                                                                                                        33
                                            Figure 7: Public vs. privately-held firms (representation in LPM trials)

                                 Share of Phase I LPM trials with public firm involvement                                                Share of Phase I non−LPM trials with public firm involvement
                      100                                                                                                     100
                      90                                                                                                       90
                      80                                                                                                       80
                      70                                                                                                       70
Share of trials (%)




                                                                                                        Share of trials (%)
                      60                                                                                                       60
                      50                                                                                                       50
                      40                                                                                                       40
                      30                                                                                                       30
                      20                                                                                                       20
                      10                                                                                                       10
                       0                                                                                                        0
                            20

                                 20

                                       20

                                             20

                                                   20

                                                         20

                                                                20

                                                                      20

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                            05

                                  06

                                        07

                                              08

                                                    09

                                                           10

                                                                 11

                                                                       12

                                                                             13

                                                                                   14

                                                                                         15

                                                                                              16




                                                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                                                            06

                                                                                                                                                  07

                                                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                                                                                       13

                                                                                                                                                                                             14

                                                                                                                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                         Start year                                                                                                 Start year


                                 Share of Phase II LPM trials with public firm involvement                                               Share of Phase II non−LPM trials with public firm involvement
                      100                                                                                                     100
                      90                                                                                                       90
                      80                                                                                                       80
                      70                                                                                                       70
Share of trials (%)




                                                                                                        Share of trials (%)




                      60                                                                                                       60
                      50                                                                                                       50
                      40                                                                                                       40
                      30                                                                                                       30
                      20                                                                                                       20
                      10                                                                                                       10
                       0                                                                                                        0
                            20

                                 20

                                       20

                                             20

                                                   20

                                                         20

                                                                20

                                                                      20

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                            05

                                  06

                                        07

                                              08

                                                    09

                                                           10

                                                                 11

                                                                       12

                                                                             13

                                                                                   14

                                                                                         15

                                                                                              16




                                                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                                                            06

                                                                                                                                                  07

                                                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                                                                                       13

                                                                                                                                                                                             14

                                                                                                                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                                                                                                                          16
                                                         Start year                                                                                                 Start year


                                 Share of Phase III LPM trials with public firm involvement                                              Share of Phase III non−LPM trials with public firm involvement
                      100                                                                                                     100
                      90                                                                                                       90
                      80                                                                                                       80
                      70                                                                                                       70
Share of trials (%)




                                                                                                        Share of trials (%)




                      60                                                                                                       60
                      50                                                                                                       50
                      40                                                                                                       40
                      30                                                                                                       30
                      20                                                                                                       20
                      10                                                                                                       10
                       0                                                                                                        0
                            20

                                 20

                                       20

                                             20

                                                   20

                                                         20

                                                                20

                                                                      20

                                                                            20

                                                                                  20

                                                                                        20

                                                                                              20




                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                       20

                                                                                                                                                              20

                                                                                                                                                                    20

                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                                                                                                                                                 20

                                                                                                                                                                                      20

                                                                                                                                                                                            20

                                                                                                                                                                                                  20

                                                                                                                                                                                                          20
                            05

                                  06

                                        07

                                              08

                                                    09

                                                           10

                                                                 11

                                                                       12

                                                                             13

                                                                                   14

                                                                                         15

                                                                                              16




                                                                                                                                    05

                                                                                                                                            06

                                                                                                                                                  07

                                                                                                                                                         08

                                                                                                                                                               09

                                                                                                                                                                     10

                                                                                                                                                                            11

                                                                                                                                                                                 12

                                                                                                                                                                                       13

                                                                                                                                                                                             14

                                                                                                                                                                                                   15

                                                                                                                                                                                                          16




                                                         Start year                                                                                                 Start year




                                                                                                   34
Tables

                           Table 1: Summary statistics for selected variables

                                                                      All trials                US trials
                                                             Mean       Observations   Mean       Observations
Uses biomarker                                               0.4092         131,971    0.4619        49,540
Generous LPM                                                 0.0643         131,971    0.0907        49,540
Restrictive LPM                                              0.0581         131,971    0.0813        49,540
Phase 1 Clinical (includes Phase 1/Phase 2 trials)           0.3305         131,971    0.3653        49,540
Phase 2 Clinical (includes Phase 2/Phase 3 trials)           0.4367         131,971    0.4263        49,540
Phase 3 Clinical                                             0.2328         131,971    0.2083        49,540
Trial site in US                                             0.4368         113,410    1.0000        49,540
Publicly-listed firm (lower bound)                           0.2903         131,971    0.3436        49,540
Publicly-listed firm (upper bound)                           0.3977         131,971    0.4588        49,540
Drug indication for neoplasm (cancer)                        0.3352         131,971    0.4002        49,540
Biomarker role: disease                                      0.0842         131,971    0.1145        49,540
Biomarker role: toxic e↵ect                                  0.0496         131,971    0.0699        49,540
Biomarker role: therapeutic e↵ect                            0.3371         131,971    0.3758        49,540
Biomarker role: not determined                               0.0023         131,971    0.0024        49,540
Biomarker type: anthropomorphic                              0.0350         131,971    0.0400        49,540
Biomarker type: biochemical                                  0.1248         131,971    0.1300        49,540
Biomarker type: cellular                                     0.0308         131,971    0.0424        49,540
Biomarker type: genomic                                      0.2321         131,971    0.2845        49,540
Biomarker type: physiological                                0.0849         131,971    0.0865        49,540
Biomarker type: proteomic                                    0.2426         131,971    0.2942        49,540
Biomarker type: structural (imaging)                         0.0177         131,971    0.0200        49,540
Biomarker role (detailed): diagnosis                         0.2948         117,180    0.3448        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): di↵erential diagnosis             0.1829         117,180    0.2041        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): predicting drug resistance        0.0624         117,180    0.0778        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): predicting treatment efficacy     0.2568         117,180    0.3060        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): predicting treatment toxicity     0.0474         117,180    0.0493        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): screening                         0.0523         117,180    0.0547        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): selection for therapy             0.0938         117,180    0.1111        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): disease profiling                 0.1909         117,180    0.2269        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): monitoring disease progression    0.1293         117,180    0.1394        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): monitoring treatment efficacy     0.2998         117,180    0.3481        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): monitoring treatment toxicity     0.0464         117,180    0.0469        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): not determined                    0.0090         117,180    0.0114        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): prognosis                         0.2375         117,180    0.2797        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): prognosis - risk stratification   0.0564         117,180    0.0660        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): risk factor                       0.2407         117,180    0.2770        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): staging                           0.1103         117,180    0.1280        43,777
Biomarker role (detailed): toxicity profiling                0.0085         117,180    0.0082        43,777
N                                                                           131,971                  49,540




                                                   35
                                          Table 2: Number of trials employing biomarkers by type

              Any biomarker Anthropomorphic Biochemical Cellular Genomic Physiological Proteomic                         Structural
     Overall      53,998           4,620            16,472       4,070       30,634        11,205         32,011           2,340
     1995           105              4                29           1            59            22             60              4
     1996           131              5                 34           6           77            16             84              4
     1997           193              10                62           8          119            24            125              2
     1998           288              12                74           6          165            58            182              5
     1999           448              16               119          22          292            68            307              8
     2000           542              33               149          28          349            83            360               9
     2001           645              36               190          38          406            94            426               9
     2002           869              53               263          36          558           135            579              21
     2003          1,085             80               358          51          698           156            732              28
     2004          1,524            126               469          68          950           216            997              34
     2005          1,928            135               580         118         1,157          314           1,218             58
     2006          2,280            178               737         138         1,379          377           1,462             73
     2007          2,718            220               831         207         1,687          437           1,751             98




36
     2008          3,005            252               970         245         1,813          548           1,900            101
     2009          3,492            288              1,137        251         2,157          627           2,248            114
     2010          3,916            334              1,239        304         2,333          740           2,418            134
     2011          4,228            366              1,353        357         2,525          828           2,638            164
     2012          4,517            408              1,463        406         2,566          994           2,661            206
     2013          4,681            439              1,446        382         2,544         1,104          2,666            241
     2014          5,099            518              1,576        434         2,647         1,310          2,762            270
     2015          5,857            546              1,610        438         2,944         1,499          3,086            374
     2016          6,447            561              1,783        526         3,209         1,555          3,349            383
     Biomarker types:
     Anthropomorphic biomarkers are markers of the body shape/form
     Biochemical biomarkers are substrates or products of chemical reactions in the body
     Cellular biomarkers are whole cells
     Genomic biomarkers are variants in the DNA sequence or in the transcription level;
     Physiological biomarkers are body processes
     Proteomic biomarkers are variants in protein sequence, protein levels in a given tissue, protein interactions and enzyme activities
     Structural biomarkers are anatomical structures
                            Table 3: Number of trials employing biomarkers by detailed role

                                                          Predicting Predicting Predicting                   Selection
                   Any                      Di↵erential       drug      treatment treatment                      for
               biomarker Diagnosis           Diagnosis     resistance    efficacy   toxicity    Screening     therapy
     Overall     39,207         34,545        21,429         7,312        30,091     5,556        6,133        10,988
     1995          105             68            45             7            62        8            8             13
     1996          131             88            49            22            81        14           14            19
     1997          193            130            83            38           122        31           39            38
     1998          288            210           137            66           199        53           42            68
     1999          448            341           201            76           310        85           57            97
     2000          542            369           233            88           343        78           59           118
     2001          645            458           275           121           421        85           81           138
     2002          869            624           395           151           578       122          109           203
     2003         1,085           764           487           174           691       157          132           263
     2004         1,524          1,051          675           240           954       224          190           332
     2005         1,928          1,306          799           286          1,189      263          239           408




37
     2006         2,280          1,575         1,004          370          1,396      308          291           510
     2007         2,718          1,882         1,215          444          1,693      369          332           617
     2008         3,005          2,046         1,360          496          1,832      430          362           661
     2009         3,492          2,352         1,578          649          2,145      504          482           842
     2010         3,916          2,539         1,540          581          2,210      343          444           768
     2011         4,228          2,738         1,698          582          2,379      376          502           890
     2012         4,517          2,909         1,780          574          2,494      376          462           906
     2013         4,681          2,932         1,778          609          2,530      396          500           964
     2014         5,099          3,071         1,809          548          2,552      409          519           934
     2015         5,857          3,355         2,005          574          2,816      427          589          1,070
     2016         6,447          3,737         2,283          616          3,094      498          680          1,129
     Biomarker roles (uses) that are related to the development of LPMs, generously defined, are included above
     The restrictive definition of LPMs limits the definition to those related only to prediction: predicting
     drug resistance, treatment efficacy, and treatment toxicity and is driven by “predicting treatment efficacy.”
     Biomarker roles (uses) that are unrelated to developing LPMs, but included in the data are: disease profiling,
     monitoring disease progression, monitoring treatment efficacy, monitoring treatment toxicity, prognosis,
     prognosis - risk stratification, risk factor, staging, and toxicity profiling
  Table 4: Likely precision medicine (LPM) trials (1995-2016):

                       Generous definition
        All    All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
       Count    %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
1995     12    1.39      4      1.2       2    .631     6     2.79
1996     25    2.58      6     1.77      10    2.53      9    3.81
1997     37     2.8     11     2.44      16    3.13     10    2.77
1998     56    3.29     10     1.72      31    4.43     15    3.54
1999     75    3.12     26     3.03      37    3.94     12    1.96
2000     95    3.62     27     3.03      48    4.57     20    2.93
2001    114    3.81     41     4.13      50    4.05     23    3.01
2002    144    3.87     46     3.99      70    4.46     28    2.81
2003    166    3.96     45     3.55      85    4.82     36     3.1
2004    234    4.49     68     4.48     126    5.68     40    2.71
2005    263     4.1     67     3.63     143    5.09     53    3.03
2006    299    4.17     74     3.44     167     5.4     58      3
2007    407    5.39    109     4.62     231    6.96     67    3.57
2008    408    5.09    116     4.34     229    6.69     63    3.28
2009    563    6.63    178     5.95     300    8.22     85    4.57
2010    563    6.44    185     5.97     311    8.52     67    3.37
2011    642    7.14    214     6.88     361    9.34     67    3.32
2012    699    7.54    231      7.6     381    9.13     87    4.24
2013    781    8.55    257     8.44     396    9.86    128    6.18
2014    836    8.85    337     9.95     388     9.4    111    5.76
2015   1,009   9.55    368     10.5     482    9.89    159    7.23
2016   1,057   8.69    417     10.3     501    8.44    139    6.35
                      Restrictive definition
        All    All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
       Count    %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
1995      9    1.04      3     .898       2    .631      4    1.86
1996     23    2.37      5     1.47       9    2.28      9    3.81
1997     34    2.57      9       2       15    2.94    10     2.77
1998     53    3.11      9     1.55      30    4.29     14     3.3
1999     70    2.91     23     2.68      35    3.73     12    1.96
2000     90    3.43     25      2.8      46    4.38    19     2.78
2001    105    3.51     36     3.63      46    3.72     23    3.01
2002    133    3.58     41     3.56      66    4.21     26    2.61
2003    152    3.63     37     2.92      80    4.54     35    3.01
2004    212    4.06     60     3.95     112    5.05     40    2.71
2005    240    3.75     58     3.14     131    4.66     51    2.91
2006    275    3.83     64     2.98     156    5.04     55    2.85
2007    370     4.9     89     3.78     218    6.56     63    3.35
2008    380    4.74    104     3.89     217    6.34     59    3.07
2009    502    5.91    148     4.95     274    7.51     80    4.31
2010    514    5.88    165     5.33     285    7.81     64    3.22
2011    592    6.58    188     6.04     343    8.87     61    3.02
2012    645    6.96    209     6.88     355     8.5     81    3.94
2013    720    7.88    231     7.59     369    9.19    120    5.79
2014    748    7.92    306     9.03     343    8.31     99    5.13
2015    883    8.35    322     9.21     417    8.56    144    6.55
2016    914    7.52    346     8.56     442    7.45    126    5.76

                               38
Table 5: Likely precision medicine (LPM) trials: cancer only (1995-2016):

                           Generous definition
           All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
          Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
   1995      8     2.33      3     2.38       2    1.39      3    4.05
   1996     24      5.3      6     3.57      10    5.21      8    8.6
   1997     34     5.81     11     4.89      13     5.1     10    9.52
   1998     54     6.26     10     3.15      30    7.52     14    9.52
   1999     67     6.41     21     5.34      35    7.26     11    6.47
   2000     86     6.62     24     4.75      45    7.56     17    8.5
   2001    104     7.74     39     7.39      45    7.28     20    10.2
   2002    137     8.77     44     7.76      68    8.66     25    11.9
   2003    142     8.53     34     5.72      80    9.41     28    12.7
   2004    204     10.2     61     8.93     113    10.5     30    12.6
   2005    226     9.89     55     6.67     130    10.8     41    15.8
   2006    261     10.7     64     7.62     154    11.8     43    14.5
   2007    363     14.2     87      9.6     217    16.1     59    19.4
   2008    368     14.2     98     10.2     221    16.6     49    16.3
   2009    507      18     162     14.4     275    19.8     70    22.9
   2010    509      18     164     14.6     289    20.5     56    19.4
   2011    572     19.8    189     16.7     332    22.4     51    18.8
   2012    620     21.4    211     18.9     341     23      68    22.7
   2013    680     24.8    226     21.6     356    25.6     98    31.8
   2014    713     26.5    296     25.6     332    26.7     85    28.9
   2015    855     29.5    319      27      410    30.5    126    34.3
   2016    899     27.1    375      27      410    26.1    114    31.4
                          Restrictive definition
           All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
          Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
   1995      8     2.33      3     2.38       2    1.39      3    4.05
   1996     22     4.86      5     2.98      9     4.69      8     8.6
   1997     31      5.3      9       4       12    4.71    10     9.52
   1998     52     6.03      9     2.84      29    7.27     14    9.52
   1999     64     6.12     20     5.09      33    6.85     11    6.47
   2000     83     6.38     22     4.36      44    7.39     17     8.5
   2001    100     7.45     35     6.63      45    7.28     20    10.2
   2002    129     8.26     41     7.23      65    8.28     23     11
   2003    132     7.93     29     4.88      76    8.94     27    12.2
   2004    190     9.51     56      8.2     104    9.67     30    12.6
   2005    213     9.32     50     6.07     122    10.1     41    15.8
   2006    249     10.2     59     7.02     147    11.3     43    14.5
   2007    340     13.3     77      8.5     207    15.3     56    18.4
   2008    352     13.6     91     9.48     212    15.9     49    16.3
   2009    467     16.6    138     12.3     259    18.6     70    22.9
   2010    479      17     155     13.8     270    19.2    54     18.7
   2011    544     18.9    172     15.2     323    21.8     49     18
   2012    598     20.7    200      18      332    22.4    66     22.1
   2013    654     23.8    212     20.3     347     25     95     30.8
   2014    673      25     278      24      311     25     84     28.6
   2015    791     27.3    291     24.6     378    28.1    122    33.2
   2016    820     24.7    326     23.5     383    24.4    111    30.6

                                   39
Table 6: Burden of disease: Millions of years of life lost for associated diseases (average)

                                           U.S. only   Global
                             non-LPM       11.66       188.20
                             LPM           14.65       202.03
                             t-statistic   19.30       5.57




                                            40
Table 7a: Likely precision medicine LPM trials: publicly listed firm (upper bound) involvement (1995-2016):

                                            Generous definition
                            All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                           Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
                   1995       3      25       1      25        0      0      2     33.3
                   1996       1       4       1     16.7       0      0      0      0
                   1997       6     16.2      1     9.09       5    31.3      0      0
                   1998       8     14.3      3      30        4    12.9     1     6.67
                   1999       8     10.7      2     7.69       5    13.5      1    8.33
                   2000      11     11.6      3     11.1      4     8.33      4     20
                   2001      32     28.1     12     29.3      14     28      6     26.1
                   2002      40     27.8     12     26.1      20    28.6      8    28.6
                   2003      56     33.7      7     15.6      35    41.2     14    38.9
                   2004      65     27.8     15     22.1      39     31     11     27.5
                   2005     106     40.3     27     40.3      52    36.4     27    50.9
                   2006     126     42.1     28     37.8      72    43.1     26    44.8
                   2007     164     40.3     45     41.3      92    39.8     27    40.3
                   2008     152     37.3     47     40.5      80    34.9     25    39.7
                   2009     259      46      80     44.9     130    43.3    49     57.6
                   2010     234     41.6     80     43.2     113    36.3     41    61.2
                   2011     290     45.2     95     44.4     154    42.7     41    61.2
                   2012     307     43.9    107     46.3     144    37.8     56    64.4
                   2013     347     44.4    116     45.1     150    37.9     81    63.3
                   2014     426      51     170     50.4     182    46.9    74     66.7
                   2015     476     47.2    186     50.5     186    38.6    104    65.4
                   2016     439     41.5    169     40.5     198    39.5     72    51.8
                                           Restrictive definition
                            All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                           Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
                   1995       2     22.2      1     33.3       0      0      1      25
                   1996       1     4.35      1      20        0      0      0      0
                   1997       5     14.7      0       0        5    33.3     0       0
                   1998       8     15.1      3     33.3       4    13.3     1     7.14
                   1999       8     11.4      2      8.7      5     14.3     1     8.33
                   2000      11     12.2      3      12        4     8.7     4     21.1
                   2001      30     28.6     11     30.6      13    28.3     6     26.1
                   2002      37     27.8     11     26.8      18    27.3     8     30.8
                   2003      55     36.2      7     18.9      34    42.5    14      40
                   2004      65     30.7     15      25       39    34.8    11     27.5
                   2005      97     40.4     25     43.1      47    35.9    25      49
                   2006     122     44.4     27     42.2      70    44.9    25     45.5
                   2007     150     40.5     39     43.8      86    39.4    25     39.7
                   2008     144     37.9     44     42.3      77    35.5    23      39
                   2009     241      48      73     49.3     123    44.9    45     56.3
                   2010     218     42.4     74     44.8     104    36.5    40     62.5
                   2011     273     46.1     88     46.8     146    42.6    39     63.9
                   2012     289     44.8    101     48.3     135     38     53     65.4
                   2013     331      46     113     48.9     141    38.2    77     64.2
                   2014     388     51.9    163     53.3     159    46.4    66     66.7
                   2015     435     49.3    172     53.4     168    40.3    95      66
                   2016     395     43.2    150     43.4     179    40.5    66     52.4

                                                    41
Table 7b: Likely precision medicine LPM trials: publicly listed firm (lower bound) involvement (1995-2016):

                                            Generous definition
                            All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                           Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
                   1995       1     8.33      0       0        0      0      1     16.7
                   1996       1       4       1     16.7       0      0      0       0
                   1997       3     8.11      1     9.09       2    12.5     0       0
                   1998       3     5.36      2      20        0      0      1     6.67
                   1999       3       4       0       0        2    5.41     1     8.33
                   2000       5     5.26      0       0        2    4.17     3      15
                   2001      23     20.2     10     24.4      8      16      5     21.7
                   2002      27     18.8      6      13       15    21.4     6     21.4
                   2003      40     24.1      4     8.89      24    28.2    12     33.3
                   2004      51     21.8     10     14.7      31    24.6    10      25
                   2005      74     28.1     16     23.9      39    27.3    19     35.8
                   2006     103     34.4     21     28.4      60    35.9    22     37.9
                   2007     124     30.5     34     31.2      66    28.6    24     35.8
                   2008     114     27.9     35     30.2      60    26.2    19     30.2
                   2009     216     38.4     68     38.2     105     35     43     50.6
                   2010     196     34.8     65     35.1      93    29.9    38     56.7
                   2011     228     35.5     73     34.1     119     33     36     53.7
                   2012     248     35.5     93     40.3     112    29.4    43     49.4
                   2013     285     36.5     92     35.8     117    29.5    76     59.4
                   2014     345     41.3    139     41.2     142    36.6    64     57.7
                   2015     378     37.5    148     40.2     141    29.3    89      56
                   2016     326     30.8    129     30.9     140    27.9    57      41
                                           Restrictive definition
                            All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                           Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
                   1995       0       0       0       0        0      0      0       0
                   1996       1     4.35      1      20        0      0      0      0
                   1997       2     5.88      0       0        2    13.3     0       0
                   1998       3     5.66      2     22.2       0      0      1     7.14
                   1999       3     4.29      0       0        2    5.71     1     8.33
                   2000       5     5.56      0       0        2    4.35     3     15.8
                   2001      21      20       9      25        7    15.2     5     21.7
                   2002      24      18       5     12.2      13    19.7     6     23.1
                   2003      40     26.3      4     10.8      24     30     12     34.3
                   2004      51     24.1     10     16.7      31    27.7    10      25
                   2005      69     28.8     16     27.6      34     26     19     37.3
                   2006     101     36.7     21     32.8      59    37.8    21     38.2
                   2007     112     30.3     29     32.6      61     28     22     34.9
                   2008     111     29.2     34     32.7      59    27.2    18     30.5
                   2009     201      40      62     41.9     100    36.5    39     48.8
                   2010     182     35.4     59     35.8      86    30.2    37     57.8
                   2011     213      36      68     36.2     111    32.4    34     55.7
                   2012     232      36      87     41.6     104    29.3    41     50.6
                   2013     271     37.6     89     38.5     110    29.8    72      60
                   2014     319     42.6    137     44.8     123    35.9    59     59.6
                   2015     345     39.1    137     42.5     128    30.7    80     55.6
                   2016     296     32.4    118     34.1     125    28.3    53     42.1

                                                    42
                                   Table 8a: Predicting likely precision medicine trials (linear probability models)

                                                         Outcome = LPM trial, generous definition
                                                                      All Years                                         2005-2016 Only
     Trial start year                                0.0038*    0.0038*      0.0038*    0.0038*         0.0050        0.0050      0.0050      0.0050
                                                     (0.0014)   (0.0014)    (0.0014)    (0.0014)       (0.0024)      (0.0024)    (0.0024)    (0.0024)
     Phase 2 Clinical (includes phase 2/3 trials)     0.0097     0.0099      0.0097      0.0100         0.0124        0.0127      0.0129      0.0131
                                                     (0.0095)   (0.0095)    (0.0093)    (0.0094)       (0.0109)      (0.0110)    (0.0107)    (0.0107)
     Phase 3 Clinical                                 0.0167     0.0164       0.0168     0.0165         0.0190        0.0188      0.0195      0.0193
                                                     (0.0146)   (0.0145)    (0.0143)    (0.0143)       (0.0160)      (0.0159)    (0.0158)    (0.0157)
     Trial site in US=1                             0.0134*** 0.0127*** 0.0125**       0.0118**       0.0138***     0.0130***     0.0090*    0.0082*
                                                     (0.0021)   (0.0023)    (0.0032)    (0.0032)       (0.0027)      (0.0029)    (0.0036)    (0.0036)
     Cancer trial =1                                0.1374*** 0.1376*** 0.1363*** 0.1364***           0.1504***     0.1504*** 0.1443***     0.1443***
                                                     (0.0148)   (0.0148)    (0.0120)    (0.0120)       (0.0186)      (0.0186)    (0.0133)    (0.0133)
     Biomarker type: genomic=1                       0.2429*    0.2429*      0.2428*    0.2428*        0.2403*       0.2403*      0.2398*    0.2398*
                                                     (0.1103)   (0.1103)    (0.1105)    (0.1104)       (0.1128)      (0.1128)    (0.1131)    (0.1131)
     Public firm (lower bound)                       0.0104*                 0.0104*                   0.0129*                    0.0129*
                                                     (0.0044)               (0.0044)                   (0.0061)                  (0.0061)
     Public firm (upper bound)                                  0.0117*                 0.0117*                      0.0136*                 0.0135*




43
                                                                (0.0049)                (0.0049)                     (0.0063)               (0.0063)
     Trial site in US=1 ⇥ Cancer trial=1                                      0.0024     0.0025                                    0.0142     0.0142
                                                                            (0.0077)    (0.0076)                                 (0.0133)   (0.0133)
     Constant                                        -7.6404*   -7.6590*    -7.6465*    -7.6654*         -10.0729    -10.1599    -10.0572   -10.1441
                                                     (2.8601)   (2.8172)    (2.8436)    (2.8008)         (4.8924)    (4.8829)    (4.9004)   (4.8911)
     N                                                108749     108749      108749      108749           92568       92568        92568      92568
     R2                                                0.271      0.271        0.271      0.271            0.279       0.279       0.279      0.279
     * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
     All models include a constant; robust standard errors clustered at the level of the ICD-9 chapter
                                   Table 8b: Predicting likely precision medicine trials (linear probability models)

                                                          Outcome = LPM trial, restrictive definition
                                                                      All Years                                           2005-2016   Only
     Trial start year                                0.0034*    0.0034*      0.0034*     0.0034*        0.0043           0 .0044        0.0043      0.0044
                                                     (0.0014)   (0.0013)    (0.0014)     (0.0013)      (0.0023)         (0. 0023)      (0.0023)    (0.0023)
     Phase 2 Clinical (includes phase 2/3 trials)     0.0127     0.0130      0.0129       0.0 132       0.0153            0.0156        0.0159      0.0161
                                                     (0.0101)   (0.0101)    (0.0099)     (0.0100)      (0.0117)         (0. 0117)      (0.0115)    (0.0115)
     Phase 3 Clinical                                 0.0214     0.0211       0.0216      0.0213        0.0235           0 .0232        0.0241      0.0237
                                                     (0.0154)   (0.0153)    (0.0152)     (0.0151)      (0.0170)         (0. 0169)      (0.0169)    (0.0168)
     Trial site in US=1                             0.0097*** 0.0089*** 0.0079**         0.0070**     0.0096***        0 .0086***       0.0039      0.0029
                                                     (0.0016)   (0.0016)    (0.0025)     (0.0024)      (0.0018)         (0. 0021)      (0.0026)    (0.0027)
     Cancer trial =1                                0.1362*** 0.1364*** 0.1338*** 0.1339*** 0.1490* ¿ **                0.1491***     0.1417***   0.1418***
                                                     (0.0140)   (0.0140)    (0.0111)     (0.0111)      (0.0176)        (0. ¿ 0176)     (0.0124)    (0.0124)
     Biomarker type: genomic=1                        0.2175     0.2176       0.2174      0.2174        0.2144            0.2145        0.2138      0.2139
                                                     (0.1086)   (0.1086)    (0.1087)     (0.1087)      (0.1110)         (0. 1109)      (0.1112)    (0.1112)
     Public firm (lower bound)                       0.0134*                 0.0134*                   0.0159*                         0.0159*
                                                     (0.0054)               (0.0054)                   (0.0072)                        (0.0072)
     Public firm (upper bound)                                  0.0148*                   0.0149*                       0.0166*                   0.0166*




44
                                                                (0.0058)                 (0.0057)                      (0. 0073)                  (0.0073)
     Trial site in US=1 ⇥ Cancer trial=1                                      0.0052       0.0054                                        0.0170     0.0170
                                                                            (0.0071)     (0.0071)                                      (0.0125)   (0.0125)
     Constant                                        -6.8624*   -6.8852*    -6.8755*     -6.8987*       -8.8031         -8 .9076        -8.7843    -8.8886
                                                     (2.7860)   (2.7331)    (2.7727)     (2.7198)      (4.6997)        (4. 6847)       (4.7055)   (4.6907)
     N                                                108749     108749      108749       108749         92568           92568           92568      92568
     R2                                                0.254      0.254        0.254       0.254         0.261           0.262           0.262      0.262
     * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
     All models include a constant; robust standard errors clustered at the level of the ICD-9 chapter
                         Table 9: Dependent variable: Trial duration in months

                                                         LPM Trials                        Non-LPM Trials
                                           All Trials     All Trials All U.S.    All Trials All Trials    All U.S.
Phase 2 Clinical (inc. Phase 2/3 trials)      1.976         2.018     2.565       6.472***   6.192***     5.374***
                                             (1.048)       (1.045)   (1.359)       (0.224)     (0.223)     (0.339)
Phase 3 Clinical                           13.889***      14.136*** 13.171***     9.054***    9.193***    6.859***
                                             (1.566)       (1.555)   (2.063)       (0.254)     (0.252)     (0.400)
Trial site in US                            3.767***      4.143***                4.610***    4.968***
                                             (0.958)       (0.962)                 (0.188)     (0.188)
Cancer trial                               13.258***      13.335*** 12.781***    19.608*** 19.403*** 18.488***
                                             (1.283)       (1.275)   (1.750)       (0.269)     (0.268)     (0.375)
Public firm (lower bound)                  -3.348***                             -6.620***
                                             (0.949)                               (0.186)
Public firm (upper bound)                                -5.078***   -6.021***               -7.805***   -8.227***
                                                          (0.973)     (1.317)                  (0.190)     (0.292)
Constant                                   60.043***     59.840***   63.616***   38.916*** 39.438*** 45.857***
                                            (6.184)       (6.153)     (6.764)      (1.275)     (1.274)     (1.469)
N                                            2743           2743        1760        50186       50186       26101
R2                                           0.330         0.334       0.320        0.304       0.311       0.277
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
Sample includes all trials launched after 2000 with known end dates. Duration is winsorized to remove extreme
outliers. All OLS models include a constant, year fixed e↵ects, and robust standard errors. All models in this table
use the “generous” definition of LPM trials.




                                                    45
APPENDIX A
    This table lists the formal definition of different biomarker types as defined by the FDA-NIH Bi-
omarker Working group (2016)
 Biomarker type       Official definition                               Examples
 Diagnostic           A biomarker used to detect or confirm             1)! Sweat chloride may be used as a diagnostic bi-
 Biomarker            presence of a disease or condition of inter-          omarker to confirm cystic fibrosis (Farrell et al.
                      est or to identify individuals with a subtype         2008).
                      of the disease.
                                                                        2)! Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) may be used as a di-
                                                                            agnostic biomarker to identify patients with chronic
                                                                            kidney disease (National Kidney Foundation 2002).

 Monitoring           A biomarker measured serially for assessing       1)! HIV-RNA may be used as a monitoring biomarker
 Biomarker            status of a disease or medical condition or           to measure and guide treatment with antiretroviral
                      for evidence of exposure to (or effect of) a          therapy (ART) (AIDSinfo 2007).
                      medical product or an environmental agent.
                                                                        2)! Serial measurements of symphysis-fundal height dur-
                                                                            ing pregnancy can be used during antenatal screening
                                                                            to detect fetal growth disturbances (Papageorghiou et
                                                                            al. 2016).

 Pharmacodynamic /    A biomarker used to show that a biological        1)! Circulating B lymphocytes may be used as a pharma-
 Response Biomarker   response has occurred in an individual who            codynamic/response biomarker when evaluating pa-
                      has been exposed to a medical product or              tients with systemic lupus erythematosus to assess re-
                      an environmental agent.                               sponse to a B-lymphocyte stimulator inhibitor (Stohl
                                                                            and Hilbert 2012).

                                                                        2)! Urinary level of glycosaminoglycans may be used as a
                                                                            pharmacodynamic/response biomarker when evalu-
                                                                            ating the effect of enzyme replacement therapy for
                                                                            patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type 1 (Jameson
                                                                            et al. 2016).

 Predictive           A biomarker used to identify individuals          1)! Certain cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
 Biomarker            who are more likely than similar individuals          regulator (CFTR) mutations may be used as predic-
                      without the biomarker to experience a fa-             tive biomarkers in clinical trials evaluating treatment
                      vorable or unfavorable effect from expo-              for cystic fibrosis, to select patients more likely to re-
                      sure to a medical product or an environ-              spond to particular treatments (Davies et al. 2013).
                      mental agent.
                                                                        2)! Human leukocyte antigen allele (HLA)–B*5701 gen-
                                                                            otype may be used as a predictive biomarker to eval-
                                                                            uate human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) patients
                                                                            before abacavir treatment, to identify patients at risk
                                                                            for severe skin reactions (AIDSinfo 2007).

 Prognostic           A biomarker used to identify likelihood of a      1)! Breast Cancer genes 1 and 2 (BRCA1/2) mutations
 Biomarker            clinical event, disease recurrence or progres-        may be used as prognostic biomarkers when evaluat-
                      sion in patients who have the disease or              ing women with breast cancer, to assess the likeli-
                      medical condition of interest.                        hood of a second breast cancer (Basu et al. 2015).

                                                                        2)! Gleason score may be used as a prognostic bi-
                                                                            omarker when evaluating patients with prostate can-
                                                                            cer to assess the likelihood of cancer progression
                                                                            (Epstein et al. 2016; Gordetsky and Epstein 2016).

 Safety               A biomarker measured before or after an           1)! Hepatic aminotransferases and bilirubin may be used
 Biomarker            exposure to a medical product or an envi-             as safety biomarkers when evaluating potential hepa-
                      ronmental agent to indicate the likelihood,           totoxicity (Senior 2014).




                                                                    i
                         presence, or extent of toxicity as an adverse   2)! Serum creatinine may be used as a safety biomarker
                         effect.                                             when evaluating patients on drugs that affect kidney
                                                                             function to monitor for nephrotoxicity (Wasung et
                                                                             al. 2015).

 Susceptibility / Risk   A biomarker that indicates the potential for    1)! Factor V Leiden may be used as a susceptibility/risk
 Biomarker:              developing a disease or medical condition           biomarker to identify individuals with a predisposi-
                         in an individual who does not currently             tion to develop deep vein thrombosis (DVT) (Kujo-
                         have clinically apparent disease or the medi-       vich 2011).
                         cal condition.
                                                                         2)! Infection with certain human papillomavirus (HPV)
                                                                             subtypes may be used as a susceptibility/risk bi-
                                                                             omarker to identify individuals with a predisposition
                                                                             to develop cervical cancer (Khan et al. 2005; Schiff-
                                                                             man et al. 2011).




Note: Some examples of biomarkers cited in this appendix may be applicable for more than one type of
biomarker. For example, in some cases, predictive biomarkers used to identify individuals who are more
likely to experience a favorable effect from a drug can also be used as diagnostic biomarkers in the initial
detection or confirmation of the disease (e.g. CFTR mutations in Cystic Fibrosis).




                                                                    ii
APPENDIX B
       Effects'of'Uniform'Pricing'versus'Indication=Based'Pricing.
Effects of uniform pricing versus indication-based pricing.




From Chandra, A. and Garthwaite, C. “The Economics of Indication-Based Drug Pricing.” New England Journal of Medicine,
377(2), pp.103-106. Copyright © (2017) Massachusetts Medical Society. Reprinted with permission.
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1705035
 Chandra'A,'Garthwaite'C.'N'Engl'J'Med'2017:377:103=106.



     In Panel A, the upper graph represents a uniform-pricing context in which patients with indication A
receive the most benefit and those with indication C receive the least. The population with indication C is
large, and the value of treatment to this group is close to the value for indication B. As a result, the man-
ufacturer’s profit-maximizing price allows all patients to obtain the drug. At this price, the manufacturer
earns profits, represented by the green area. However, the firm faces a trade-off. By setting the price in
this way, the manufacturer forgoes profits that could be earned by charging higher prices to patients with
indications A and B. These forgone profits, represented by the blue areas, are captured by these patients
as consumer surplus — the value difference between the most consumers are willing to pay and what they
actually pay.
The lower graph in Panel A shows a different scenario, in which the product’s valuation for patients with
indication C is very low. In this case, it’s a better trade-off for the manufacturer to set a high price, at
which it knows the payer will allow only patients with indications A and B to obtain the drug. The manu-
facturer accepts the loss of sales to patients with indication C in exchange for higher profits earned from
patients with indications A and B. Comparing these graphs, we see that when the valuation of the prod-
uct for indication C is relatively low, manufacturers set a higher uniform price, the payer curtails sales to
patients with indication C (orange area), and patients with indications A and B obtain less consumer sur-
plus than they did in the first scenario.




                                                            iii
Panel B of the graph represents the same set scenarios with respect to the distribution of patients and
valuations but allows for indication-based pricing by the manufacturer. The scenario presented is an ex-
treme example in which a monopoly provider is able to set the price exactly at the willingness to pay of
the consumer population and thus capture all of the surplus. For scenario 1, the same sets of patients are
served but the manufacturer is now able to capture all of the surplus. Scenario 2 represents an output
expanding scenario where the manufacturer now finds it profitable to sell to patients with indication C,
while also raising the price on the indication A patients that receive the most value from the drug. In to-
tal, the introduction of indication-based pricing is shown to weakly increase prices, profits, and the quan-
tity sold.




                                                       iv
APPENDIX C




             v
Selected Explanation as provided by the Website of ClinicalTrials.gov (2017):

1997: Congress Passes Law (FDAMA) Requiring Trial Registration
The first U.S. Federal law to require trial registration was the Food and Drug Administration Moderniza-
tion Act of 1997 (FDAMA) (PDF). Section 113 of FDAMA required the National Institutes of Health
(NIH) to create a public information resource on certain clinical trials regulated by the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA)

2000: NIH Releases ClinicalTrials.gov Web Site
The first version of ClinicalTrials.gov was made available to the public on February 29, 2000. At the time,
ClinicalTrials.gov primarily included NIH-funded studies.

2000–2004: FDA Issues Guidance for Industry Documents
In 2000 FDA issued a draft Guidance for Industry document, which provided recommendations for re-
searchers submitting information to ClinicalTrials.gov. A final guidance document that incorporated com-
ments from the public was issued in 2002.

2004: ClinicalTrials.gov Wins the Innovations in American Government Award
The Innovations in American Government Awards program highlights exemplary models of government
innovation and advances efforts to address the Nation's most pressing public concerns.

2005: International Committee of Medical Journal Editors Requires Trial Registration
In 2005 the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) began requiring trial registration
as a condition of publication.

2005: State of Maine Passes Clinical Studies Registration Law (Repealed in 2011)
In 2005 the State of Maine passed a law requiring prescription drug manufacturers or labelers to submit
clinical study registration and results information to ClinicalTrials.gov. In 2011 the law was repealed; it is
no longer in effect.

2006: World Health Organization Establishes Trial Registration Policy
In 2006 the World Health Organization (WHO) stated that all clinical trials should be registered, and it
identified a minimum trial registration dataset of 20 items and in 2007 launched the International Clinical
Trials Registry Platform (ICTRP).

2007: Congress Passes Law (FDAAA) Expanding ClinicalTrials.gov Submission Requirements
In 2007 the requirements for submission to ClinicalTrials.gov were expanded after Congress passed the
Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 2007 (FDAAA). Section 801 of FDAAA (FDAAA
801) required more types of trials to be registered; additional trial registration information; and the sub-
mission of summary results, including adverse events, for certain trials. The law also included penalties for
noncompliance, such as the withholding of NIH grant funding and civil monetary penalties of up to
$10,000 a day.

2008: ClinicalTrials.gov Releases Results Database
In September 2008, as required by FDAAA 801, ClinicalTrials.gov began allowing sponsors and principal
investigators to submit the results of clinical studies.38


38The submission of adverse event information was optional when the results database was released but was required
beginning in September 2009.



                                                          vi
2008: Declaration of Helsinki Revision Promotes Trial Registration and Results Dissemination
In October, 2008 the 59th World Medical Association (WMA) General Assembly amended the Declara-
tion of Helsinki - Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. Two newly added
principles (paragraphs 19 and 30) considered the prospective registration and the public disclosure of study
results to be ethical obligations.

2009: Public Meeting Held at the National Institutes of Health
In accordance with FDAAA 801, NIH held a public meeting in April 2009 to solicit input from interested
individuals about future regulations that will expand the information on ClinicalTrials.gov.

2013: European Medicines Agency Expands Clinical Trial Database to Include Summary Results
In October 2013 the European Medicines Agency (EMA) released a new version of the European Clinical
Trials Database (EudraCT). Notably, the EudraCT summary results data requirements are "substantially
aligned" with those of the ClinicalTrials.gov results database.

2014: Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) for FDAAA 801 Issued for Public Comment
In November 2014 the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services issued a notice of proposed rule-
making (NPRM) describing the proposed requirements and procedures for registering and submitting the
results, including adverse events, of clinical trials on ClinicalTrials.gov, in accordance with FDAAA 801.

2014: NIH Draft Policy on Registration and Results Submission of NIH-Funded Clinical Trials
Issued for Public Comment.
In November 2014 NIH proposed a policy to ensure that every clinical trial (see the Revised NIH Defini-
tion of "Clinical Trial") that receives NIH funding is registered on ClinicalTrials.gov and has summary
results submitted and posted in a timely manner, whether subject to FDAAA 801 or not.

2015: National Cancer Institute Issues Clinical Trial Access Policy
In January, 2015 the NIH National Cancer Institute (NCI) issued its Policy Ensuring Public Availability
of Results from NCI-supported Clinical Trials. The policy states, "Final Trial Results are expected to be
reported in a publicly accessible manner within twelve (12) months of the Trial's Primary Completion Date
regardless of whether the clinical trial was completed as planned or terminated earlier."

2016: Final Rule for FDAAA 801 Issued
In September 2016, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services issued a Final Rule for Clinical
Trials Registration and Results Information Submission (42 CFR Part 11) that clarifies and expands the
regulatory requirements and procedures for submitting registration and summary results information of
clinical trials on ClinicalTrials.gov, in accordance with FDAAA 801. The final rule is intended to make it
clear to sponsors, investigators, and the public which trials must be submitted, when they must be submit-
ted, and whether compliance has been achieved.

2016: Final NIH Policy on the Dissemination of NIH-funded Clinical Trial Information Issued
In September 2016, NIH issued a final policy to promote broad and responsible dissemination of infor-
mation from NIH-funded clinical trials through ClinicalTrials.gov. Under this policy, every clinical trial
funded in whole or in part by NIH is expected to be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov and have summary
results information submitted and posted in a timely manner, whether subject to FDAAA 801 or not.




                                                      vii
APPENDIX D
 ICD-9 Sub-chapter                                                          Number          Neoplasm (cancer)
                                                                            of trials       Sub-chapter
 Intestinal Infectious Diseases                                                    402      No
 Tuberculosis                                                                      414      No
 Zoonotic Bacterial Diseases                                                        80      No
 Other Bacterial Diseases                                                         1749      No
 Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) Infection                                     2909      No
 Poliomyelitis And Other Non-Arthropod-Borne Viral Diseases And Prion
 Diseases Of Central Nervous System                                                232      No
 Viral Diseases Generally Accompanied By Exanthem                                  627      No
 Arthropod-Borne Viral Diseases                                                    210      No
 Other Diseases Due To Viruses And Chlamydiae                                     3344      No
 Rickettsioses And Other Arthropod-Borne Diseases                                  174      No
 Syphilis And Other Venereal Diseases                                               74      No
 Other Spirochetal Diseases                                                         14      No
 Mycoses                                                                           663      No
 Helminthiases                                                                      86      No
 Other Infectious And Parasitic Diseases                                           532      No
 Late Effects Of Infectious And Parasitic Diseases                                      3   No
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Lip, Oral Cavity, And Pharynx                               468      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Digestive Organs And Peritoneum                            8793      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Respiratory And Intrathoracic Organs                       5891      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Bone, Connective Tissue, Skin, And Breast                  9034      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Genitourinary Organs                                       7110      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Other And Unspecified Sites                                9340      Yes
 Malignant Neoplasm Of Lymphatic And Hematopoietic Tissue                         8981      Yes
 Neuroendocrine Tumors                                                             382      Yes
 Benign Neoplasms                                                                  440      Yes
 Carcinoma In Situ                                                                      1   Yes
 Neoplasms Of Uncertain Behavior                                                  2377      Yes
 Neoplasms Of Unspecified Nature                                                  2312      Yes
 Disorders Of Thyroid Gland                                                        135      No
 Diseases Of Other Endocrine Glands                                               6639      No
 Nutritional Deficiencies                                                          526      No
 Other Metabolic And Immunity Disorders                                           5532      No
 Diseases Of The Blood And Blood-Forming Organs                                   3392      No
 Psychoses                                                                        2855      No
 Neurotic Disorders, Personality Disorders, And Other Nonpsychotic Mental
 Disorders                                                                        4348      No
 Intellectual Disabilities                                                              5   No
 Inflammatory Diseases Of The Central Nervous System                               150      No
 Organic Sleep Disorders                                                           257      No




                                                        viii
Hereditary And Degenerative Diseases Of The Central Nervous System         3541   No
Pain                                                                        228   No
Other Headache Syndromes                                                     33   No
Other Disorders Of The Central Nervous System                              2466   No
Disorders Of The Peripheral Nervous System                                 1024   No
Disorders Of The Eye And Adnexa                                            2440   No
Diseases Of The Ear And Mastoid Process                                     393   No
Acute Rheumatic Fever                                                         1   No
Chronic Rheumatic Heart Disease                                             110   No
Hypertensive Disease                                                       1378   No
Ischemic Heart Disease                                                     1933   No
Diseases Of Pulmonary Circulation                                           613   No
Other Forms Of Heart Disease                                               2515   No
Cerebrovascular Disease                                                    1285   No
Diseases Of Arteries, Arterioles, And Capillaries                          1179   No
Diseases Of Veins And Lymphatics, And Other Diseases Of Circulatory Sys-
tem                                                                        1605   No
Acute Respiratory Infections                                                455   No
Other Diseases Of The Upper Respiratory Tract                              1047   No
Pneumonia And Influenza                                                    1794   No
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease And Allied Conditions                3159   No
Pneumoconioses And Other Lung Diseases Due To External Agents                18   No
Other Diseases Of Respiratory System                                        914   No
Diseases Of Oral Cavity, Salivary Glands, And Jaws                          841   No
Diseases Of Esophagus, Stomach, And Duodenum                               1040   No
Appendicitis                                                                 20   No
Hernia Of Abdominal Cavity                                                   20   No
Noninfectious Enteritis And Colitis                                        1213   No
Other Diseases Of Intestines And Peritoneum                                 993   No
Other Diseases Of Digestive System                                         1576   No
Nephritis, Nephrotic Syndrome, And Nephrosis                               1508   No
Other Diseases Of Urinary System                                           1207   No
Diseases Of Male Genital Organs                                             793   No
Disorders Of Breast                                                          37   No
Inflammatory Disease Of Female Pelvic Organs                                816   No
Other Disorders Of Female Genital Tract                                    1454   No
Ectopic And Molar Pregnancy                                                  12   No
Other Pregnancy With Abortive Outcome                                        91   No
Complications Mainly Related To Pregnancy                                   396   No
Normal Delivery, And Other Indications For Care In Pregnancy, Labor, And
Delivery                                                                    130   No
Complications Occurring Mainly In The Course Of Labor And Delivery           20   No
Complications Of The Puerperium                                              84   No
Infections Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                                  205   No



                                                       ix
Other Inflammatory Conditions Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                2100   No
Other Diseases Of Skin And Subcutaneous Tissue                               1536   No
Arthropathies And Related Disorders                                          3237   No
Dorsopathies                                                                  545   No
Rheumatism, Excluding The Back                                               1220   No
Osteopathies, Chondropathies, And Acquired Musculoskeletal Deformities        982   No
Congenital Anomalies                                                          789   No
Maternal Causes Of Perinatal Morbidity And Mortality                            4   No
Other Conditions Originating In The Perinatal Period                          155   No
Symptoms                                                                     6901   No
Nonspecific Abnormal Findings                                                 402   No
Ill-Defined And Unknown Causes Of Morbidity And Mortality                     195   No
Fractures                                                                     134   No
Sprains And Strains Of Joints And Adjacent Muscles                             22   No
Intracranial Injury, Excluding Those With Skull Fracture                      226   No
Internal Injury Of Thorax, Abdomen, And Pelvis                                 83   No
Open Wounds                                                                   252   No
Injury To Blood Vessels                                                         7   No
Late Effects Of Injuries, Poisonings, Toxic Effects, And Other External
Causes                                                                          3   No
Superficial Injury                                                             28   No
Contusion With Intact Skin Surface                                             15   No
Burns                                                                         119   No
Injury To Nerves And Spinal Cord                                              204   No
Certain Traumatic Complications And Unspecified Injuries                      138   No
Poisoning By Drugs, Medicinal And Biological Substances                        60   No
Toxic Effects Of Substances Chiefly Nonmedicinal As To Source                  78   No
Other And Unspecified Effects Of External Causes                             2264   No
Complications Of Surgical And Medical Care, Not Elsewhere Classified          515   No
Persons With Potential Healthhazards Related To Communicable Diseases          54   No
Persons With Need For Isolation, Other Potential Health Hazards And
Prophylactic Measures                                                          41   No
Persons With Potential Health Hazards Related To Personal And Family His-
tory                                                                           16   No
Persons Encountering Health Services In Circumstances Related To Repro-
duction And Development                                                       233   No
Persons With A Condition Influencing Their Health Status                      835   No
Persons Encountering Health Services For Specific Procedures And Aftercare     31   No
Persons Without Reported Diagnosis Encountered During Examination And
Investigation Of Individuals And Populations                                  214   No




                                                           x
APPENDIX E
Identifying publicly listed firms
     In order to understand the “lineage” (ownership histories) of firms, we take advantage of data on a
firm’s “Ancestor” as provided by the Thompson Reuters Permanent Identifier (“PermID”) database.
Thompson Reuters describes the database as “a machine-readable identifier developed to create a unique
reference for any data item” noting that a “PermID provides comprehensive identification across a wide
variety of entity types including organizations, instruments, funds, issuers and people.”39 We match firms
in the Cortellis data to the firms’ PermIDs: 90.0% of the companies in the Cortellis database have PermID
information (137,160 out of 152,357). Of the137,160 companies with PermIDs we matched 99.2% of
them with the PermID data. This results in firm-specific data on whether or not a firm is publicly listed.
The same database also allows us to observe if a firm has been acquired by a publicly listed firm (“ances-
tor”). Based on a combination of trial date (from Cortellis) and acquisition data (from the PermID data-
base), we can understand whether a trial was sponsored by a publicly listed firm (and/) or whether or not
the sponsor was a subsidiary of a publicly listed firm.
     As a result of the data considerations described below, we assign upper and lower-bound measures of
whether or not a firm was publicly listed at the time of an observed clinical trial as follows.
                                                                        Firms

                     Firm                 Ancestor            !"#$%&'               !"#$%&(             !"#$%&)            !"#$%&*

                                Ancestor (AKA par-      Firm or its ancestor    Firm is publicly   Ancestor is pub-    Either !"#$%&( or
                                ent) firm observed at   is publicly traded on   traded (observed   licly traded (ob-   !"#$%&) is
                                       time = T         trial date (unob-       at time = T)       served at time =    TRUE
                                                        served true status)                        T)


      1.   Pfizer Inc           Pfizer Inc                   TRUE                    TRUE               TRUE                TRUE

      2.   Pfizer Inc (India)   Pfizer Inc                   TRUE                    FALSE              TRUE                TRUE

      3.   Small Bio Corp.      GSK                          FALSE                   FALSE              TRUE                TRUE
      4.   Genentech            Roche                        TRUE                    FALSE              TRUE                TRUE

      5.   Xenoport             Arbor Pharmaceuti-           TRUE                    FALSE              FALSE               FALSE
                                cals




39More detail can be found at https://financial.thomsonreuters.com/en/products/data-analytics/market-data/reference-
data/permid-data-management.html



                                                                   xi
      6.   ALK-Abello       Lundbeck Founda-        TRUE                  TRUE         FALSE           TRUE
                            tion




     We use ancestor firms’ public status instead of firms’ (own) public status assigning legitimate subsidi-
aries to their parent company’s status as wanted (Row 2); however, this method also assigns some acquired
firms to an incorrect status.
     In Row 3 above, Small Bio Corp. conducts a trial as a privately owned firm at time 0 and is acquired
by GSK at time t > 0. Due to data limitations we observe only the most recent firm ancestor (GSK) at
time of data collection T > t > 0, and thus the ancestor’s public status at time T (TRUE) misrepresents
Small Bio’s status on the trial date. This is not an issue for firms that were publicly traded before being
acquired as long as the acquiring firm is public as well (as in the example in Row 4). This is, however, a
complication for firms that were publicly traded and then “delisted” after being purchased by a private
firm (as in the example in Row 5).
     Rarely, firms are listed as public with non-publicly traded ancestors. This generally indicates partial
private ownership of a public firm (as in the example in Row 6).

     None of the measures of !"#$%&+ |+∈(,),* match the unobserved true public status (!"#$%&' ) for each

case, but they can still be useful in a bounding exercise. Because !"#$%&( is never TRUE in any case that

!"#$%&' is FALSE, it can be used as a lower bound for !"#$%&' .

     Measure 3 is NOT an upper bound on Measure 0 because, as is the case with Xenoport,

!"#$%&' = 0123 does not imply !"#$%&* = 0123. However, the true share of trials run by public firms
will be bounded above by Measure 3 share as long as there are more trials misclassified as public (due to a
later acquisition) than misclassified as private. This is proven below:



4ℎ6789!"#$%&*
     #!"#$%&907%6$; + #=%;&$6;;%>%8?@ABCDEF→@HIJBK − #=%;&$6;;%>%8?@HIJBK→@ABCDEF
=9
                                     #07%6$;

M>9#=%;&$6;;%>%8?@ABCDEF→@HIJBK > #=%;&$6;;%>%8?@HIJBK→@ABCDEF 9




                                                        xii
                   #!"#$%&907%6$;
4ℎ6789!"#$%&* >                   = 9 4ℎ6789!"#$%&'
                      #07%6$;
    So in this case, 4ℎ6789!"#$%&* is an upper bound on the true share of trials funded by public firms.
    We cannot directly measure the number of misclassified trials to test whether this assumption holds,
but because these misclassifications result from mergers and acquisitions, public firms acquiring private
firms will likely make up the lion’s share of such activity and the bound will hold.
    The process by which we calculate dummy variables indicating whether a trial is public by the different
measures is outlined below:
    1.! For each firm

            a.! !"#$%&( = O >%7P9%;9Q"#$%&9%R92017 ;

            b.! !"#$%&) = O(>%7P Y ;96R&8;Z[79%;9Q"#$%&9%R92017)
    2.! For each trial and firm recode

            a.! !"#$%&( = 09%>9M!]9^6Z8 > 07%6$9^6Z8.

            b.! !"#$%&) = 09%>9_R&8;Z[79M!]9^6Z8 > 07%6$9^6Z8.

    3.! For each firm-ancestor pair calculate !"#$%&* = max9{!"#$%&( , !"#$%&) }.

    4.! For each trial, calculate whether any public firms were involved with the trial:

            a.! !"#$%&907%6$9( = max       !"#$%&(+ : f ∈ g 99

            b.! !"#$%&907%6$9* = 9 max      !"#$%&*+ : f ∈ g 9                   >[79Zℎ89;8Z9g9[>9>%7P −

                6R&8;Z[79Q6%7;9%Rh[$h8?9i%Zℎ9Zℎ89Z7%6$




                                                       xiii
APPENDIX SOURCES:
AIDSinfo. Guidelines for the Use of Antiretroviral Agents in HIV-1-Infected Adults and Adolescents.
December 1, 2007. Accessed October 2016. Available at: https://aidsinfo.nih.gov/guide-
lines/html/1/adult-and-adolescent-arv-guidelines/7/hla-b--5701-screening

Basu NN, Ingham S, Hodson J, Lalloo F, Bulman M, Howell A, Evans DG. Risk of contralateral breast
cancer in BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers: a 30-year semi-prospective analysis. Fam Cancer. 2015
Dec;14(4):531–8. doi: 10.1007/s10689-015-9825-9. PubMed PMID: 26239694.

ClinicalTrials.gov. History, Policies, and Laws. July, 2017. Accessed August 2017. Available at:
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/about-site/history

Epstein JI, Egevad L, Amin MB, Delahunt B, Srigley JR, Humphrey PA. Grading Committee. The 2014
International Society of Urological Pathology (ISUP) Consensus Conference on Gleason Grading of
Prostatic Carcinoma: Definition of Grading Patterns and Proposal for a New Grading System. Am J
Surg Pathol. 2016 Feb;40(2):244–52. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000530. PubMed PMID: 26492179.

Farrell PM, Rosenstein BJ, White TB, Accurso FJ, Castellani C, Cutting GR, Durie PR, Legrys VA,
Massie J, Parad RB, Rock MJ, Campbell PW 3rd. Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. Guidelines for diagnosis of
cystic fibrosis in newborns through older adults: Cystic Fibrosis Foundation consensus report. J Pediatr.
2008 Aug;153(2):S4–S14. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2008.05.005. PubMed PMID: 18639722.

FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group. "BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource."
(2016).

Gordetsky J, Epstein J. Grading of prostatic adenocarcinoma: current state and prognostic implications.
Diagn Pathol. 2016 Mar 9;11:25. doi: 10.1186/s13000-016-0478-2. PubMed PMID: 26956509.

Jameson E, Jones S, Remmington T. Enzyme replacement therapy with laronidase (Aldurazyme®) for
treating mucopolysaccharidosis type I. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016 Apr 1;4:CD009354. doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD009354.pub4. PubMed PMID: 27033167.

Khan MJ, Castle PE, Lorincz AT, Wacholder S, Sherman M, Scott DR, Rush BB, Glass AG, Schiffman
M. The elevated 10-year risk of cervical precancer and cancer in women with human papillomavirus
(HPV) type 16 or 18 and the possible utility of type-specific HPV testing in clinical practice. J Natl Can-
cer Inst. 2005 Jul 20;97(14):1072–9. doi: 10.1093/jnci/dji187. PubMed PMID: 16030305.

Kujovich JL, Factor V. Leiden thrombophilia. Genet Med. 2011 Jan;13(1):1–16. doi:
10.1097/GIM.0b013e3181faa0f2. PubMed PMID: 21116184.

National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for Chronic Kidney Disease: Evalu-
ation, Classification and Stratification. Am J Kidney Dis 39:S1-S266, 2002 (suppl 1). Accessed December
2016. Available at: https://www.kidney.org/sites/default/files/docs/ckd_evaluation_classifica-
tion_stratification.pdf

“NIMH » Research Funding Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs).”. https://www.nimh.nih.gov/fund-
ing/grant-writing-and-application-process/research-funding-frequently-asked-questions-faqs.shtml (ac-
cessed August 8, 2017).



                                                      xiv
Papageorghiou A, Ohuma E, Gravett M, Hirst J, Silveira M, Lambert A, Carvalho M, Jaffer Y, Altman
D, Noble J, Bertino E, Purwar M, Pang R, Ismail L, Victora C, Bhutta Z, Kennedy S, Villar J. Interna-
tional standards for symphysis-fundal height based on serial measurements from the Fetal Growth Lon-
gitudinal Study of the INTERGROWTH-21st Project: prospective cohort study in eight countries. BMJ.
2016 Oct;355:i5662. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i5662. PubMed PMID: 27821614.

Schiffman M, Glass AG, Wentzensen N, Rush BB, Castle PE, Scott DR, Buckland J, Sherman ME, Ry-
dzak G, Kirk P, Lorincz AT, Wacholder S, Burk RD. A long-term prospective study of type-specific hu-
man papillomavirus infection and risk of cervical neoplasia among 20,000 women in the Portland Kaiser
Cohort Study. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2011 Jul;20(7):1398–409. doi: 10.1158/1055-
9965.EPI-11-0206. PubMed PMID: 21602310.

Senior JR. Evolution of the Food and Drug Administration approach to liver safety assessment for new
drugs: current status and challenges. Drug Saf. 2014 Nov;37 Suppl 1:S9–17. doi: 10.1007/s40264-014-
0182-7. PubMed PMID: 25352324.

Stohl W, Hilbert DM. The discovery and development of belimumab: the anti-BLyS-lupus connection.
Nat Biotechnol. 2012 Jan 9;30(1):69–77. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2076. PubMed PMID: 22231104.

Wasung ME, Chawla LS, Madero M. Biomarkers of renal function, which and when? Clin Chim Acta.
2015 Jan 1;438:350–7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2014.08.039. PubMed PMID: 25195004.




                                                   xv
Appendices

                                                      Appendix Figure A: U.S. Clinical trials over time

                              Number of registered Phase I−III US trials (1995−2016)                                  Growth in number of registered Phase I−III US trials since 1995
                    4,000                                                                                   9000

                                                                                                            8000

                                                                                                            7000
                    3,000
 Number of trials




                                                                                                            6000




                                                                                               Growth (%)
                                                                                                            5000
                    2,000
                                                                                                            4000

                                                                                                            3000
                    1,000                                                                                   2000

                                                                                                            1000

                       0                                                                                       0
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                                                                                                                   1995           2000           2005            2010           2015
                                                                                                                                                 Start year
                               5
                                6
                                7
                                8
                                9
                                0
                                1
                                2
                                3
                                4
                                5
                                6
                                7
                                8
                                9
                                0
                                1
                                2
                                3
                                4
                                5
                                6
                                    Phase I             Phase II              Phase III                                           Phase I            Phase II           Phase III


                            Number of registered Phase I−III non−US trials (1995−2016)                             Growth in number of registered Phase I−III non−US trials since 1995
                    4,000                                                                                   9000

                                                                                                            8000

                                                                                                            7000
                    3,000
 Number of trials




                                                                                                            6000
                                                                                               Growth (%)




                                                                                                            5000
                    2,000
                                                                                                            4000

                                                                                                            3000
                    1,000                                                                                   2000

                                                                                                            1000

                       0                                                                                      0
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            199
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            200
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201
                            201




                                                                                                                   1995          2000           2005             2010           2015
                                                                                                                                                Start year
                                5
                                6
                                7
                                8
                                9
                                0
                                1
                                2
                                3
                                4
                                5
                                6
                                7
                                8
                                9
                                0
                                1
                                2
                                3
                                4
                                5
                                6




                                    Phase I             Phase II              Phase III                                           Phase I            Phase II           Phase III




                                                                                          46
                      Appendix Figure B: U.S. Clinical trials using biomarkers

                                Number of registered Phase I−III US trials using at least one biomarker
                      1,000


                       800
Number of trials




                       600


                       400


                       200


                            0




                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   201
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   200
                                   201
                                   201
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   199
                                   200
                                   200




                                       1
                                       2
                                       3
                                       4
                                       5
                                       6
                                       1
                                       2
                                       3
                                       4
                                       5
                                       6
                                       7
                                       8
                                       9
                                       0
                                       5
                                       6
                                       7
                                       8
                                       9
                                       0




                                              Phase I              Phase II              Phase III



                                        Share of US trials using at least one biomarker
                      100
                       90
                       80
                       70
Share of trials (%)




                       60
                       50
                       40
                       30
                       20
                       10
                        0
                            1995            2000             2005              2010                 2015
                                                             Start year

                                             Phase I              Phase II              Phase III




                                                            47
                                                        Appendix Figure C: U.S. Clinical trials for LPMs

                         Number of registered US LPM (generous definition) trials by phase                                             Share of US trials with LPM biomarkers (generous definition)
                   250                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                           18

                   200                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                           14




                                                                                                     Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                   150                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                           10

                   100                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                           6

                   50                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                           2

                    0                                                                                                      0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                                1995             2000            2005              2010               2015
                                                                                                                                                                 Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                     Phase I              Phase II              Phase III                                                         Phase I             Phase II            Phase III


                         Number of registered US LPM (restrictive definition) trials by phase                                          Share of US trials with LPM biomarkers (restrictive definition)
                   250                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                           18

                   200                                                                                                     16
                                                                                                                           14
                                                                                                     Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                   150                                                                                                     12
                                                                                                                           10

                   100                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                           6

                   50                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                           2

                    0                                                                                                      0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                                1995             2000            2005              2010               2015
                                                                                                                                                                 Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                     Phase I              Phase II              Phase III                                                         Phase I             Phase II            Phase III




                                                                                                48
                                                 Appendix Figure D: Types of biomarkers used in U.S. LPM trials

                         Number of Phase I US LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                          Number of Phase I US LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                       500


                   400                                                                                                       400
Number of trials




                                                                                                          Number of trials
                   300                                                                                                       300


                   200                                                                                                       200


                   100                                                                                                       100


                     0                                                                                                         0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                  1995            2000             2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                               Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical            Cellular                                            Anthropomorphic               Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological          Proteomic                                           Genomic                       Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                     Structural (imaging)


                      Number of Phase II US LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                            Number of Phase II US LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                       500


                   400                                                                                                       400
Number of trials




                                                                                                          Number of trials




                   300                                                                                                       300


                   200                                                                                                       200


                   100                                                                                                       100


                     0                                                                                                         0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                  1995           2000              2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                               Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical            Cellular                                           Anthropomorphic                Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological          Proteomic                                          Genomic                        Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                    Structural (imaging)


                      Number of Phase III US LPM trials (generous definition) by biomarker types used                           Number of Phase III US LPM trials (restrictive definition) by biomarker types used
                   500                                                                                                       500


                   400                                                                                                       400
Number of trials




                                                                                                          Number of trials




                   300                                                                                                       300


                   200                                                                                                       200


                   100                                                                                                       100


                     0                                                                                                         0
                         1995             2000             2005             2010             2015                                  1995           2000              2005              2010              2015
                                                           Start year                                                                                               Start year

                                    Anthropomorphic               Biochemical            Cellular                                           Anthropomorphic                Biochemical              Cellular
                                    Genomic                       Physiological          Proteomic                                          Genomic                        Physiological            Proteomic
                                    Structural (imaging)                                                                                    Structural (imaging)




                                                                                                     49
                                       Appendix Figure E: U.S. clinical trials for LPMs, cancer indications only

                     Number of registered US LPM (generous definition) trials by phase: cancer trials                                  Share of US cancer drug trials with LPM biomarkers (generous definition)
                   250                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                                                  50
                   200
                                                                                                                                  45




                                                                                                            Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                                  40
                   150                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                  25
                   100
                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                  15
                    50                                                                                                            10
                                                                                                                                   5
                     0                                                                                                             0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                                       1995            2000           2005             2010               2015
                                                                                                                                                                      Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                        Phase I               Phase II              Phase III                                                           Phase I           Phase II            Phase III


                     Number of registered US LPM (restrictive definition) trials by phase: cancer trials                           Share of US cancer drug trials with LPM biomarkers (restrictive definition)
                   250                                                                                                            60
                                                                                                                                  55
                                                                                                                                  50
                   200
                                                                                                                                  45
                                                                                                            Share of trials (%)
Number of trials




                                                                                                                                  40
                   150                                                                                                            35
                                                                                                                                  30
                                                                                                                                  25
                   100
                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                  15
                   50                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                  5
                    0                                                                                                             0
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         199
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         200
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201
                         201




                                                                                                                                       1995            2000           2005             2010               2015
                                                                                                                                                                      Start year
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6
                             7
                             8
                             9
                             0
                             1
                             2
                             3
                             4
                             5
                             6




                                        Phase I               Phase II              Phase III                                                           Phase I           Phase II            Phase III




                                                                                                       50
Appendix Table I: U.S. likely precision medicine (LPM) trials (1995-2016):

                           Generous definition
           All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
          Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
   1995      8     6.15      3     5.36       2      4      3     12.5
   1996     18     8.57      4     5.19       9     10      5     11.6
   1997     23     7.82     10     7.94       9    6.57     4     12.9
   1998     38     8.15      6     3.66      26    10.3     6     12.2
   1999     45     8.09     16     7.55      24    8.57     5     7.81
   2000     57     8.78     15      6.1      34    10.7     8      9.3
   2001     65     10.1     24     10.2      31    9.09    10     14.3
   2002     85     12.3     32     12.8      41    10.8    12      20
   2003     91     11.8     22     8.21      56    13.2    13     15.7
   2004    117     11.8     38     10.9      69    12.5    10     11.6
   2005    119      11      31     7.33      70    12.2    18      20
   2006    155     13.3     48     10.4      90    14.7    17     18.7
   2007    201     16.7     56     11.2     125    20.7    20     19.8
   2008    207      18      65     12.7     120    21.7    22     25.3
   2009    271     22.2    106     18.3     129    24.1    36     32.7
   2010    257     21.1    112     18.8     121    23.3    24      24
   2011    290     24.8    125      22      143    27.8    22     24.7
   2012    293     26.1    132     23.1     132    28.3    29     34.1
   2013    354     30.8    153     26.8     156    31.9    45      50
   2014    387     31.9    202     30.8     143    30.8    42     45.2
   2015    453     34.2    212     31.3     180    33.5    61      55
   2016    413     30.9    205     29.5     165     31     43     39.4
                          Restrictive definition
           All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
          Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
   1995      8     6.15      3     5.36       2      4      3     12.5
   1996     16     7.62      3      3.9       8    8.89     5     11.6
   1997     21     7.14      9     7.14       8    5.84     4     12.9
   1998     36     7.73      5     3.05      25    9.88     6     12.2
   1999     42     7.55     15     7.08      22    7.86     5     7.81
   2000     54     8.32     13     5.28      33    10.4     8      9.3
   2001     63     9.75     22     9.36      31    9.09    10     14.3
   2002     81     11.7     31     12.4      39    10.3    11     18.3
   2003     84     10.9     19     7.09      52    12.3    13     15.7
   2004    110     11.1     35     10.1      65    11.7    10     11.6
   2005    111     10.2     28     6.62      65    11.3    18      20
   2006    144     12.4     44     9.54      83    13.5    17     18.7
   2007    189     15.7     52     10.4     118    19.6    19     18.8
   2008    198     17.2     62     12.1     114    20.7    22     25.3
   2009    245      20      89     15.4     120    22.4    36     32.7
   2010    242     19.9    106     17.8     112    21.5    24      24
   2011    274     23.4    115     20.3     139     27     20     22.5
   2012    279     24.8    123     21.5     128    27.4    28     32.9
   2013    340     29.6    146     25.6     152    31.1    42     46.7
   2014    363      30     188     28.7     133    28.7    42     45.2
   2015    415     31.3    196      29      161     30     58     52.3
   2016    376     28.1    186     26.8     149     28     41     37.6

                                   51
Appendix Table II: U.S. likely precision medicine (LPM) trials: cancer only (1995-2016):

                                  Generous definition
                  All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                 Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
          1995      8     6.15      3     5.36       2      4      3     12.5
          1996     18     8.57      4     5.19       9     10      5     11.6
          1997     23     7.82     10     7.94       9    6.57     4     12.9
          1998     38     8.15      6     3.66      26    10.3     6     12.2
          1999     45     8.09     16     7.55      24    8.57     5     7.81
          2000     57     8.78     15      6.1      34    10.7     8      9.3
          2001     65     10.1     24     10.2      31    9.09    10     14.3
          2002     85     12.3     32     12.8      41    10.8    12      20
          2003     91     11.8     22     8.21      56    13.2    13     15.7
          2004    117     11.8     38     10.9      69    12.5    10     11.6
          2005    119      11      31     7.33      70    12.2    18      20
          2006    155     13.3     48     10.4      90    14.7    17     18.7
          2007    201     16.7     56     11.2     125    20.7    20     19.8
          2008    207      18      65     12.7     120    21.7    22     25.3
          2009    271     22.2    106     18.3     129    24.1    36     32.7
          2010    257     21.1    112     18.8     121    23.3    24      24
          2011    290     24.8    125      22      143    27.8    22     24.7
          2012    293     26.1    132     23.1     132    28.3    29     34.1
          2013    354     30.8    153     26.8     156    31.9    45      50
          2014    387     31.9    202     30.8     143    30.8    42     45.2
          2015    453     34.2    212     31.3     180    33.5    61      55
          2016    413     30.9    205     29.5     165     31     43     39.4
                                 Restrictive definition
                  All     All     P1       P1      P2      P2     P3      P3
                 Count     %     Count     %     Count     %     Count    %
          1995      8     6.15      3     5.36       2      4      3     12.5
          1996     16     7.62      3      3.9       8    8.89     5     11.6
          1997     21     7.14      9     7.14       8    5.84     4     12.9
          1998     36     7.73      5     3.05      25    9.88     6     12.2
          1999     42     7.55     15     7.08      22    7.86     5     7.81
          2000     54     8.32     13     5.28      33    10.4     8      9.3
          2001     63     9.75     22     9.36      31    9.09    10     14.3
          2002     81     11.7     31     12.4      39    10.3    11     18.3
          2003     84     10.9     19     7.09      52    12.3    13     15.7
          2004    110     11.1     35     10.1      65    11.7    10     11.6
          2005    111     10.2     28     6.62      65    11.3    18      20
          2006    144     12.4     44     9.54      83    13.5    17     18.7
          2007    189     15.7     52     10.4     118    19.6    19     18.8
          2008    198     17.2     62     12.1     114    20.7    22     25.3
          2009    245      20      89     15.4     120    22.4    36     32.7
          2010    242     19.9    106     17.8     112    21.5    24      24
          2011    274     23.4    115     20.3     139     27     20     22.5
          2012    279     24.8    123     21.5     128    27.4    28     32.9
          2013    340     29.6    146     25.6     152    31.1    42     46.7
          2014    363      30     188     28.7     133    28.7    42     45.2
          2015    415     31.3    196      29      161     30     58     52.3
          2016    376     28.1    186     26.8     149     28     41     37.6

                                          52
       Appendix Table III: Dependent variable: Trial duration in months (cancer trials only)

                                                           LPM Trials           Non-LPM Trials
Phase 2 Clinical (includes Phase 2/Phase 3 trials)      1.478      1.503    3.120***   3.049***
                                                       (1.129)    (1.127)     (0.484)   (0.484)
Phase 3 Clinical                                     15.967*** 16.119***    12.922*** 12.847***
                                                       (1.887)    (1.877)     (0.932)   (0.928)
Trial site in US                                      3.902***  4.208***     3.946***  4.209***
                                                       (1.067)    (1.073)     (0.473)   (0.473)
Public firm (lower bound)                             -2.993**              -6.125***
                                                       (1.052)                (0.467)
Public firm (upper bound)                                       -4.447***              -6.703***
                                                                  (1.074)               (0.460)
Constant                                             70.280*** 70.194***    58.384*** 58.429***
                                                       (6.449)    (6.415)     (1.781)   (1.782)
N                                                       2289       2289        12423     12423
R2                                                      0.303      0.306       0.192     0.195
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
Sample includes all trials launched after 2000 with known end dates. Duration is winsorized to
remove extreme outliers. All OLS models include year fixed e↵ects, and robust standard errors.




                                                53
