NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT WORKER
DISPLACEMENT IN THE U.S.?

Daniel S. Hamermesh

Working Paper No. 2402

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2402
October 1987

What Do We Know About Worker
Displacement in the United States?

ABSTRACT

In the United States roughly one-half million workers with 3+
years on the job have become unemployed each year during the 1980s

because of plant closings. There is evidence that this represents
an increase over earlier periods of similar macroeconomic

conditions. Wage cuts within the observed range lower only
slightly the probability that a plant will close. The average loss
of earnings, due to long spells of post-displacement unemployment

and to subsequent reduced wages, is substantial. While minorities
suffer an above-average rate of displacement, the earnings losses
they experience upon displacement are not disproportionately high.

Women and older workers are no more likely than others to become
displaced, and their losses are not disproportionate; but workers
who have been on the job longer lose more.

Daniel S. Hamermesh
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
(517) 355-5238

Worker displacement---job loss among workers with significant
labor-force attachment- - -has attracted sharply increased attention

from policy-makers and recently from economists too. Proposals for
advance notification of plant closings and large increases in funds
for training displaced workers are among the responses in the U.S.

to what is perceived to be a. new unemployment problem. Who are the

displaced workers? How do they differ from the unemployed in
general? Has there been an upward trend in their number that is
distinct from the higher unemployment of the l970s and 1980s? To
what extent do wage cuts reduce the likelihood of displacement?

What is lost when a worker is displaced? I answer these questions
by examining recent data and research.

I. Counting Displaced Workers: Demographics and Trends
Substantial debate has arisen over which workers are to be
classified as displaced. From the most restrictive definition- --

trade-displaced,

long-tenure workers whose plants closed, to the

least restrictive---all laid-off workers, the estimated number of

displaced workers varies tremendously. Some of the confusion on
this issue was removed by special supplements that were added to
the January 1984 and January 1986 Current Population Surveys (CPS)
that asked workers if they had lost their jobs during the previous

five years. These Displaced Worker Surveys (DWS) produced counts
for 1979-83 and 1981-85.

The federal government (Flaim-Sehgal, 1985) has settled on the
admittedly arbitrary definition of displaced workers as those who
lost jobs that they had held for three or more years either due to

slack work, abolition of the job or closing of the plant. By this
1

Table 1

Incidence of Displacement Among Workers
Aged 20+, 1981—85 (percent)

Age

Men

Women

20+
20—24
25—54

6.2
2.0

4.4

6.9

1.2
4.7

54—64

7.2

6.6

65+

4.9

7.1

Indus try

Durable manufacturing
Nondurable manufacturing
Services
Construction

14.8
10.8
1.9
5.4

Race or Ethnicity

Men

Women

Blacks
Hispanics

7.0
7.0

6.1

5.3

Occupation
Managerial and professional
Technical, sales, etc.
Precision production, etc.
Operatives, etc.
Service workers

TOTAL

3.3
3.8
8.5

15.6
2.2

5.4

Computed from Employment and Earnings,
January 1984, and F. Horvath, "The Pulse of
Economic Change," Monthly Labor Review, June
1987, 102, 3—12.

criterion 5.1 million workers were displaced during 1979-83, with

the same number counted as displaced during 1981-85. Although this
definition has become standard, and though it provides the basis

for disaggregation in published data, it is too broad. Abolition
of one's job or slack work are subjective notions that receive
"Slack work" can be used as an

subjective responses in the CPS.

excuse to rationalize one's job loss, as can "position abolished."

Counting only workers whose plants closed leaves 2.5 million
workers displaced during 1979-83, and 2.8 million displaced during
1981-85. Even with this restrictive definition- --workers with at
least three years of job tenure whose plants closed- --over one-

half million workers per year were displaced during the l980s.

Using the official definition gives the impression that there
is distinct nonrandoinness in the incidence of displacement. Table
1 shows the ratio of the number of workers displaced during 1981-85
to total employment during 1983 in various demographic and industry

groups. Displacement is more likely among men than among women;
among blacks and Hispanics than among non-Hispanic whites; and

especially among manufacturing workers. Despite popular myth, and
despite the definitional requirement that a worker have at least
three years of job tenure, older male workers (those aged 55-64)

are no more likely to be displaced than workers aged 25-54. Other
data show displacement more likely in the Northeast and North
Central regions during this period.

The official data do not provide a good indication of whether
increased interest in displacement is the result of any change in

the magnitude of the problem. They imply that the number of
2

workers displaced in 1979 and 1980 was about the same as in 1984

and 1985. Fortunately, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID)
asks respondents whether they left jobs because the plant closed.
Defining displaced workers as those (regardless of job tenure)

whose plants closed, weighted averages of the data for each year
during 1968-81 show very clearly that there was an increase in the
rate of displacement (Hamerniesh, 1983). For example, during the

1974-75 recession the displacement rate averaged 1.6 percent per
year; during the much milder 1980-81 recession it averaged 2.5

percent. During 1971-72 and 1978-79, periods of expansion with
almost identical aggregate unemployment rates, displacement rates
in the PSID sample averaged 1.6 and 2.0 percent respectively.

These data suggest that the increased public attention to worker
displacement reflects the growth of this labor-market phenomenon.

II. Labor Costs and the Likelihood of Displacement
The increase in the incidence of displacement provokes two

questions: 1) What causes plants to close, and, in particular, why
do workers not accede to cuts in labor costs that allow the plant to

remain open? and 2) What changes in the displacement process have

produced the increase? Plant closings must be handled by a theory
that focuses on the standard items that affect labor demand-- -labor

costs, technology and product price---modified to account for the
discreteness of the plant-closing decision.
Despite the much-touted nominal wage cuts of the early 1980s,

they were really quite rare. Except during 1983, cuts were
accepted by no more than 5 percent of workers covered by major
union contracts from 1981-85 (Mitchell, 1985); and some of these
3

wage cuts were accompanied by offsetting increases in the cost of

employee benefits. Given the pressures of foreign and domestic
competition on these and other workers, the paucity of wage cuts is
perhaps surprising.

The relationship between the probability of a plant closing
and the wage can be viewed as part of an implicit contract between

the firm and its workers. The firm earns the same expected profits
given a particular distribution of stochastic product prices while
offering workers a package of higher wages and a greater likelihood

of plant closing. Workers can be compensated for a greater risk of
closing by higher wages. With a demand shock (a leftward shift in
the distribution of product prices) equilibrium is reestablished
with lower wages and a higher likelihood that the plant closes.
Using PSID data for 1977-81, Hamermesh (1986) finds a
negative relationship between the probability that a worker loses a

job in a plant closing and the worker's wage in the last year on
the job (adjusted for the worker's demographic characteristics and

human capital). Hence, those workers whose wages were higher,
other things equal, are less likely to experience plant closings.
(Similar results have been produced by Dickens-Lang (1987)

comparing CPS data for 1973 and 1981.) Demand shifts dominated
movements along the labor-demand curve in determining the incidence

of displacement. Holding demand conditions constant, though, higher
wages did increase the likelihood of displacement, with an analogue
to the constant-output labor-demand elasticity equal to - .4, well
in line with estimates of conventional demand elasticities.

4

Workers could accept wage cuts and thereby reduce the

probability of the plant closing. That they do not is the rational
outcome of their realization that the wage cut guarantees a

reduction in their welfare. Plant closings are a low-probability
event whose major cause is product-market shocks that will swamp
the beneficial impact the wage cut might have on the probability of

closing. This conclusion is corroborated by Grossman's (1986)
study of the basic steel industry, where many plants have closed
and production-worker employment decreased from 448,000 in 1979 to

216,700 in 1986. Based on an expanded time-series labor-demand
equation, wage changes during this period accounted for essentially

none of the decline in employment. Part was explicable by changes
in the terms of trade and by the slow growth of real incomes in the

U.S. Nearly half of the decline could not be attributed to either
of these causes, and must instead have resulted from other causes,
perhaps very rapid labor-saving technical change.

III. The Losses from Displacement
The size and incidence of the losses- - -

in terms of lost work

time and wages- - -have been the most thoroughly studied aspects of

job displacement. Measuring them is important both to inform
decisions about the desirability of ameliorative or preventive
policies, and for structuring policies appropriately.
One must consider the distinction between the private and

social costs of displacement. At the simplest level, which has been
accounted for in some of the studies we discuss, there is a need to

net out transfer payments when calculating private losses. At a
5

slightly less simple level, which has been recognized in a few
studies, one needs to distinguish between income streams that are

lost because specific investments become worthless unexpectedly
early when displacement occurs, and those that disappear when rents

are wiped out. The former, including the returns to firm-, and
perhaps industry- and location-specific capital, represent the

social cost of moving toward a new labor-market equilibrium. The
latter, including rents accruing to beneficiaries of discrimination

and union-induced job queues, are not a social cost. At a more
complex level the losses incurred by the individuals studied are

part of a general equilibrium response to shocks. No study has
attempted to compare the private losses of these individuals to the

labor-market impacts on other workers. Many early case studies and
one recent one (Foibre et al, 1984) did, though, examine the

impacts of plant closings on particular labor markets. Other work
has demonstrated the huge rate of both plant closings and openings
relative to net changes in employment (Leonard, 1987).
Even the estimation of the private wage and employment losses

incurred by the few individuals studied requires care. Unemployment and subsequent wages of displaced workers depend on their

search behavior. Workers whose reservation wages decline more
slowly with unemployment duration will have a lower likelihood of

reemployment and a higher post-displacement wage. This does not
mean that the unemployment is voluntary, any more than the
contracting approach discussed in Section II implies that workers

choose to have their plants close. Rather, the unemployment is the
involuntary result of an exogenous shock; but the incidence of
6

unemployment and the wage loss are endogenously determined. They
vary with workers' characteristics, whose effects on search
behavior must be modeled or somehow accounted for to discover the

incidence of the private losses attributable to the shocks. All
but two of the studies that consider this problem "solve" it by
including a selectivity correction that is not carefully modeled.
This difficulty casts some doubt on many of the studies, especially
since there is clear evidence that exit rates of displaced workers

from unemployment show negative duration dependence. This is a
particular problem in studies that use workers' post-displacement
experience without concern for their heterogeneity.

Empirical work in this area is hardly new; but it took off in
the past ten years, and exploded in the last three years with the

analysis of data sets covering broadly representative samples of

displaced workers. Twelve studies using such U.S. data are
swmnarized in Table 2. The first three are based on special surveys
of displaced workers. The underlying data are retrospective, so
that data on pre-displacement experience may contain substantial

measurement error and biases; but the data have the virtue of

focusing on a narrowly-defined study group. Five of the studies
used the 1979-84 DWS, which has the virtue of producing large
samples, but the severe drawback of providing only retrospective

data. The remaining studies use the two major U.S. longitudinal
data sets. Neither has problems with retrospective data; but the
PSID provides very small samples of displaced workers, and the NLS
does not allow one to identify workers whose plants closed.
Clearly, currently there is no set of data that is a very
7

Table 2
Survey of SUilies of Disp1acelEnt
Stuly am!

Sle

1le (1976)
Trade—displaced, 1969—70,

intervied 1972

ResuLts

Social loss = $1,200—$7,600
1972$

Neirann (1978)
Trade—displaced, 1970-73,
interv-la.ied 1975

Increased unenploynnt,
decreased post-wage with
tenure

Corson-Nlchalson (1.981)

Increased unenployint
duration with tenure;
earnings loss = $9,000

Pernunent layoff, 1976,
intervied 1978—79

1978$

thdden (1987)

tMS, 1983, displaced

Greater wage loss for wonen,

greater tenure, less education,
change industry, white

Pod ursky—Swaim (1987a)

Redixed unenploynent duration

IMS, displaced

if plant closing, if nonunion;

1979—82

negative duration dependence

Podirsky-&.zaim (198Th)
IMS, 1979—84

Addison-Portugal (1986)
FMS, 19 79-84, full—tIme

Greater wage loss with tenure,
with industry or occupation
change, lcw education
Greater wage loss with tenure,
industry or occupation change
(hit not location change);
no age effect; negative
unesploynent duration dependence

Kletzer (1987)
[)..IS, only plant

closing or position

abolisl1

Hanernesh (1987)
PSID, 1977—81, only

plant closing
Ruhu (1987)

Greater wage loss with tenure
(but sciie effect of tenure on
post-wage eept for blue—
collar nen), among men
Lost job—specific capitel

= $7,000

1980$;

wage-tenure profile urnnuying
before displacesent
No pernanent unemployment

PSID, 1971—80,

effect of job loss; no effect

job loss, others,

of age or tenure

1971—75

Blau-Kahn (1981)
NLS ycung nen,

ycung en, 1969-72

Greater wage loss among
nan, whites; lcwar reemployment
anong blacks

pernanent layoffs,
o thars

Sandell—Slapiro (1985)
NLS older men,
196Er78

Greater wage loss if over 65,
with tenure, if black

satisfactory vehicle for measuring the incidence and amount of wage
and earnings losses.

The DWS data demonstrate that the median reemployed displaced

worker suffered a real wage reduction of between 5 and 15 percent

(depending on the sample chosen). The median displaced worker who
found a job was unemployed for as much as 40 weeks (among female

workers in one sample). Estimates of the present value of average
earnings losses (in 1980$) over the remainder of the worker's
expected lifetime range from slightly more than $1,500 to over

$10,000. All of these are gross estimates for displaced workers
only, unadjusted for the effects of workers' search behavior and
for the possible impacts of displacement on other workers.

Despite difficulties with data and lack of proper concern with
issues of job search, we can draw some conclusions about the
correlates of the losses from this large body of empirical research.

Most clearly and most relevant for policy, workers who had greater
tenure on the job from which they were displaced suffered the

greatest losses of subsequent wages and time employed. Patterns of
wage-tenure relationships before plant closings (Hamermesh, 1987)
suggest this finding is not an artifact produced by search

behavior. Whether it reflects the loss of firm-specific capital or
the destruction of successful job matches is not clear; but longtenure workers are made especially worse off by displacement.
Though the evidence is less strong, because of possible

contamination by search behavior, workers who change occupation or
industry suffer greater losses than otherwise identical workers.

8

All the studies that consider the issue show that less
educated workers spend more time unemployed and suffer dispropor-

tionate wage losses. Here the problem of search behavior severely
confounds the results, for access and ability to process labor-

market information is probably related to education level. Bluecollar workers also suffer larger-than-average losses. Various
studies also stress correlations between earnings loss and such
demographic characteristics as age, sex and race; but for each such

study another finds the opposite correlation. Based on all the
available studies there is no basis for concluding that particular
groups, such as women or minorities, suffer especially large losses
from being displaced (though minorities are more likely to be
displaced).

A particularly careful study (Ruhm, 1987) demonstrates that
there is no long-term employment effect of displacement once one

accounts for worker heterogeneity. No similar study has been done
on long-term wage effects; but the large wage gains generally made
by labor-force reentrants (Mincer-Ofek, 1982) suggest that much of

the wage loss may not be permanent either. These results imply
that projecting streams of wage and/or employment losses will lead
to overestimates of the present value of the private loss.

IV. Conclusion
There is always substantial job displacement in a dynamic
developed economy; but displacement has shown a secular increase in

the U.S. that is independent of the business cycle. Wage cuts have
only small impacts in reducing the likelihood of displacement. The
9

social costs of displacement are unknown, but that there are large

private costs is well demonstrated. These costs are especially
large to workers with greater job tenure, but they are mostly not

long-term. There is no evidence that they are perfectly offset by
prior compensating wage differentials. That the adjustments that
engender them produce a net gain to society argues in favor of
offsetting labor-market policy if we can be fairly sure that the
disincentives produced are not great.

10

REFERENCES

Addison, J. and Portugal, P., "Job Displacement, the Age-Earnings
Profile, and Relative Earnings Losses," mimeo., University of
South Carolina, 1986.
Bale, N., "Estimates of Trade-Displacement Costs for U.S. Workers,"
Journal of International Economics, 1976, 6, 245-250.
Blau, F. and Kahn, L., "Causes and Consequences of Layoffs,"
Economic Inquiry, April 1981, 19, 270-296.
Corson, W. and Nicholson, W., "Trade Adjustment Assistance for
Workers," Research in Labor Economics, 1981, 4, 417-469.

Dickens, W. and Lang, K., "Where Have All the Good Jobs Gone?" in
K. Lang and J. Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure
of Labor Markets, Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Flaim, P. and Sehgal, E., "Displaced Workers of 1979-1983: How Well
Have They Fared?" Bureau of Labor Statistics, Bulletin No.
2240, 1985.

Poibre, N., Leighton, J. and Roderick, N., "Plant Closings and their
Regulation in Maine," Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
January 1984, .j, 185-196.

Grossman, G., "Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of the U.S.
Steel Industry," Journal of International Economics, 1986,
20, 201-223.
Hamermesh, D., "The Costs of Worker Displacement," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, February 1987, 102, 51-76.

"The Human Capital Losses of Displaced Workers,"
,
University of Wisconsin, Institute for Research on Poverty,
Discussion Paper No. 753-84, July 1984.

"Plant Closings, Labor Demand and the Value of the
,
Firm," National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper
No. 1839, February 1986.
Kletzer, L. G., "Job Tenure and Earnings After Permanent Job Loss,"
mimeo., Amherst College, 1987.

Leonard, J., "In the Wrong Place at the Wrong Time," in K. Lang and
J. Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor
Markets, Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Nadden, J. F., "Gender Differences in the Cost of Displacement,"
American Economic Review, May 1987, fl, 246-251.
11

Mincer, J. and Ofek, H., "Interrupted Work Careers: Depreciation
and Restoration of Human Capital," Journal of Human
Resources, Winter 1982, 17 3-24.
Mitchell, D., "Shifting Norms in Wage Determination," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity, 1985, 575-599.
Neumann, G., "The Labor Market Adjustments of Trade Displaced
Workers," Research in Labor Economics, 1978, 2, 353-381.
Podgursky, N. and Swaim, P., "The Duration of Joblessness Following
Displacement," Industrial Relations, in press, 1987a.

"Job Displacement and Earnings Loss:
and
Evidence from the Displace Worker Survey," Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, in press, 1987b.
,

Ruhm, C., "The Extent and Persistence of Unemployment Following
Permanent Quits and Layoffs," mimeo., Boston University, 1987.
Sandell, S. and Shapiro, D., "Age Discrimination in Wages and
Displaced Older Men," Southern Economic Journal, July 1985,

, 90-102.

12

