NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE INFORMATION PHARMS RACE AND COMPETITIVE DYNAMICS OF PRECISION MEDICINE:
INSIGHTS FROM GAME THEORY
Ernst R. Berndt
Mark R. Trusheim
Working Paper 24020
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24020

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank participants in the September 13-14, 2017 National Bureau of Economic Research
Conference on Economic Dimensions of Personalized and Precision Medicine in Santa Monica,
California. This research was not sponsored. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Ernst R. Berndt and Mark R. Trusheim. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

The Information Pharms Race and Competitive Dynamics of Precision Medicine: Insights
from Game Theory
Ernst R. Berndt and Mark R. Trusheim
NBER Working Paper No. 24020
November 2017
JEL No. I11,L13,L65
ABSTRACT
Precision medicines inherently fragment treatment populations, generating small-population
markets, creating high-priced "niche busters" rather than broadly prescribed "blockbusters". It is
plausible to expect that small markets will attract limited entry in which a small number of
interdependent differentiated product oligopolists will compete, each possessing market power.
Multiple precision medicine market situations now resemble game theory constructs such as the
prisoners' dilemma and Bertrand competition. The examples often involve drug developer
choices created by setting the cut-off value for the companion diagnostics to define the precision
medicine market niches and their payoffs. Precision medicine game situations may also involve
payers and patients who attempt to change the game to their advantage or whose induced
behaviors alter the payoffs for the developers. The variety of games may predictably array
themselves across the lifecycle of each precision medicine indication niche and so may become
linked into a sequentially evolving meta-game. We hypothesize that certain precision medicine
areas such as inflammatory diseases are becoming complex simultaneous multi-games in which
distinct precision medicine niches compete. Those players that learn the most rapidly and apply
those learnings the most asymmetrically will be advantaged in this ongoing information pharms
race.

Ernst R. Berndt
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-518
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
eberndt@mit.edu
Mark R. Trusheim
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Alfred P. Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-527
Cambridge, MA 02142
mtrusheim@cobioconsulting.com

Introduction to Precision Medicines
Over the last decade advances in our understanding of the human genome and biology
more generally have facilitated the development and commercialization of therapies that,
when combined with some form of biomarker diagnostic, are able to identify subpopulations of
patients that are likely to respond differentially to the therapy – either positively or negatively.
This combination of biomarker and therapy has been given a variety of names – e.g.,
personalized medicine, precision medicine, tailored medicine, and stratified medicine.1,2,6 The
majority of these medicines identify multi-person subpopulations. Truly personalized
medicines extract and harvest human tissues, expose them to external treatment, and then
infuse or inject them back into the patient. The FDA recently approved a new gene therapy,
CTL019 (tisagenlecleucel) CAR-T cell therapy developed by Novartis for B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) - a truly personalized medicine.3 Prior to that, the only FDA
approved personalized medicines were Provenge from Dendreon (recently again independent)4
and a variety of cord blood transplant products.5
Regardless of what one calls it, the combination of a therapy and a companion
diagnostic (CDx) relies critically on the ability ex ante to distinguish treatment responders from
non-responders. The precision medicine opportunity arises because many drugs prove
efficacious for only some who take them. For example, clinical remission rates for tumor
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) inhibitors in auto-immune diseases such as Crohn’s disease and
ulcerative colitis are approximately 25-40%.7 For many oncology therapeutics perhaps only 2030% respond and have their life expectancy (months of overall survival) increased.8

Like drugs, however, no diagnostic is perfect. The performance of a diagnostic is
quantified by metrics such as sensitivity (the portion of true positives that are diagnosed as
such) and specificity (the portion of true negatives that receive a negative diagnostic result). For
example, the HER2 test used to qualify breast cancer patients for receiving trastuzumab
(Herceptin) was shown to be approximately 89% sensitive and only 83% specific. The reported
performance also indicated that a patient testing positive had a 39% (2 out of 5) chance of
responding to trastuzumab-the positive predictive value of the companion diagnostic.9,10
Precision Medicine Often Results In Oligopolies
Companion diagnostics inherently reduce the size of the potentially treated population
by identifying sub-populations. In practice, precision medicine indications often possess
relatively small numbers of patients. For scientific feasibility reasons, already small indications
such as cancer have seen the most precision medicine products and so become even more
fragmented.11,12 This combination of small patient populations and high mortality conditions
has resulted in precision medicines becoming high priced “niche busters” rather than broadly
prescribed “block busters” such as blood pressure medicines.
One might expect small markets to attract few entrants. In fact, this is largely the case.
A study of oncology products (both approved and in development) showed that the number of
competitors with products for precision medicine drug targets is generally under five, with one
or two exceptions such as HER2 and EGFR targeted therapies.13 Precision medicines to date
generally involve a small number of interdependent differentiated product oligopolists, each
having some market power. This brings us to game theory.

Game Theory Useful in Oligopolistic Situations
In markets with a small number of firms producing slightly differentiated products, one
firm’s pricing, output and quality decisions affect all other firms’ similar decisions, and vice
versa. In a cooperative game, players (firms) can negotiate binding contracts that allow them
to plan joint strategies. In many countries, cooperative games are prohibited by law, and
enforced by anti-trust or anti-combines authorities. We will not discuss such games here.
Rather, we will focus on non-cooperative games in which the negotiation and enforcement of
binding contracts are not possible, yet players can anticipate, observe and react to others’
behaviors.
An example non-cooperative game is a situation in which two competing firms take each
other’s likely behavior into account when independently setting prices, or making R&D
decisions. A strategy is a rule or plan of action for playing the game to maximize the payoff. If
firms solely seek profits, an optimal strategy for a player is the one that maximizes their
expected profit (or net present value). In addition to assuming profit maximization as a firm’s
only objective, game theorists typically assume players are rational. In game theory this means
that firms think through the consequences of their actions, with each one asking, “Since our
competitors are rational and act to maximize their own expected profits, what will they do and
how should we take their likely behavior into account when making our decisions?”14
Plan of Paper
Game theory has useful insights for traditional drug development in cases where
emerging drug classes contain few products. Here we introduce the additional complications

that arise when firms choose to use a companion diagnostic to stratify patients into subpopulations. In this paper, we will focus on markets for precision medicines that frequently
include game theory situations. We are not game theorists. Our goal here is to provide
examples of precision medicine market developments that illustrate a variety of classic games
and variations, beginning with the iconic prisoners’ dilemma game that occurs in the situation
of selecting a companion diagnostic cut-off value. But before we begin discussing the games we
briefly describe the key features of precision medicine that underpin the rules and payoffs of
the games.
Games People Play When Precision Medicine Is Not Precisely Accurate
Companion diagnostics have been used in oncology since at least the 1990s when
trastuzumab (Herceptin) was launched with a companion diagnostic for HER2 overexpression.15 Since then, many stratified medicines have been introduced not only into
oncology but also into fields such as infectious disease (sofosbuvir; Sovaldi and HCV genotypes
1-4), respiratory disease (omalizumab; Xolair and IgE levels for both patient selection and
dosing), and neurodegenerative disease (natalizumab; Tysabri) and John Cunningham Virus
([JCV] testing).11,15
A firm may choose to develop a companion diagnostic, or not. But when it does, by
setting the companion diagnostic cut-off value, developers link science, the clinic and the
marketplace to create a precision medicine. Selecting the cut-off value connects scientific
understanding of both therapeutic response and biomarker performance to change the

observed efficacy in the selected clinical trial population. This in turn has implications for
pricing, especially when price is linked to patient benefit as in “value pricing” regimes.

Responders
1/3 of Population
12 months added OS
Non-Responders
2/3 of Population
0 months added OS

Cut-off Cut-off
B
C

# of Patients

Cut-Off
A

Companion Diagnostic Score

RCT Efficacy
(Months OS)

4.0

6.7

10.3

Sensitivity

100%

95%

64%

Specificity

0%

64%

95%

33%

56%

86%

100,000

56,000

24,000

PPV (Positive Predictive Value)
Patients Testing Positive

RCT: Randomized Controlled Trial
OS: Overall Survival

Figure 1: Companion Diagnostics Affect Observed Efficacy. In this hypothetical case of an indication
with 100,000 total patients, an imperfect companion diagnostic generally scores responders (blue)
higher than non-responders (yellow) but with overlapping distributions. Cut-off A selects (those to the
right of the cut-off) all patients. This is equivalent to an all-comers population with no diagnostic. Cutoff B selects nearly all patients who will respond (95% sensitivity) and raises the observed efficacy over
50% to 6.7 months by excluding non-responders. Cut-off C excludes nearly all non-responders (95%
specificity) which raises the observed efficacy to 10.3 months survival. See text for computational
details.

Figure 1 illustrates the mechanics of how companion diagnostics achieve the biomarker
science to clinical efficacy linkage. In the chart, the two curves represent all the patients with
the disease who might be treated with the drug. The larger yellow curve to the left represents
the patients who will not respond to the therapeutic. The smaller blue curve to the right

represents those patients who will respond. The companion diagnostic test score along the xaxis imperfectly separates the two patient populations with the vertical dashed lines indicating
three different cut-off values for the test. Those to the right of the dashed cut-off line will be
selected for treatment and those to the left will not.
The population overlap from the imperfect biomarker leads to patients with false
positive and false negative test results. False positives are those patients represented by the
portion of the yellow curve to right of the vertical cut-off line. False negative patients are those
patients represented by the portion of the blue curve to the left of the cut-off.
To keep the mathematics simple, we assume that 33% of the 100,000 patients with this
condition respond to treatment and that each responder gains 12 months overall survival
compared to standard of care, and that the remaining patients receive zero incremental
benefit. We also assume each distribution is standard normal and that the means are
separated by two standard deviations. At cut-off A the clinical trial enrolls all patients to obtain
an average clinical benefit of 4 months overall survival - the weighted average of the 1/3 of
patients who respond with the 2/3 of patients who do not. Cut-off A has 100% sensitivity (it
selects all patients who might respond), and has 0% specificity (it excludes none who will not
benefit). Another diagnostic metric, Positive Predictive Value (PPV) states the fraction of
patients testing positive on the companion diagnostic (CDx+) that actually do respond. More
technically, PPV measures the number of true positives as a portion of all those who test
positive. The all-comers PPV for cut-off A is 33% – the responder prevalence rate.

Using cut-off B selects nearly all who respond (95% sensitivity, ~31,500 of 33,000) but also
includes many who do not. In our assumptions, cut-off B only yields 64% specificity so that
24,500 of 67,000 non-responders test positive (fall to the right of the cut-off B). For an
oncology companion diagnostic this is quite superior performance. One of the more powerful
companion diagnostics known, the KRAS test for detecting likely responders and nonresponders to cetuximab (Erbitux) in colorectal cancer, has an estimated 75% sensitivity and
35% specificity.16 By enriching for responders, using the companion diagnostic with cut-off B
will elevate the observed efficacy in the clinical trial to 6.7 months incremental overall survival
(31,500 with 12 months additional survival and 24,500 with 0 months additional benefit). This
overall survival improvement is about 70% longer than if no companion diagnostic was used
(2.7 months longer than 4.0 months from using cut-off A). 56% of the patients testing positive
(CDx+) from using cut-off B would be expected to respond-the positive predictive value. This is
23 percentage points greater than the 33% of treated patients responding in an unenriched
population. Choosing different cut-off values yields apparently different efficacy outcomes for
the same molecule.
Using cut-off C excludes nearly all who do not respond (95% specificity, ~63,500 of
67,000). This high cut-off also excludes some patients who would benefit from treatment as

measured by a lower 64% sensitivity (only ~21,000 of the 33,000 potential responders test
positive and are eligible for treatment). A clinical trial using cut-off C would be expected to
show a mean treatment survival benefit of 10.3 months (21,000 with 12 months additional
survival and 3,500 with 0 months additional benefit). This is more than 2.5 times greater than
the 4.0 months additional survival expected from a clinical trial not using a companion

diagnostic (cut-off A). Also, the cut-off C reported overall survival benefit likely will be 54%
longer (3.6 months longer than 6.7 months) than that for a trial using cut-off B. The power of
the high cut-off C is demonstrated by the resulting high PPV, 86% of patients testing positive
(20,640 of 24,000) would be expected to respond. This is 53 percentage points higher than the
33% response rate expected from cut-off A.
Note that the innate drug performance is unchanged in these three scenarios. The
differences are driven by the imperfect biomarker creating choices regarding whether to use it
at all and if it is employed, what cut-off to choose. This scientific choice underpins the rules of
the game. Assuming that pricing is at least somewhat proportional to efficacy, the companion
diagnostic also sets up the pay-offs of the game.
Balanced clinical development impact
A precision medicine approach holds the potential for smaller, faster and less expensive
clinical development due to the higher anticipated therapeutic effect owing to companion
diagnostic use. However, the approach also requires the development of the diagnostic and its
associated risk of failure, more complex patient recruitment and possibly no savings in trial size
due to the potential need to examine negative test result patients and the continuing need to
develop an acceptably large patient safety database. For this discussion we assume that these
two effects exactly off set each other and so do not affect the games.
The Diagnostic Cut-Off Prisoners’ Dilemma Part 1
The first game-like strategic decision precision medicine developers face is whether to
use a companion diagnostic. Figure 2 illustrates the base case, iso-payoff game facing

developers built on the Figure 1 case facts above. Assuming the companion diagnostic
performance and cut-offs as before plus a price determined by a recent meta-analysis of
oncology ICERs (Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratios) of $138,000 per incremental year of
overall survival, a developer could choose to have their drug perform as Drug A, Drug B or Drug
C in Figure 2.17 This further assumes that the drug developer faces a small number of other
firms advancing drugs that engage the same molecular target, and possess essentially identical
other characteristics such as adverse event and toxicity profile, dosing form, pharmacokinetics,
pharmacodynamics, manufacturing costs and the like.
In practice, several precision medicines provide examples of this game theoretic
dilemma. The exciting immuno-oncology therapies that target the PD1-PDL1 receptor-ligand
complex are one such example. On average 10-20% of patients respond with many of those
with dramatic remission that endures for over a year. The 10-40% of patients who respond to
pembrolizumab (Keytruda, Merck & Co.) receive dramatically overall survival increases
compared to standard of care (6-10 months median overall survival in non-small cell breast
cancer compared to docetaxol with 15% higher stable long-term survival-65% compared to
50%).18 Merck & Co. chose to employ a PD-L1 companion diagnostic assay that was a de
minimus fraction of the therapeutic cost. A competing firm Bristol Myers-Squibb developed
nivolumab (Opdivo) without a companion diagnostic.19 Initially, the BMS product outperformed
the Merck & Co. product in the marketplace, in part due to easier use from not needing a test.20
However, nivolumab subsequently failed a trial in NSCLC (Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer) whereas
the Merck & Co. product succeeded in a similar trial partly because the PD-L1 companion

diagnostic improved the observed efficacy by enriching the trial with those more likely to
respond to pembrolizumab.22

Responders
1/3 of Population
12 months added OS
Non-Responders
2/3 of Population
0 months added OS

Drug B Drug C

# of Patients

Drug A

Companion Diagnostic Score

RCT Efficacy
(Months OS)

4.0

6.7

10.3

Price (ICER Based)

$46,000

$77,000

$119,000

Benefiting Patients

7,250

7,250

7,250

21,750

13,000

8,400

$1B

$1B

$1B

Treated Patients
Payer Cost

RCT: Randomized Controlled Trial
OS: Overall Survival
ICER: Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio

Figure 2: Companion Diagnostics Cut-Off Game Part 1. Continuing the Figure 1 hypothetical case of an
indication with 100,000 total patients with an imperfect companion diagnostic, here we illustrate the
potential drug prices based on a recent $138,000 ICER oncology benchmark at the three Figure 1
illustrative companion diagnostic cut-offs. To reach $1B of sales the no cut-off choice (Drug A) must
treat 21,750 patients (21.75% market share in this 100,000 patient indication). Drug B and Drug C that
each use a companion diagnostic must treat fewer total patients to achieve the same revenue and the
same number of benefiting (responding) patients.

Other PD1-PDL1 immuno-oncology product developers have also faced the choice of
whether to use a companion diagnostic test for their products such as atezolizumab (Tecentriq,
Roche), avelumab (Bavencio, Pfizer, Merck KGaA), and durvalumab (Imfinzi, AstraZeneca). The

firms developing atezolizumab and durvalumab both chose to use a PDL1 companion diagnostic
but the avelumab developers did not.23 Those that chose to use a companion diagnostic not
only chose different cut-off values but also chose to use distinct diagnostic tests with different
performance characteristics. These choices have made it difficult to compare the clinical trial
evidence among the products. Simultaneous development of the products hampered the
ability to use consistent assays and so do not present a transparent ‘game’ to the drug
developers. But the behavior also demonstrates that one strategy is to change the game
through changing the test, not simply changing the cut-off value selection of a common test.
Note that like the classic prisoners’ dilemma, each player would prefer a different
outcome but each must choose a strategy to do the best they can, given the behaviors of the
others. Thus the equilibrium iso-payoffs shown in Figure 2 suggest a strategy in which higher
cut-offs might be preferred by each player.
Anticipate a sequential game
Seeing that cetuximab (Erbitux) had entered the market with a poor companion
diagnostic (EGFR overexpression) that performed not much better than no CDx at all, the
developers of panitumumab chose to use KRAS wild type status as to indicate non-response.24
This is similar to selecting the Drug C cut-off in Figure 2. This provided the panitumumab
developers a short-term advantage until the developers of cetuximab could also show that their
drug performed similarly with the KRAS marker. Due to relatively sticky prices, the cetuximab
developers suffered revenue declines as patients were excluded but the price could not be
raised to reflect the greater efficacy in the enriched patient sub-population.25 Over time,

however, cetuximab garnered increased revenues as more patients and physicians preferred
cetuximab over panitumumab for other reasons (in the real world the assumption of identical
other drug properties often does not hold) and annual price increases occurred for both drugs.
This example illustrates that developers must not only consider current players and
diagnostics but also anticipate future players, new diagnostics and their impact on the precision
medicine game.
Induced behavioral effects
Additional potential benefits not shown in Figure 2 may result from potential behavior
changes induced by a precision medicine entering a market already served by other products.
The perturbation from the new entrant will cause dynamic movements towards a new
equilibrium (Figure 3). Although the first step to the new equilibrium reduces patient
populations because of diagnostic exclusion, enhanced efficacy/safety increases market share
as the therapy becomes the preferred treatment (Figure 3 from point A to point B to point C). If
the companion diagnostic inspires greater confidence that the therapeutic is the best course for
the patient, precision medicines may also benefit from improved patient adherence (C to D).
Further market size and market share expansion occurs as underserved patients enter the
market encouraged by the greater certainty of outcome should they qualify (D to E). This
movement may be less pronounced in high mortality diseases such as oncology but more so for
morbid conditions such as arthritis, HIV, Crohn’s disease or psoriasis. Other factors may also
encourage this shift. By providing higher, but not complete, assurance that the therapy will
specifically work for them, the test shifts an individual patient’s benefit odds and so helps
overcome any barriers faced, from fear to inconvenience. A companion diagnostic may also

encourage physicians to consider and recommend the therapy by prospectively indicating likely
response. Even if the therapy is the only available treatment, a CDx might encourage providers
and patients to initiate care.

Market Size (units)

A

Selected by
Companion
Diagnostic

Classic Dx

D
B

F

Treatment
Order Effect

E

New Patients
Enter

Higher Treatment
Adherence

C
Increase Share
As Preferred
Treatment

Market Share (%)
Figure 3: Precision Medicine Induced Behavior Increases the Prisoners Dilemma Payoff for Greater
Companion Diagnostic Cut-Off Value. The observed therapeutic efficacy increase from selecting a
higher cut-off value (Figure 2, Drug C), can induce multiple behaviors that expand the number of treated
patients. After the initial unit volume drop from the diagnostic selection process (A to B), the higher
efficacy of the precision medicine usually induces a greater share of the targeted patients than the
empirical drug would receive (B to C). Patients who believe this is the best drug for them may adhere
more closely and longer to the drug treatment (C to D). Physicians encouraged by the better clinical
performance may suggest more aggressive treatment for patients (D to E). Finally, the product with the
highest cut-off and efficacy may preferentially deplete the responding patients remaining for other
products in its class. This will extend the observed performance gap and increase both share and
market size. Multiplied by the higher ICER justifiable price, the revenue for the precision medicine can
increase dramatically.

Relaxing the Iso-Payoff Restriction
The initial description in Figure 2 held the pay-offs as measured by payer cost and
product sales constant for each cut-off selection. In this section, using just the increased
market share induced behavior effect ( Figure 3 B to C), we relax the iso-payoff assumption. In
Figure 4, each strategy leads to a different market share in the selected population. Drug A is
hypothesized to now decline to 10% market share from 20% in the original Figure 2 case
resulting in it treating 10,000 patients (10% of 100,000) and costing $0.5B ($46,000 price times
10,000 patients rounded to the nearest $0.1B). Drug B is hypothesized to achieve 30% market
share in its selected population of 56,000 test positive patients. Drug B therefore treats 16,800
patients (30% * 56,000) and generates revenues of, or costs payers depending on one’s
perspective, $1.3B (16,800 patients times $77,000 again rounded to nearest $0.1B). Drug C is
hypothesized to achieve 55% market share in its selected population, 25 percentage points
above the 30% market share hypothesized for Drug B. We calculate this hypothesized market
share building upon the hypothesized Drug B 20% market share advantage (30% vs. 10%) over
Drug A combined with the Drug B 2.7 months overall survival advantage (6.7 vs. 4.0 months)
over Drug A. Drug C achieves a 3.6 month overall survival advantage (10.3 vs. 6.7 months) over
Drug B. Extrapolating the same overall survival advantage to market share ratio yields a 26%
additional Drug C market share which we round to 55%. (20% Drug B over Drug A market share
increase *3.6/2.7=26%). With a 55% market share Drug C then generates $1.6B in revenue (or
payer cost depending on one’s perspective) by treating 13,200 patients (55% * 24,000 CDx+
patients) at a price per patient of $119,000.

Figure 4 illustrates the resulting prisoners’ dilemma for both the firms and society. For
illustrative purposes we assume that an individual firm wishes to maximize its firm profits by
maximizing revenues. The high Drug C cut-off and corresponding pay-off maximizes the
individual firm’s revenues, and so profits, if it is the only firm to so choose. If all firms move to
this high cut-off however, the overall collection of firms (assuming that 100% of patients would
then receive treatment) will only receive $2.9B in revenue with many potential responding
patients not qualifying for treatment (those responders to the left of the Drug C cut-off in
Figure 4).
Society would most benefit by treating the most responders while minimizing the
treatment of non-responders. Given the imperfect companion diagnostic, this approximately
corresponds to the Drug B cut-off which selects 95% of responders. The collection of firms also
would be better off if the middle cut-off were selected. The Drug B cut-off would result in total
market revenues (if 100% of those 56,000 testing positive were treated) of $4.4B with 31,500 of
33,000 (95%) potential responders benefiting. The middle cut-off also avoids potential adverse
events and non-drug treatment costs for the 42,500 non-responders who would test negative
and avoid ineffective treatment.

Responders
1/3 of Population
12 months added OS
Non-Responders
2/3 of Population
0 months added OS

Drug B Drug C

# of Patients

Drug A

Companion Diagnostic Score

RCT Efficacy
(Months OS)

4.0

6.7

10.3

Price (ICER Based)

$46,000

$77,000

$119,000

Patients Testing Positive

100,000

56,000

24,000

Market Share in Selected

10%

30%

55%

Patients Treated

10,000

16,800

13,200

Product Revenue (Payer Cost)

$0.5B

$1.3B

$1.6B

Total (100%) Market

$4.6B

$4.4B

$2.9B

ICER: Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio
OS: Overall Survival

Figure 4: Companion Diagnostics Cut-Off Game Part 2: Varying Financial Pay-offs based on cut-off
selection. Continuing the Figure 1 hypothetical case of an indication with 100,000 total patients with an
imperfect companion diagnostic, here we illustrate the potential drug revenue (payer cost) pay-offs
based on varying the market share in the selected population due to the induced behavior effect of
perceived better efficacy (Figure 3 B to C). Market shares in each selected population are hypothesized
as 10% for Drug A, 30% for Drug B and 55% for Drug C. These shares of the respective test positive
patient pools times the ICER based price create expected payer costs (developer revenue) that increases
with the higher cut-off values. This creates a firm and social prisoners’ dilemma because the high cut-off
excludes patients who might benefit and with ICER based pricing if 100% of eligible patients were
treated, cut-off B would generate both the most patient benefit and the most firm revenues ($4.4B
revenue for 31,500 benefiting patients versus $2.9B revenue and 20,700 benefiting patients for 100%
market share at the highest cut-off)

Loser losses increased by responder depletion
There might be additional market growth beyond that from the induced behavioral
effects in the previous section (B to E in Figure 3). In clinical practice, Firm A might find it
difficult to market and compete versus Firm B due to the difference in expected patient overall
survival from the use of the companion diagnostic. From a public health perspective, an
ordered market with selection bias in which more patients choose Drug B with the companion
diagnostic could make the realized benefits from Drug A even lower. Since both work on the
same biological target, initial use of Drug B may result in a residual Drug A patient subpopulation that is responder depleted. Thus rather than being used in an all-comers population
with 33% responders, Drug A may be relegated to treating a residual all-comers population with
lower proportion of responders if Drug B achieves higher levels of market share among its
companion diagnostic positive population.
If such therapeutic ordering occurs, real-world payer studies may therefore report Drug
A efficacy substantially below the already lower average benefit observed in Drug A clinical
trials whereas Drug B real-world studies would align with its original clinical trial observation.

Responders
1/3 of Population
12 months added OS
Non-Responders
2/3 of Population
0 months added OS

Drug B Drug C

# of Patients

Drug A

Companion Diagnostic Score

RCT Efficacy
(Months OS)

0.4
(4.0 prior)

4.0
(6.7 prior)

10.3

Price (ICER Based)

$46,000

$77,000

$119,000

Benefiting Patients

1,500

10,800

20,700

44,000

32,000

24,000

$2B

$2.4B

$2.9B

Treated Patients
Payer Cost

ICER: Incremental Cost Effectiveness Ratio
OS: Overall Survival

Figure 5 Responder Depletion Effect Increases Incentive to Select Higher Cut-off. If patients are first
treated with Drug C, the pool of patients remaining for Drug B that test positive have fewer responders.
The population that remains is not similar to the clinical trial but to the population between the Drug B
and Drug C cut-offs. In the real world this step therapy depletion effect would be expected to reduce
the observed overall survival benefit for Drug B to 4.0 months from 6.7 previously and for Drug A to
lower the OS survival benefit to less than half a month from the clinical trial result of 4 months.

Game Theory Suggested Strategy
The induced behavior phenomena seen in Figure 3 along with the responder depletion
effect just discussed transform a simple one period game theoretic dilemma into a sequential
one. Facing such a game, what strategy should a rational, game theory oligopolist adopt? While
not game theorist specialists, we suggest that the optimal strategy is not clear. If one believes
in efficacy proportional pricing (aka “value pricing”), we suggest that the optimal initial strategy

may be to select a high biomarker cut-off to set an initial high price and protect against
subsequent players selecting an even higher cut-off that would suggest that their product could
make a superiority claim. Trastuzumab (Herceptin) effectively pursued this strategy with an
initially high over-expression cut-off of 3+ on the HER2 test. Over time, this cut-off has been
lowered, at least unofficially, to include more potential responding patients. Cetuximab
(Erbitux) is an example where not pursuing this strategy had negative results, at least for a
period.16 Thus empirical support exists for the proposed initial high cut-off strategy.
This strategy is defeated, however, if one or more of the above assumptions do not
hold. The immuno-oncology checkpoint inhibitors provide an example demonstrating the realworld risk. Bristol-Myers Squibb chose cut-off A (no PDL1 companion diagnostic) for nivolumab
(Opdivo) while Merck & Co. instead chose to use a companion diagnostic for its highly similar
pembrolizumab (Keytruda). Companion diagnostics for checkpoint inhibitors are more
cumbersome than other precision medicine genetic tests. Oncologists have preferred the ease
and speed of choosing nivolumab over testing and waiting for pembrolizumab as evidenced by
Bristol-Myers Squibb’s product’s sales being double that of the Merck & Co product. In the
sequential game where Merck & Co. has now received positive non-small cell cancer first line
treatment clinical trial results while Bristo-Myers Squibb has not, the dynamic may now be
changing. But in the initial game theoretic round, not using precision medicine proved the
superior choice for the drug developer. It is not clear this resulted in a patient optimal
treatment outcome.

Variations of the Precision Medicine Prisoners’ Dilemma
Precision medicine science creates additional variants of the prisoners’ dilemma game
beyond that created by companion diagnostic enrichment. Here we describe two: precision
medicine treatment dosing rules, and stopping criteria.
The Dosing Game
The FDA lists many drugs that have pharmacogenomic biomarkers (genetic tests) to
indicate metabolism issues that can change the effective dose for either efficacy enhancement
or adverse event avoidance. These biomarkers mostly involve liver enzyme mutations (CYP
gene family and others).26 For example, mutations in the CYP2D6 gene in the cytochrome P450
family have been associated with metabolism differences for drugs as varied as the tricyclic
antidepressants and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) and cardiovascular drugs
such as beta blockers and antiarrhythmics.27 Mutations in another member of the gene family,
CYP2C9, affect the metabolism of proton pump inhibitors, benzodiazepines, barbiturates and
also the tricyclic antidepressants. Some mutations accelerate drug metabolism requiring
increased dosing strength to maintain therapeutic levels in the blood. Other mutations slow
drug metabolism requiring lower dosing strength to avoid effectively over-dosing patients. If
their dose strengths were adjusted patients would see their beneficial responses rise and
adverse events fall. The effect on drug revenues is more ambiguous because in some instances,
assuming revenues are proportional to dosing strength, drug consumption would be increased,
and so sales. In other instances, drug consumption would be lowered with drug revenues
falling accordingly. In addition, as with companion diagnostics, improved dosing may induce

second order behaviors. In this case, patient adherence may increase with concomitant
increases in total drug usage and sales over time.
Developers thus face a variation of the prisoners’ dilemma. Should they invest in
elucidating the gene mutation effects and promoting the dosing changes in the hopes of
improving patient care, gaining competitive advantage and increasing sales? Will competitors
match their investments and so eliminate any preferential revenue payoff but raise costs for
all? Or should the developer save the genetic discovery investment and hope others do as
well? This game has an added feature: In clinical practice to date, physicians rarely test for
these genetic mutations or use the test results to adjust their prescribed dosing. Unless
physician practices change, the dosing game remains substantially moot. Or put another way,
the genetic investment costs far outweigh the potential increased payoff-making the clearly
dominant strategy to do nothing.
The Stopping Game
Precision medicine and diagnostic tests can indicate not just when a patient should
begin a treatment but also when a patient would be best off to terminate a treatment. At least
two sub-varieties of the stopping game have occurred. One suggests via a diagnostic that a
therapy is not providing the expected benefit and so should be stopped. An example is the
serum M test for gauging the effectiveness of bortezomib (Velcade) from Johnson & Johnson’s
Janssen for multiple myeloma after six weeks of treatment.28
The second stopping test sub-variety indicates when it is appropriate to halt a chronic
therapy, at least for a time. Another, new therapy for multiple myeloma from Johnson &

Johnson’s Janssen called daratumumab (Darzalex)/clonoSEQ is proving so effective that a new
term is emerging, ‘minimal residual disease’, to indicate such dramatic remission that no cancer
cells or their detritus can be detected.29 So called ‘liquid biopsies’ using next generation RNA
and DNA sequencing tools on blood samples are being used to detect unique cancer cell
signatures. When no signature is detected after general remission, the patient is declared to
harbor minimal residual disease. Current studies are now ongoing to determine if chronic
adjuvant therapeutic treatment can also be halted and then resumed only as necessary as
indicated by a liquid biopsy conducted as a routine monitoring test.
Deciding whether to sponsor the trials for such a stopping rule creates a game theoretic
dilemma for the drug company. Under a successful trial, drug revenues from chronic treatment
decrease but could be offset by increases from patients preferring the treatment due to the
high implied efficacy making stopping a possibility. Patients may also prefer the treatment
owing to the possible savings and avoided adverse event risk from stopping. Like the
companion diagnostic enrichment game, the payoffs may change as drug competitors facing
the same choice do or do not also seek stopping rule tests. 1
Prisoner’s Dilemma Part 3: Including The Payer
The classic prisoners’ dilemma focuses on the prisoner payoffs but usually ignores the
jailor’s desired information payoff from one or more prisoners and society’s preference for
seeing justice served. Including the payer perspective as another player but with a different

1

The stopping rule presents a second game to the patient at the time when the stopping criteria have been met.
Should the patient actually choose to halt therapy with the risk of more rapid cancer recurrence and benefit of no
more drug cost, associated doctor visits and adverse events? Or should the patient continue treatment to keep
the cancer at bay? The evidence supporting the stopping rule will likely be limited which will add uncertainty
regarding the pay-offs in this game in which the patient literally bets their life.

objective – to minimize the product revenue (i.e., minimize payer’s costs) rather than maximize
it – changes the rules of the game and introduces new payoffs for the payer. As Cortez
demonstrated when he burned his ships, changing the rules can dramatically change payoffs
and thus the player behaviors. In the case of Cortez, it removed the payoff of returning home
for the conquistadors and so focused them on searching for gold in the New World – Cortez’
preferred payoff. Introducing the payer as player not only transforms the payoffs but also
moves the form of the game towards a Bertrand competition-the payer’s preferred game.
A savvy payer might recognize that Drugs A, B and C in the example above are
essentially identical but their developers use different companion diagnostic cut-offs to create
the (inaccurate) perception of differentiated products. Faced with the table in Figure 2 above,
such a savvy payer may decide to play to optimize its own pay offs (minimize its costs), rather
than passively fund the drug company payoffs.

Responders
33% of Population
12 months added OS
Non-Responders
67% of Population
0 months added OS

Drug B Drug C

# of Patients

Drug A

Companion Diagnostic Score

RCT Efficacy
(Months OS)

4.0

6.7

10.3

Price (ICER Based)

$46,000

$46,000

$46,000

Benefiting Patients

7,250

7,250

7,250

21,750

13,000

8,400

Original Payer Cost

$1B

$1B

$1B

Revised Payer Cost

$1B

$0.6B

$0.4B

Savings

0%

40%

60%

Treated Patients

Figure 6: Companion Diagnostics Cut-Off Game Part 3: Adding the Payer as Player. Recognizing the
fundamental equivalence of the three drugs differentiated by their companion diagnostic strategies, a
savvy payer may switch Drug A for Drug B or Drug C. Alternatively, the payer may negotiate the lower
price for Drug B or Drug C. The savings could reach 60% in this example.

Specifically, the payer might choose to use the cut-off from Drug C (the high cut-off) but
require the use of Drug A (or negotiate discounts with Firms B and C to match Drug A pricing).
Such a strategy would save the payer 60% compared to purchasing Drug C as per Figure 2.
Because the Drug C cut-off excludes many who might benefit from treatment, the payer may
choose the cutoff from Drug B to reach nearly all responders but with Drug A pricing. This
would lower the total cost to $2.6B, while achieving the nearly perfect health benefit of about
32,000 QALYs/year. The effective cost per QALY correspondingly falls to $81,000 from the
$138,000 reference used in these examples. This 40% price reduction from Drug B’s price to

Drug A’s price saves the payer $0.4B of the $1.0B initial illustration and $1.7B compared to the
$4.4B amount the payer would expend at the ICER- justified Drug B price to treat 100% of
companion diagnostic selected population. Such payer actions would of course reduce
incentives for developers to pursue precision medicines in the future if in the end, they still only
receive the all-comers non-stratified price.
This has a strong resemblance to finitely repeated prisoners’ dilemmas in which
backward induction causes all players to undercut from the first round onwards.30
Note that the payer has effectively transformed a precision medicine prisoners’
dilemma game into a Bertrand competition for undifferentiated products.
A Precision Medicine Bertrand Competition
Generic, small molecule drugs, are certified by the FDA to be fully interchangeable and
undifferentiated from each other and from the original branded product. In such an
environment, payers and manufacturers engage in Bertrand competition, with the winning
bidder (the lowest price bidder) potentially supplying the entire market. This competitive
bidding process among undifferentiated products results in the price approaching marginal
cost, since each bidder realizes bidding a price above marginal costs risks being underbid by a
competitor. When products are highly substitutable but not identical, payers may still possess
significant pricing power which they may exercise in Bertrand competition like behaviors.31 For
example, CDC used to have winner take all bidding for vaccines which successfully lowered
prices to the lowest marginal cost of the lowest cost manufacturer which drove all others out of
the market.32 In the face of this Bertrand Competition result, the CDC altered its bidding

process by allowing individual states to run bidding competitions with evaluation criteria
beyond lowest price. The number of vaccine manufacturers has since rebounded to restore
both competition and supply security.33
Precision medicines can also experience situations very similar to Bertrand competition.
The new generation of Hepatitis C treatments are precision medicines. Hepatitis C infections
are classified into six major genotypes or strains creatively named 1 through 6. Perhaps the
most famous Hepatitis C treatments are sofosbuvir (Sovaldi) and the fixed-dose combination of
ledipasvir-sofosbuvir (Harvoni) from Gilead Pharmaceuticals. Sovaldi essentially cures patients
with genotypes 1 through 4 when combined with other supporting drugs, while Harvoni was
initially approved as a sole treatment for patients with genotypes 1 or 4.34 Harvoni has
subsequently been approved to also treat patients with Hepatitis C genotypes 5 and 6. Thus, to
select the appropriate treatment the patient must first have their infection genetically
identified with an immunoassay blood test which detects the genotype specific antibodies the
patient’s body produces to combat the virus.35 Sovaldi was the first drug launched in its new
class of chemistry that both attacks the unique Hepatitis C NS5B protein (critical for its
machinery of replicating inside the human cell) and that efficiently penetrates the host human
cell.
Sovaldi was launched in December 2013 with a list price of $84,000 per patient course
of treatment. This pricing received widespread publicity and incurred considerable criticism
from payers and those who sympathized with them. Harvoni launched soon after with a list
price of $94,500 for its one tablet a day, 12-week treatment course. Gilead justified these prices
based on the value to the healthcare system for avoiding the expensive liver transplants and

other care that advanced Hepatitis C patients incur, and by Harvoni being priced at rough parity
per cure obtained compared to earlier generations of hepatitis C treatments.
Gilead only had the market to itself for one year. In early December 2014 AbbVie
received approval for Viekira Pak which combined three drugs to cure those patients with the
most prevalent Hepatitis C genotype, genotype 1. By Christmas, Express Scripts (at the time the
largest pharmacy benefits manager in the United States) announced that its National Preferred
Formulary would exclude Gilead’s Sovaldi and exclusively offer AbbVie’s Viekira Pak which it
claimed it received at a large discount.38
Since then, in August 2017 AbbVie has launched a new drug Mavyret that cures in only
eight weeks rather than the 10-14 weeks required of the prior drugs and at a list price of
$26,400. The National Acquisition Center makes available the federal government
pharmaceutical purchasing cost in the four major programs of the Federal Service System (FSS)
and the so-called Big 4 (DoD, VA, Public Health Service and Coast Guard) prices. The lowest
shown prices of Sovaldi, Harvoni, Viekira Pak and Mavyret at the end of August, 2017
extrapolated for a full treatment course are $49,860, $56,700, $60,153 and $29,235
respectively.39 The gradual decline to something closer to the Bertrand Competition marginal
cost continues with price discounts and rebates, some of which are government mandated.
Defending Against a Bertrand Competition: Biologics
A game with payers included can be transformed into Bertrand competition as discussed
above for small molecules, but in large molecule biologics competition may be limited by the
entry deterring science of proving similarity and interchangeability. To date, to protect patient

safety, the FDA has certified some biologics to be biosimilar but not interchangeable, thereby
not fully enabling Bertrand competition.40 In Europe biologics have been successfully defending
their franchises for nearly a decade.40 Janssen’s Remicade is successfully defending its brand
position in the US against biosimilars such as Inflectra from Pfizer.41 Janssen appears to be
pursuing a three pronged strategy of payer negotiations with increased rebates to secure
exclusive first line contracts; volume based discounts with providers to incentivize stocking; and
bundling Remicade with other Johnson & Johnson products to reduce Inflectra appeal as a
standalone discount. Janssen has pursued a discounting approach that leverages its economies
of scale and scope and lingering medical concerns that inhibit switching all patients to a
biosimilar thus requiring some continued inclusion of Remicade by providers and payers. In
short, sophisticated discounting and continued product differentiation has blunted the price
advantage of the Inflectra biosimilar.
Game theory models with learning formalize these defense strategies, but we do not
have space to pursue them here.42
The Emerging Multi-Class Precision Medicine Game
We have described some of the games that cohorts of precision medicines face within
their niches. While each niche is defined by its scientific therapeutic target and the associated
biomarkers, the niches may begin to overlap and compete for the same patients. Such a
situation is emerging in inflammatory disease where no fewer than five drug classes will be
competing for rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease and psoriasis patients. Each of these drug
classes provides significant benefits for as few as 30% or as many as 60% or maybe even 75% of
patients. Biomarkers exist or are being explored for many of these drug classes.

Drug developers, payers and patients face a complex simultaneous game in these multiclass situations. This is built upon, but significantly different from, the multi-player within a
product class games we discussed above. Each precision medicine niche will likely be at a
different maturity stage. Some will be early in their lifecycles while others will be entering postexclusivity. The games will likely link, with the payoffs of the early lifecycle games being
influenced and constrained by the payoffs and strategies employed by the later games.
Similarly, the late stage game will be influenced by the new niches which may threaten them
with technological obsolescence.
The five set Venn diagram in Figure 7 shows the combinations and competition
emerging in these overlapping precision medicine niches. The legend assigns a current or
emerging inflammatory drug class to each set, A through E. Each class may provide benefits
exclusively to some patients, represented as the pure, non-overlapping color at the exposed
point of each set. All other products fail for these patients. Most patients however will likely
respond to two, three, four or maybe all the drug classes. These are represented by all the
overlapping, labelled sections. Note that the schematic shows the logical overlap but does not
necessarily show the quantitative actual results. Some small section(s) on the schematic may
contain large numbers of patients and vice versa. Also, the schematic does not show the
degree to which patients respond more strongly or more weakly to the product classes within a
multi-class intersecting area. Navigating the game and determining the optimal strategies for
the players is beyond the scope of this paper and will of course depend upon the specific
payoffs as determined by the performance of the products and patient value inherent to these
indications. The developers, payers, providers and patients in this inflammatory disease space

nonetheless are facing this complex game, whether they fully comprehend its complexity or
not. We suggest that game theory can provide multiple insights to guide the clever, rational
player.

A = NKG2D
B = TNFα
C = IL-12, IL-23
D = α4β7 or aEβ7
E = Smad7, Orals (JAK,S1P1), Etc.

Figure 7: The emerging multi-class game for inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis, irritable bowel disease, Crohn’s disease and psoriasis, among others maybe even
cardiovascular.
Oncology faces a similar explosion of product classes for an individual cancer type with
the even more complex possibility of including drug combinations to increase efficacy for some
molecularly defined patient sub-populations. Oncology has maintained stronger differentiation
of each molecular sub-type as a distinct market limited to a particular cohort of precision
medicines. For example, HER2-positive breast cancer remains distinct from other precision
medicines and classic medicines. This keeps the prisoners’ dilemma game mostly intact for
Roche and its competitors GlaxoSmithKline and Puma Biotechnology. Roche has two products
in the game -- trastuzumab (Herceptin) and trastuzumab emtansine (Kadcyla, T-DM1 that adds

a cytotoxic chemotherapeutic to the trastuzumab antibody for double action). The other
players compete with differently targeted precision medicines that are also approved for HER2
positive breast cancer patients. GlaxoSmithKline markets lapatinib (Tykerb) and Puma
Biotechnology offers neratinib (Nerlynx).
The Phased Precision Medicine Game
We have explored a series of precision medicine examples and the game situations they
exemplify. These examples also suggest that cohorts of precision medicines that share niches
might present a series of linked games over their lifecycles (Figure 8).
As the precision medicine cohort emerges, the drug developers face the first game
theoretic dilemma as they make decisions regarding their clinical trial programs and prepare for
regulatory submissions. It is likely the companion diagnostics core game but may be the dosing
or stopping rule variants, or even a combination of the three.
After market authorization, and the entrance of multiple near substitute precision
medicines, the payers may enter the game and attempt to change it into a Bertrand
competition. This has been demonstrated in the Hepatitis C market. Payers may learn to
develop their own scientific insights to mix diagnostics with therapies as we suggested in the
companion diagnostics game part 2 above.

Mature

Dev’t

Prisoners’ Dilemma Variants
Optimize the use of the
medicine.

CDx Cut-Off
Prisoners’ Dilemma
Among the developers

Multi
Defend against Bertrand
competition after loss of
exclusivity.

Payer as
Player

Dosing,
Stopping Rule

Defense

Savvy payer converts Prisoners’
Dilemma to Bertrand
competition.

Regimen

LOE

Game of
Games
Multi-Class, multi-phase game
of games when multiple
product classes compete for
same patients

Figure 8: The Phased precision medicine lifecycle game. The games can be arrayed across the life cycle
of a therapeutic. While not guaranteed to occur for all precision medicines, a developer might choose
to prepare for the sequential, connected games that the individual specific cases suggest might occur.

If the branded therapeutic does not succumb to a Bertrand competition prior to legal
loss of exclusivity, traditional biologics products are demonstrating an ability to deter entry and
combat franchise erosion. Traditional small molecule brands have also demonstrated some
ability to delay, but less ability to defeat, generic competition. Precision medicine remains too
young to have examples of biosimilar or generic competition. But simply because it has not yet
occurred does not mean that the generic/biosimilar defense game is unlikely when exclusivity
ends for these products.
Participants in precision medicine markets can expect a series of games and
opportunities to apply game theory for each market. Participants will need to discern,
however, which game applies to each cohort or niche at a given time. Participants will also
need strategies that link across games as payoffs from the prior games may influence later
games, and so reputational effects may evolve. In any case, the preparation for later games will
begin even as the initial games unfold.

Conclusion
In this paper we have described how precision medicines create situations that bear
some semblance to game theory constructs such as the prisoners’ dilemma and Bertrand
competition. We recognize that the textbook examples of the Prisoners’ Dilemma are typically
a one-time static game, whereas what we have described here is more dynamic in nature. But
the resulting Nash equilibrium outcome is similar. In particular, outcome equilibria emerge in
which players each prefer a different outcome but must choose a strategy to do the best they
can assuming the anticipated rational behaviors of the others. The examples usually involve
drug developers in competition with each other. We have also described situations in which
other stakeholders join the game or face their own unique game. For instance, when payers
joined the prisoners’ dilemma game they transformed it into a Bertrand competition-like game.
Another prisoners’ dilemma-like game occurs when patients face their own distinct decision in
the stopping rule variant. When patients join the drug developer companion diagnostic
prisoners’ dilemma, their induced behaviors amplifies the payoffs for the primary drug
developer players.
We also observe that the games may predictably array themselves across the lifecycle of
each precision medicine indication niche. These arrayed games may remain independent or
may become linked into a sequentially evolving meta game. This might be an area for
additional fruitful theoretical research immediately and for future empirical studies as the
precision medicine niches mature.

Finally, we hypothesize that some precision medicine areas such as inflammatory
diseases are becoming complex simultaneous multi-games in which separate drug cohorts in
distinct precision medicine niches compete with other cohorts for patients as well as within
their own cohort. This multi-game is further complicated by cohorts being in different lifecycle
stages even as the cohorts compete across niches. Some cohorts may be young and just
emerging into the market, while others are established and still others may be entering the
mature loss of exclusivity game. By stretching the classic game frameworks, this multi-game
might be a particularly exciting, albeit challenging, area for future research.
Precision medicines have been a limited pharmaceutical category since their
introduction in the late 1990s. Rapidly increasing molecular understanding of disease and the
falling cost of genetic testing due to next generation sequencing technologies have swollen the
precision medicine product pipeline in many therapeutic areas. Whether these precision
medicines can achieve sustainable commercial success and payer acceptance remains to be
seen. The underlying science may support virtually unlimited differentiation, but economic
forces may advance commoditization, particularly if developers continue to introduce multiple
products in each precision medicine scientific niche. Much will depend on how successfully
developers play the prisoners’ dilemma to differentiate their products even as payers attempt
to transform that game into a Bertrand competition.
In such a context, the credibility of evidence sources will play a critical role, again raising
enduring issues of the optimal societal roles for public and private sectors in creating,
disseminating, and pricing information. Those players that learn the most rapidly and apply

those learnings the most asymmetrically will be advantaged in this ongoing information pharms
race.

REFERENCES
1. Trusheim, Mark R., Ernst R. Berndt and Frank L. Douglas, “Stratified Medicine:
Strategic and Economic Implications of Combining Drugs and Clinical Biomarkers”,
Nature Reviews: Drug Discovery, April 2007, 6(4):287-293.
2. Hu, Sean X., Murray L. Aitken, Arnold M. Epstein, Mark R. Trusheim and Ernst R. Berndt,
“Defining and Quantifying the Use of Personalized Medicines”, Nature Reviews: Drug
Discovery, online version published 29 November 2013,
http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v12/n12/full/nrd4177.html?WT.ec_id=NRD-201312.
Hard copy version published December 2013.
3. Novartis press release. Novartis CAR-T cell therapy CTL019 unanimously (10-0)
recommended for approval by FDA advisory committee to treat pediatric, young adult r/r B-cell
ALL. July 13, 2017. https://www.novartis.com/news/media-releases/novartis-car-t-celltherapy-ctl019-unanimously-10-0-recommended-approval-fda , Accessed August 22, 2017.
4. Press Release. Sanpower Group closes acquisition of Dendreon. June 29, 2017. Available
at http://www.dendreon.com/Portals/188/DENDREON%20PRESS%20RELEASE.pdf . Accessed
August 22, 2017. OR Reuters staff. BRIEF-Valeant pharmaceuticals completes sale of Dendreon
to Sanpower Group. Reuters. June 29, 2017. http://www.reuters.com/article/brief-valeantpharmaceuticals-completes-idUSFWN1JQ07C Accessed August 22,2017.
5. FDA. Cellular & Gene Therapy Products-Marketed Products. Food and Drug
Administration.
https://www.fda.gov/BiologicsBloodVaccines/CellularGeneTherapyProducts/ApprovedProducts
/default.htm Page updated August 11, 2017. Accessed August 22, 2017.
Trusheim, Mark R., Breon Burgess, Sean Xinghua Hu, Theresa Long, Steven D. Averbuch,
Aiden A. Flynn, Alfons Lieftucht et al. "Quantifying factors for the success of stratified
medicine." Nature Reviews: Drug Discovery 10, no. 11 (2011): 817.
6.

7. US Food and Drug Administration. Remicade (infliximab) label, revised: January 2015. US
Food and Drug Administration. Available at:
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/drugsatfda/ (2015).
8. Helwick, C. Pathologic complete response: Understanding the subtleties. The ASCO Post
5(16) October 15, 2014. accessed on 5/4/2015. Available at
http://www.ascopost.com/issues/october-15,-2014/pathologic-complete-responseunderstanding-the-subtleties.aspx (2014).
9. Ainsworth R., et al. IHC for Her2 with CBE356 antibody is a more accurate predictor of Her2
gene amplification by FISH than HercepTest™ in breast carcinoma. J. Clin. Pathol. 58 1086-1090
(2005).

10. Birner P., et al. Evaluation of the United States Food and Drug Administration-approved
Scoring and Test System of HER-2 Protein Expression in Breast Cancer. Clin. Can. Res. 7 16691675 (2001).
11. Hu, Sean X., Murray L. Aitken, Arnold M. Epstein, Mark R. Trusheim and Ernst R. Berndt,
“Defining and Quantifying the Use of Personalized Medicines”, Nature Reviews: Drug
Discovery, online version published 29 November 2013,
http://www.nature.com/nrd/journal/v12/n12/full/nrd4177.html?WT.ec_id=NRD-201312.
Hard
copy version published December 2013.
12. Trusheim, Mark R. and Ernst R. Berndt, “The Segmentation of Therapeutic
Populations in Oncology”, Health Management, Policy and Innovation, 1(1):19-34, October
2012
13. Trusheim, Mark R., and Ernst R. Berndt, “The clinical benefits, ethics, and
economics
of stratified medicine and companion diagnostics”, Drug Discovery
Today 20(12): 14391450, December 2015.
14. Robert S. Pindyck and Daniel L. Rubinfeld, “Game Theory and Competitive
Strategy”, ch. 13 in Pindyck and Rubinfeld, Microeconomics, Eighth Edition, New
York: Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Prentice Hall, 2013, 487-528.
15.

FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).

16. Westwood M, van Asselt T, Ramaekers B, et al. Health Technology
Assessment, No. 18.62. Chapter 3 Table 8 Accuracy of KRAS mutation testing for
the prediction of response to treatment with cetuximab in addition to
chemotherapy. Southampton (UK): NIHR Journals Library; 2014 Oct
17. Bae Y.H. Mullins C. D. Do value thresholds for oncology drugs differ from
nononcology drugs? J. Manag Care Pharm, 20(11):1086-92. (Nov 2014).
18. FDA. Keytruda label. FDA Online Label Repository, available at
http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
19.

FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).

20. Staton, T. Bristol-Myers' Opdivo far outpaced Merck's Keytruda again in Q2.
What gives? FiercePharma August 1, 2016.
http://www.fiercepharma.com/marketing/bristol-myers-opdivo-far-outpacedmerck-s-keytruda-again-q2-what-gives Accessed August 27, 207.
21. Pollack, A. Immunotherapy drug Opdivo fails clinical trial to expand use.
New York Times. August 5, 2016.
https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/06/business/lung-cancer-drug-opdivo-failsclinical-trial-to-expand-use.html?mcubz=1 Accessed August 27, 2017.

22. FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
23. FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
24. FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
25. Carlson B. KRAS testing: Optimizing Cancer Therapy. Biotechnoloyg
Healthcare. 6(5):7-9 Winter 2009-2010.
26. FDA. Table of Pharmacogenomic Biomarkers in Drug Labelling. FDA.
Available at
https://www.fda.gov/drugs/scienceresearch/researchareas/pharmacogenetics/uc
m083378.htm. Accessed August 27, 2017.
27. Gardiner, S.J. and Begg, E.J. Pharmacogenetics, drug-metabolizing enzymes,
and clinical practice. Pharmacological reviews, 58(3):521-590 (2006).
28. NICE. Bortezomib monotherapy for relapsed multiple myeloma. NICE
technology appraisal guidance 129. Issue date October 2007. Review date October
2010. Available at https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ta129 Accessed August 27,
2017.
29. Press release. Adaptive Biotechnologies Announces a Collaboration with
Janssen Biotech, Inc. to use the clonoSEQ® Assay to Measure Minimal Residual
Disease in Ongoing and Future DARZALEX® Multiple Myeloma Trials. July 21, 2017.
Available at http://www.adaptivebiotech.com/news/adaptive-biotechnologiesannounces-collaboration-janssen-biotech-inc-use-clonoseq%C2%AE-assay Accessed
August 27, 2017.
30. Pindyck, RS, Rubinfeld DL. Microeconomics Eighth Edition. pp:499-500,
Pearson Education, 2013.
31. Berndt ER, MCGuire TG, Newhouse JP. A primer on the economics of
prescription pharmaceutical pricing in health insurance markets. Forum for Health
Economics & Policy 14(2) article 10, November 2011.
32. Danzon, Patricia M., Nuno Sousa Pereira, and Sapna S. Tejwani. "Vaccine
supply: a cross-national perspective." Health Affairs 24, no. 3 (2005): 706-717.
33. Berndt, E.R., Denoncourt, R.N. and Warner, A.C. US markets for vaccines:
characteristics, case studies, and controversies. AEI Press. (2009).
34. FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
35. CDC. Hepatitis C Information on Testing and Diagnosis. Centers for Disease
Control. Available at https://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/hcv/pdfs/hepctestingdiagnosis.pdf , Accessed August 31, 2017.

36. Pollack, A. FDA approves pill to treat Hepatitis C. New York Times, Page B1,
New York Edition, December 7, 2013. Available at
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/07/business/fda-approves-pill-to-treathepatitis-c.html?mcubz=1 . Accessed August 31, 2017.
37. FDA. FDA Online Label Repository, available at http://labels.fda.gov/ (2017).
38. Humer C. Express Scripts to cover AbbVie hepatitis C drug, drops Gilead
treatment. Reuters. December 22, 2014. Available at
http://www.reuters.com/article/express-scripts-abbvie-hepatitiscidUSL1N0U50M120141222 Accessed August 31, 2017.
39. National Acquisition Center (CCST) Pharmaceutical Catalogue Search. US
Department of Veterans Affairs. Available at
https://www.va.gov/nac/Pharma/List, Accessed August 31, 2017.
40. Berndt, E.R. and Trusheim, M.R. Biosimilar and Biobetter Scenarios for the
US and Europe: What Should We Expect?. In Biobetters (pp. 315-360). Springer
New York. (2015).
41. Private communication with Aaron Gal of Berstein
42. Fudenberg, D. and Tirole, J., 1991. Game theory, chapter four. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press.

