                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              MANAGEMENT QUALITY IN PUBLIC EDUCATION:
   SUPERINTENDENT VALUE-ADDED, STUDENT OUTCOMES AND MECHANISMS

                                          Victor Lavy
                                          Adi Boiko

                                      Working Paper 24028
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24028


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We benefited from comments and suggestions by Ema Duccini, Naomi Hausman, Rolant
Rathelet, Moshe Shayo, and participants in seminars at the Hebrew University, University of
Warwick, University College London, the Madrid January 2017 Education Conference, CESifo
Economics of Education Network 2017 Conference, and the 2017 NBER Summer Institute
Conference in Personnel Economics. We thank Elior Cohen for providing excellent research
assistance during the early stages of this study. The first author acknowledges financial support
for this project from the European Research Council through ERC Advance Grant 323439,
CAGE at Warwick and the Falk Institute in Jerusalem. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Victor Lavy and Adi Boiko. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Management Quality in Public Education: Superintendent Value-Added, Student Outcomes
and Mechanisms
Victor Lavy and Adi Boiko
NBER Working Paper No. 24028
November 2017
JEL No. I0,I21

                                          ABSTRACT

We present evidence about the ways that school superintendents add value in Israel’s primary and
middle schools. Superintendents are the CEOs of a cluster of schools with powers to affect the
quality of schooling, and we extend the approach used in recent literature to measure teachers’
value added, to assess school superintendents. We exploit a quasi-random matching of
superintendent and schools, and estimate that superintendent value added has positive and
significant effects on primary and middle school students’ test scores in math, Hebrew, and
English. One standard deviation improvement in superintendent value added increases test scores
by about 0.04 of a standard deviation in the test score distribution. The effect doesn’t vary with
students’ socio-economic background, is highly non-linear, increases sharply for superintendents
in the highest-quartile of the value added distribution, and is larger for female superintendents.
We explore several mechanisms for these effects and find that superintendents with higher value
added are associated with more focused school priorities and more clearly defined working
procedures, but no effect on school resources and no effect on total teachers’ on the job and
external training, although there is a significant effect on the composition of the former. Another
important effect is that schools with higher quality superintendents are more likely to address
school climate, violence and bullying, and implement related interventions which lead to lower
violence in school. A new superintendent is also associated with a higher likelihood that the
school principal is replaced.


Victor Lavy
Department of Economics
University of Warwick
Coventry, CV4 7AL
United Kingdom
and Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and also NBER
v.lavy@warwick.ac.uk

Adi Boiko
Department of Economics
Hebrew University
Mount Scopus Jerusalem Israel
adi.boiko@mail.huji.ac.il
1. Introduction

Recent studies examined the relationship between management quality and productivity in the public
sector. Di Liberto (2013), Bloom et al. (2015) and Bryson et al. (2017) have extended the World
Management Survey methodology to measure management practices in schools, and present descriptive
evidence about the quality of management by school principals and education outcomes in several
countries. They show that better quality management is strongly associated with better educational
outcomes, but they cannot establish causality in this relationship. Branch et al. (2012) study school
principals’ leadership roles and measure the correlation with school outcomes. Bloom, Propper et al.
(2015), McCormack et al. (2013), and Rasul and Rogger (2013) study management practices in public
sector institutions and other government agencies. In this paper we focus on measuring the effect of
superintendents in public education on the education outcomes of students and schools and the channels
of these effects.1 School superintendents are the CEOs of a cluster of schools within a school district or
a local school authority. In Israel, as in many other countries, these CEOs have wide responsibilities
that affect school quality and output. For example, they are the direct managers of school principals and
draw their authority from the district or regional education director. In recent years this model of
superintendent as school CEO has been criticized as inefficient, too procedural, anachronistic and not
innovative, and insignificant in its impact on the quality of schools. Many countries have reacted to this
perceived inefficiency with extensive management reform in public education.2
         However, the link between management quality and the effectiveness/productivity of schools
has not been studied as carefully as, for example, the impact of teachers’ value added (Rivkin et al 2005,
Rothstein 2010, Jacob et al 2010, 2016, Chetty et al 2014a, 2014b). This paper provides empirical
evidence about the causal effect of management quality in public education on students’ cognitive and
non-cognitive schooling outcomes and explores some of the relevant mechanisms. We measure
superintendent quality by their value added in terms of students’ test scores, and in a second step we
estimate the effect on students’ schools cognitive and behavioural outcomes.
         The role and responsibilities of superintendents vary across countries but it is common for them
to set the tone, chart the course of the district or sub-district, and work closely with the school board or


1
 Superintendent is the title used in the US and in some other countries. In the UK the title used is Chief Education
Officer, in Canada it is Director of Education.
2
  For example, England, New Zealand, Finland and Chile introduced global transformation in the organization
and regulation of their education system and in the role of supervision of schools (UNESCO 2007). In some
countries profound structural changes have been introduced, for example, changing school structures (charter
schools in the US and school academies in the UK), accountability measures (performance league tables and
closure of failing schools as in the US No Child Left Behind), and programs that enhance school competition
(voucher programs, free school choice, financial incentives to staff and students). Only few of these programs
were expanded at scale, partly because of their lack of popularity among educational practitioners, who believe
that the current system of management and supervision in public education maintains proper motivation and
quality in schools.

                                                         1
district board of trustees. Superintendents are responsible for hiring and supervising school principals
and teachers, including the decision to grant tenure to novice teachers. It is the superintendent’s job to
evaluate school principals’ performances and ensure that they are effective leaders, working with
teachers to serve the needs of students and meet the district goals. The superintendent must respond to
demands from all other constituencies in the district or sub-district: the teachers, students, parents, and
the community at large. In some countries, superintendents can affect the allocation of financial and
human resources in the district. Therefore a high quality superintendent can have an important effect
on the quality of a school and on students’ academic achievements.
        Non-random matching of schools and superintendent can lead to biased measures of
superintendents’ value added. We address this concern by exploiting a quasi-random pairing of
superintendents and schools that results from a Ministry of Education rule, under which the
superintendents’ ‘supervision area’ must change every 3-5 years, leading to schools being reshuffled
across superintendents’ clusters. The implementation of this regulation is closely linked to
superintendents’ retirement and sometimes, though not very often, to promotion of superintendents
within the Ministry of Education. Such exits lead to new superintendents entering and to some
reshuffling of schools across existing superintendents. Most often, the whole cluster of schools of a
retiring superintendent is transferred as a group to a different superintendent. Clearly there should be
no concern for sorting in such cases and we show evidence that supports our claim of random matching
of schools and superintendents. We show that the probability of having a superintendent change is
unrelated to school characteristics and outcomes. We show that a new superintendent’s quality is
unrelated to school characteristics and outcomes. We also show that the quality of the new and old
school’s superintendents are not correlated.
        We estimate superintendents’ value added in two different ways. In the first, we measure
superintendents’ value added based on schools that did not switch superintendent during the study
period. The value added is measured as a superintendent fixed effect in a regression of a school level
education production function. In a second step we estimate the effect of superintendent value added
on outcomes of schools that switched to a new superintendent. As an alternative approach we exploit
superintendent turnover and measure value added based on schools that switched superintendent. Value
added here is measured by a superintendent fixed effect in a regression of the change in cognitive
outcomes. In a second step we estimate the effect of superintendent value added based on the sample
of schools that did not switch superintendent.
        The ranking of superintendents obtained from these two methods are highly positively
correlated and the estimated effect of these two alternative superintendents’ value added measures on
students’ test scores are very similar. For learning outcomes we use test scores in national exams in
primary and middle schools in Israel in math, Hebrew, and English. We also examine effects on
students’ behavioural outcomes, in particular measures of bullying and violence in school and students’

                                                    2
social skills and behavior. As potential mechanisms for the effect of superintendent quality we focus on
several management practices of school principals.
        The results show that the quality of superintendents has positive and significant effects on
students' academic achievements. A one standard deviation improvement in management-supervision
quality increases students’ test scores in math, English and Hebrew by 0.04 standard deviation. These
positive within-school estimates contrast with the “naïve” OLS estimates which are actually negative,
reflecting a negative selection pattern in the sorting of superintendents to schools. The effect is non-
linear, being higher for the highest quality superintendents. The treatment effect is on the same scale
when estimation is by subject. Interestingly, female superintendents have higher value added and higher
impact on students’ outcomes.
        This paper also contributes to several literatures. First, we link to work on teachers’ value added
and its effect on students’ academic achievement (Rockoff 2004, Rivkin et al (2005), Jacob (2010),
Rothstein (2010), Bacher-Hicks, Kane, and Staiger (2014), and Chetty et al. (2014)). Secondly, this
paper is related to recent research on the effect of school principals and leadership (for examples see
Branch, Hanushek, and Rivkin (2012), Clark, Martorell, and Rockoff (2009), Béteille, Kalogrides, and
Loeb (2012), and Horng, Klasik, and Loeb (2010)). Finally and more generally, we contribute to the
emerging literature investigating management practices in public sector institutions (For examples see
McCormack, Propper, and Smith (2013), Rasul and Rogger (2013), and Bloom, Propper, Seiler and
Van Reenen (2015)).
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents background on the system of
superintendents in Israel and elsewhere. Section 3 presents the data and section 4 presents our empirical
strategy and results on the effect on students’ outcomes. Section 5 presents evidence on the mechanisms
of the effect of managerial and supervision quality and section 6 presents the conclusions.

2. Context and Background
There are school supervision services in nearly all countries.3 Their key role is to monitor the quality of
education, i.e. schools and teachers, and support their improvement, creating two distinct but
complementary tasks: on the one hand, to control and evaluate and, on the other hand, to advise and
support teachers and head-teachers. Superintendents (in some countries they are called supervisors) are
based outside the school at a local or regional government body overseeing public schools. Each
superintendent is assigned a number of schools, to which they make regular visits every year. The role
and powers of the superintendent vary considerably between countries, however, their tasks generally
include: supervising implementation of government education policy, regulations, and national
curriculum, advising on teaching methods, supervising, guiding and assessing teachers on probation,


3
 Much of the material in this section is based on “Reforming School Supervision for Quality Improvement”,
United Nations, International Institute for Educational Planning, UNESCO 2007.

                                                    3
liaising with and advising headmasters, guiding schools in responding to patterns of problems and
needs, and reporting on periodic inspections. Some countries, for example Spain, separate the
administrative from the pedagogic tasks of supervisors. Other countries tend to separate control and
support roles. This has been the case mainly in countries with strong school-based management
practices such as New Zealand and the UK. Some countries adopted a management-supervision
approach directed towards the school as a whole and less on individual teachers. A noticeable example
is the OSTED school audit system in the UK. In France, superintendents produce regular reports on
issues based on specific fieldwork and special school visits. In few countries, schools use self-
assessment instead of external supervision. Finland follows this model, and quality control is entirely
entrusted to teachers. Other countries use a model that combines internal school evaluation and
assessment with external supervision (New Zealand, Wales, Australia, and Chile).
        School superintendents in Israel are Ministry of Education staff. While a school principal is
responsible for the day-to-day administration of school, the school superintendent has a diverse range
of activities and responsibilities, both at the macro and micro level. At the ‘macro’ level he oversees
the development of each school’s annual strategic action plan in line with its school charter, which sets
out the educational objectives for the school under the national curriculum framework. The
superintendent also oversees implementation of the action plan, and is responsible for decisions about
hiring, placement and transfer of teachers. At the ‘micro’ level, he assesses teachers’ performance,
provides pedagogic guidance and know-how to school principals and teachers, decides about tenure and
dismissal of teachers, and deals with students’ extreme disciplinary violations, including the approval
of temporary or permanent expulsion of students. To carry out these tasks, the superintendent visits
every school a few times a year, meets with the school principal and members of the school senior
leadership team, attends classes, mainly of novice teachers, and holds confidential meetings with
teachers and staff. He is expected to develop a safe and trusting relationship with his supervisees and
use these meetings to talk about all elements of their practice, including emotional and psychological
difficulties at work. It is the superintendent’s responsibility to encourage teachers and school principals
to improve their classroom instruction, and ensure that they work within the norm, policies, and codes
of practice of the Ministry of Education and the law. The superintendent should monitor training and
teaching progress and ensure that novice teachers receive appropriate career guidance. Following each
school visit, the superintendent should submit a report to the school district director. Supervisees should
receive relevant parts of the report and be able to comment on their assessment and on the support
provided, and to discuss any problems that were identified.
         The majority of school superintendents in Israel adopt a hierarchical approach, conducting their
interaction with teachers and school principals as an educational authority, and the school staff view
them as the highest pedagogical authority. In accordance with the State Education Law, the Ministry of
Education is the superintendents’ employer, navigate and guide them in their work. Most

                                                    4
superintendents in their daily work are part of the staff of regional directors (there are seven regions in
the country). Each superintendent is in charge of a number of schools. Every 3 to 5 years superintendents
rotate to a different "supervision zone", or there is a broad reallocation of schools they supervise.

3. Data
The data we use in this study are based on the Growth and Effectiveness Measures for Schools (GEMS
- Meizav in Hebrew) datasets for the years 2002-2005. The GEMS was administered for the first time
in 2002 and it includes a series of tests and questionnaires administered by the Division of Evaluation
and Measurement of the Ministry of Education.4 The GEMS is administered towards the end (from mid-
May to mid-June) of each school year to a representative 1-in-2 sample of all elementary and middle
schools in Israel, so that each school participates in GEMS once every two years. The GEMS data
include test scores of fifth- (primary school) and eighth- (middle school) grade students in math, science,
Hebrew, and English. In principle, all students except those in special education classes are tested and
the proportion of students tested is above 90 percent. The raw test scores used a 1-to-100 scale that we
transform into z-scores to facilitate interpretation of the results. In this study we use only primary school
data since the funding reform only affected primary level schools.
          The test scores for the years 2002-2005 are linked to student administrative records collected
by the Ministry of Education. The administrative records include student demographics, which we use
to construct all measures of students’ background characteristics. Using the linked datasets, we build a
panel for elementary schools with test scores for the years 2002-2005. The sample is restricted to Jewish
public schools that follow the same national curriculum and participate in the GEMS national testing.
For these reasons we exclude the religious Orthodox Jewish schools and the Arab schools. There are
939 elementary schools with test score data. Since every school is sampled once in two years, we have
two observations of the same school for more than 90 percent of the schools.
          The GEMS also includes interviews with all teachers and the school principal. The
questionnaire for ‘home class’ teachers5 of all classes included questions about instruction time in each
subject and the total instruction time per week. We use teachers’ responses to these items to compute
the school average for fifth-grade instruction time in each subject. Though there was very little
difference between or among fifth-grade classes in a school in these time inputs, we still prefer to use
the school-level mean per grade to avoid any biases that might be caused by sorting of students into


4
  The GEMS is not administered for school accountability purposes and only aggregated results at the district
level are published. For more information on the GEMS see the Division of Evaluation and Measurement website
(in Hebrew): http://cms.education.gov.il/educationcms/units/rama/odotrama/odot.htm.
5
 A ‘home class’ teacher in primary school in Israel teaches most weekly sessions of his class, and has additional
duties such as taking attendance registers, acting as intermediary in cases of conflict, collating other teachers’
impressions of the class and of individual students in preparation for the quarterly report, liaising with parents
and various other administrative tasks.

                                                        5
certain classrooms and setting time allocations for given academic subjects according to those students’
particular strengths and weaknesses. In any case, the grade- and class-level measures of these time
inputs are very highly correlated.
         The school principal questionnaire includes questions on pedagogical and management
practices in school. We use the following questions: (1) “Did the school evaluate its environment and
discipline?” and (2) “Does the school have interventions related to values, norms and discipline?”.
         We also use items from the GEMS student questionnaire that address various aspects of the
school and their learning environment. We concentrate on the section of the questionnaire that provides
information on student satisfaction in school and on the violent behaviour of other students. In this
section students are asked to rate the extent to which they agree with a series of statements on a six-
point scale ranging from “strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. These items include: (1) “There are
many fights among students in my classroom”; (2) “Sometimes I’m scared to go to school because there
are violent students”; (3) “This year I was involved in many fights””; (4) “"When I have a problem at
school there is always someone I can turn to (from the teaching staff)"; (5) “I am satisfied in school”;
and (6) “I feel well-adjusted socially in my class”. We transformed students’ responses to these items
into standardized z-scores.6

4. The Quasi-Random Pairing of Schools and Superintendents
         The pairing of schools and superintendents may be non-random. For example, school
authorities may place more proven and effective superintendents in weaker or failing schools, or
experienced superintendents may prefer to work in better schools. Therefore, the potential endogenous
sorting of superintendents in schools has to be accounted for when measuring unbiased superintendents’
value added. The administrative structure of superintendents in Israel and the schools they manage
offers a way to measure superintendents’ value added that is not affected by endogenous sorting of
superintendents. Israel’s public education system has seven geographical regions, each headed by a
regional director that reports directly to the general director of the Ministry of Education. All schools
within each of the seven regions are under the directorate of the regional director. Each region has
several superintendents and each is in charge of a number of schools. Except for the large cities
(Jerusalem, Tel Aviv, Haifa, Beer-Sheba, Rishon-Lezion), all other localities have only one
superintendent who supervises all schools in the locality. Each such superintendent will manage few
localities that are close geographically. This is clearly evident from the information presented in Maps
1-6. Each map presents the geographical distribution of the schools by superintendent in each of the


6
  We experimented with binary versions of these variables denoting above median answers and also using them
linearly and the results were not different, confirming that the evidence regarding these variables is not a feature
of this particular transformation of the data.



                                                         6
seven regions in 2005. The spatial clustering of the schools of each superintendent clearly suggests
matching of schools and superintendents are based on geographic considerations. About 77 percent of
schools in our sample are in municipalities with a single superintendent and about 82 percent of these
schools have a superintendent who oversees schools in more than one municipality. Every change of a
superintendent in these municipalities involves all schools, minimizing in this context the scope for
selective matching between superintendents and schools.
        The large cities noted above have more than one superintendent: the first three have 3
superintendents and the other two cities have 2. The distribution of schools of each superintendent in
these large cities is also clustered geographically, shown in Maps 1-6. The schools that are included in
each superintendent cluster are mostly the same over time, particularly when there is a change of
superintendent.
        The Ministry of Education reassigns superintendents every 3-5 years. 7 This is often
implemented in conjunction with the departures of superintendents due to retirement – rarely due to
promotion. Our panel data for the period 2002-2005 includes 771 schools that appear in the sample each
of the four years. There are three potential transition points, one for every two adjacent years and 402
schools (52%) switched superintendent at least once within this period. This transition rate implies that
a school will indeed have a new superintendent every 5-6 years. Very often, the whole cluster of schools
of a retiring superintendent is transferred as a group to a novice or veteran superintendent. Fifteen
percent of the changes in the pairing of schools and superintendents results from such reassignment and
an additional 61 percent of the transitions result from a transfer of at least 5 schools from a retired or
promoted superintendent to different superintendent. Clearly when the reassignment involves such large
number of schools as in these cases, we can confidently rule out any endogenous sorting that might lead
to selection bias in the measure of superintendent value added an in the treatment effects estimates. The
reassignment of one or two schools to a new or veteran superintendent accounts for only 9 percent of
all reassigned schools (40 out of 459). The reassignment of three or more schools to a new or veteran
superintendent accounts for 91 percent of all reassigned schools. In fact, out of the 40 schools reassigned
as a single or a couple of schools in the reassigned cluster, the reassignments of 25 schools seem to be
driven by spatial reasons, as the reassigned schools are geographically closer to the receiving
superintendent’s cluster of schools. Clearly there should be little concern for endogenous sorting in
these transitions.
        Some evidence for the lack of endogenous sorting of superintendents can be seen in Figures 1-
3 which are representative examples of patterns of turnover of superintendents following a retirement
of one or more superintendents. Figure 1 presents the changes in the Central educational district


7
https://he.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D7%9E%D7%A4%D7%A7%D7%97_(%D7%97%D7%99%D7%A0%D7%95
%D7%9A).

                                                    7
following the retirement of two superintendents. All of Ruth’s (this and other names in the paper are
fictitious) schools were transferred to Rebecca (a new superintendent) and all of Amalia’s schools were
transferred to Hannah (a veteran superintendent). Rebecca received also ten schools from Johanna. The
transfer in bloc of such large number of schools between pairs of superintendents clearly suggests that
there was no sorting involved. However, Figure 1 show transfers of smaller numbers of schools between
superintendents, in most cases 1 or 2 schools, which may involve sorting. In Figure 2 Judith, a
superintendent in South district, retired and her 13 schools were distributed between 4 other
superintendents. Figure 3 shows transitions in the Haifa district in 2003-2004. There are 8 pairwise
transfers, five of them involving a move 5 or 6 schools. In most cases the number of outgoing and
incoming schools of a superintendent are equal or almost equal.

5. Measuring Superintendents’ Value Added
        We estimate superintendents’ value added in two different ways. In the first method (I), using
the sample of schools that did not change their superintendent during the study period (‘the non-
switchers’) we estimate an education production function with a superintendents’ fixed effect and use
these fixed effects as measures of superintendents’ value added. In a second step we estimate the effect
of these superintendents’ value added on outcomes of schools that did change their superintendents (the
‘switchers’). Using two different samples in the two steps of this procedure guarantees that the
superintendent fixed effect does not reflect specific characteristics of the schools that are included in
the sample in the second step. This ‘out of sample’ procedure of estimating the superintendent fixed
effect is crucial even though we estimate the role of CEOs of education districts in a framework where
we can control for observable and unobservable differences across schools. For this purpose, we
construct a superintendent-school matched panel data set, where we track superintendents across
different schools over time. This allows us to estimate how much of the unexplained variation in
schools’ average outcomes can be attributed to superintendent value added (fixed effects), after
controlling for schools’ fixed effects and time-varying school characteristics. The second method (II)
reverses the role of ‘switchers’ and ‘non-switchers’: We exploit superintendents’ turnover, using
schools that were assigned a new superintendent (‘switchers’) and measure value added as the
superintendent ‘fixed effect’ in a regression of the change in schools’ mean test scores as a dependent
variable. In a second step, we estimate the effect of the value added of these superintendents on mean
test scores of the sample of the `non-switchers’, the schools that were not assigned a new superintendent.
Both methods rely on the assumption that schools that are part of a superintendent’s cluster of schools,
do not share any other common factors that can correlate with their residual test scores (method I) or
their residual growth in test scores (method II). Both methods are similar in spirit to the models that are
used to estimate the effect of individual managers on corporate behavior and performance (Bertand and
Schohar 2003).

                                                    8
        We show below that the percentile ranking of superintendents’ value added derived from these
alternative methods are highly correlated. We also show that the two series of value added, based on
the second method (one for each year) are also highly correlated. Finally we will observe that the
estimated treatment effects obtained from value added I and value added II are very similar.
        We specify an education production function that includes an input that captures superintendent
quality or value added in addition to the standard school and student level inputs:
        Yjs αjγ Os βXj  Lj ujs                                              (1)

where Yjs is the average learning outcome of students in school j that is assigned to superintendent s.
We use test scores in national exams in primary (5th grade) and middle school (8th grade) in Israel in
math, Hebrew, and English as measures of learning outcomes. We also examine effects on students’
behavioural outcomes, in particular measures of bullying and violence in school and students’ social
skills and behavior. As potential mechanisms for the effect of superintendents’ quality we focus on
several management practices of school principals. αj is a school fixed effect, Os captures the value
added of superintendent s, Xj is a set of potentially time varying covariates of school j (including
students’ characteristics, school enrolment, number of classes), Lj is a vector of lagged test scores in
Hebrew and math and ujs is a mean zero residual.
        The parameter of interest is γ but Os is unobserved and therefore has to be estimated. Since
superintendent value-added might be measured with error, it can be correlated with ujs and therefore
with school speciﬁc outcomes shocks which are part of the error term in equation (1). To avoid this
problem we use the same approach as in recent studies of teachers’ value added, for example Jacob et
al (2010), where estimation of the value-added of a student’s teacher does not incorporate information
from that student’s cohort. In our case, this approach implies that the estimation of the value-added of
a school’s superintendent does not incorporate information from that school. Stated differently, the
value added of a school’s superintendent is estimated out of sample for every school for every period.
Stated explicitly, in the first method we measure value added based on ‘non-switchers’ and in a second
step estimate its effect using the sample of ‘switchers’. In the second method we measure value added
based on ‘switchers’ and in a second step estimate its effect using the sample of ‘non-switchers’.

Method I: Measuring Superintendents Value Added Based on ‘Non-Switchers’
        Based on the non-switchers’ sample (schools that stayed with the same superintendent during
the study period), we estimate equation (1) while including a dummy variable for each superintendent.
The practical representation of this specification is that a vector of superintendents’ fixed effects is
included in equation (1) and the estimates of these fixed effects are the measure of superintendents’




                                                   9
value added.8 We estimate this regression separately for each of the sub-periods: 2002-03 and 2004-05.
Each school is included once in each of these regressions because the test scores data is available for
each school in one of the two years of each of these two periods. Here as well, the interpretation of the
superintendent fixed effect as a value added measure rests on the assumption that all schools that share
the same superintendent do not share any other common factor that might affect their learning outcomes.
Including many students’ and school level controls in equation (1), in particular lagged school level
means test scores, as done in the above-referenced studies on teachers’ value added, ensures that the
superintendents’ fixed effects picks up only the superintendent’s value added.
        Table 2 presents the estimates of these two regressions from which we recover the estimated
superintendents’ fixed effects. The Xj vector includes an indicator for male students, number of siblings,
an immigrant indicator, father’s and mother’s years of schooling, six indicators of student’s ethnicity,
school enrolment and number of classes. The means and standard deviations for these variables are
presented in columns 1 and 3 for each of the two periods.9 The 1991 schools standardized test scores
means of 4th and 5th grade in Hebrew and math are also included in these regressions. The point estimates
of the control variables have the expected signs: boys have 0.10- 0.13 standard deviation lower test
scores than girls, number of siblings is negatively correlated with test scores, immigrants and students
from Asia-Africa and Ethiopian ethnic background have negative correlation with test scores, and
parental schooling and ethnicity from Europe, America, Israel and the former Soviet Union has positive
correlation with test scores. The school average lagged test score in Hebrew has a significant positive
effect on current outcomes but the estimate of the lagged math test score is zero. These estimates are
much weaker, because the school test score means are highly correlated with the school means of
students’ characteristics that are also included in these regressions.
        We standardized the superintendents’ fixed effects as a z-scores distribution with mean zero
and standard deviation one. Figure 6 displays the two distributions (first and second period) of the
standardized value added measure of 47 superintendents that are in charge of 497 schools. The two
distributions look identical, and their equality is not rejected in a two-sample KS test. The correlation
coefficient between these two value-added measures of each superintendent is 0.62.
        The use of lagged scores as controls is meant to ensure that the superintendent fixed effect does
not capture some unobserved school-specific characteristics. Although short lags would be ideal to do



8
  This approach is identical to the method used in Rivkin et al (2005) and Jacob (2010) who measured teachers’
value added and also very similar to the method used in Rothstein (2010) and Chetty et al. (2014) in a teachers’
value added context as well.
9
  It is important to note that these student and school’s characteristics are the main determinant of school
government funding. In 2002 and 2003 the school budget was mainly a function of number of classes in school
and on a school level deprivation index (which was function of a school’s mean of student characteristics). In
2004 and 2005 school funding was based on school enrolment and the school deprivation index. See Lavy (2017)
for more details on the funding rules in the two periods.

                                                      10
so, the 1991 scores which are available to us perform just as well. Figure 7 displays the distributions of
student-level estimated standardized value added of the 2004-2005 period using alternative lagged
scores sets as controls. The distribution of value added using the 1991 lagged scores as controls and the
value added distributions using 2002-2003 lagged scores look identical, and equality of any distribution
pair cannot be rejected by a two-sample KS test. This provides important support to the validity of our
value added estimates.

Method II: Measuring Superintendents’ Value Added Based on Switchers
We specify a school level value added regression:
            Yj1 - Yj0 = γ Osj1 + β (Xj1 – Xj0) + δ (Sj1 – Sj0) + µ Yjl + uj1        (2)
when the dependent variable is the change in test score between period 0 and period 1. Ȏjs1 is the new
superintendent j in period 1 of school s. Xj0 and Sj0 are the students’ and school’s mean characteristics
in the first period and Xj1 and Sj1 are the respective means in the second period. (Xj1 – Xj0) and (Sj1 – Sj0)
are the changes in students’ and school’s characteristics. Superintendent fixed effect Oj is the mean
residual change in test scores (value added) of the schools that are part of the cluster of superintendent
j. Yjl is the lagged test scores in math, English and Hebrew. As lagged test scores we use the earliest test
scores data available for all schools from a national testing program in 1991 and 1992. The 1991 data
include test scores in Hebrew and math in 4th and 5th grade and the 1992 data include test scores of 3rd
graders in the same subjects. Even though these data are from more than a decade ago, they are strong
and precise predictors of the 2002-2005 test scores. For example, the R2 of a regression of the 2002-
2003 stacked test score in Hebrew and math on the 2004-05 respective test scores is 0.42. The R2 when
the 1991 test scores replace the 2002-2003 scores is 0.41. Furthermore, when the 1991 test scores are
included jointly with the 2002-2003 test scores in a regression of the 2004-05 test scores, both lagged
sets of test scores have positive and similar coefficients.10
           We combine all observed data throughout the study period, 2002-2005, for the estimation of
superintendent’s value added. Table 3 presents the estimates of equation (2). The Xj vector includes an
indicator for male students, number of siblings, an immigrant indicator, father’s and mother’s years of
schooling, six student’s ethnicity indicators, school enrolment and number of classes. The means and
standard deviations for these variables are presented in column 1 of Table 3.11 Most of the estimated
coefficients of the right-hand side variables are different from zero except for the two parental education
variables. This pattern is most likely a result of the stability of the characteristics of a school within this

10
     We don’t present these results in the paper and they are available from the authors upon request.
11
  It is important to note that these student and school’s characteristics are the main determinant of school
government funding. In 2002 and 2003 the school budget was mainly a function of number of classes in school
and on a school level deprivation index (which was function of a school’s mean of student characteristics). In
2004 and 2005 school funding was based on school enrolment and the school deprivation index. See Lavy (2017)
for more details on the funding rules in the two periods – a reference is missing.

                                                           11
short period. From this regression we recover the superintendents’ fixed effects. These are then
standardized as a z-scores distribution with mean zero and standard deviation one. Figure 8 displays the
distribution of the standardized value added measure of 44 superintendents that are in charge of 226
schools.12 It is clear that there is large variation in superintendent quality which we can use to estimate
its impact on schools’ academic and non-academic outcomes.
         The correlation coefficient between the two measures of superintendent value added, based on
the sample that includes all superintendents for which we computed value added I and II, is 0.61. It is
very re-assuring that these two alternative measures, based on very different methods and samples, are
highly correlated.
Are Switching Schools and Superintendents Quasi-Randomly Matched? In this section we show that
the likelihood that a school experienced a change in superintendent is unrelated to the superintendent’s
value added or to the school characteristics. This is an expected result, given the details in section 2
clarifying that changes in superintendent-school paring are related to personal and geographical
considerations, and not to the relationship between the school and the quality of its superintendent.
Are schools that changed or remained with the same superintendent observationally equivalent? In
Table 4, we present summary statistics for the variables used in the analysis. Column 1 presents the
means for the sample of all schools that did not change superintendent during the period of the study,
and column 2 presents the respective means for the schools that did change superintendent during this
period. Panel A includes 13 schools’ mean of its students and other characteristics (gender, number of
siblings, immigrant status, mother and father years of education, and 6 ethnic origin indicators,
enrolment and number of classes). Panel B includes schools’ mean of its students’ test scores in national
standardized exams in math, Hebrew and English. The 497 schools that stayed with the same
superintendent during the study period had 63,979 students and 47 superintendents. The 82 schools that
switched superintendent between 2002 and 2004 or between 2003 and 2005 had 10,293 students and
29 superintendents.
         In column 3 we present the balancing tests between columns 1 and 2, which are a test of a
correlation between the probability of a school changing superintendent and its observable
characteristics. There are 16 parameter estimates and only one of them is statistically different from
zero. With respect to the proportion of Asia-Africa ethnicity, the difference is larger and more
significant. However, it should be noted that the two groups are statistically indistinguishable in terms
of their parental years of schooling and in terms of the average test scores in each of the three subjects,
both in terms of the absolute differences and their statistical significance. We view this evidence as



12
  We also estimated the value added regression where school means data replaces student-individual in outcome
test scores and student characteristics. The distribution of the superintendents’ value added values looks identical
to that displayed in Figure 2.

                                                        12
suggestive of no particular pattern of selection in the probability of changing superintendent, and
definitely no correlation with students’ socio-economic background and test scores.
        Next we estimate whether quality of the incoming superintendent is correlated with observable
school characteristics and outcomes. We use the value added based on method I and method II. These
balancing tests are presented in columns 4-5 of Table 4. In column 4 we present the estimates based on
value added I. The sample includes only the 82 schools (10,249 students and 29 superintendents) that
switched superintendent between 2002 and 2004 or between 2003 and 2005. Four of the 16 estimates
in column 4 are statistically different from zero: ethnicity Israel and ethnicity Europe-America are
positively and negatively correlated, respectively, with superintendent quality. These two ethnic groups
have higher socio-economic backgrounds than the other ethnic groups so we expect that they will have
the same direction of selection. But we see that these two ethnic indicators have the opposite sign of
their correlation with superintendent value added, one positive and the other negative, suggesting
perhaps that their significance imbalance does not reflect a systematic selection pattern in the
assignment of schools to superintendents. The evidence is a clear indication that overall this value added
measure is not systematically correlated with students’ and schools’ observed background variables.
Particularly reassuring is the lack of any correlation with student’s parental education and with lagged
test scores in panel B. Another point that underscores the relatively marginal importance of these
imbalances is that our model of estimating the effect of value added I on school outcomes includes a
school fixed effect that is feasible because we observe each school with two different superintendents.
In column 5, we present estimates based on value added II. The sample includes 301 schools that did
not change superintendent. Only one of the 16 estimates is statistically different from zero, ethnicity
Ethiopian.

6. Estimated Impact of Superintendents’ Value Added
We estimate equation (1) twice, first using school level means for all variables and secondly with
student level data. Using student micro data of course allows estimation with much larger sample,
leading to more precise estimates. It also allows estimation of treatment heterogeneity by students’
characteristics: particularly important in this context is the heterogeneity of the effect of superintendent
value added by students’ socio-economic background.
        The first row of Table 6 presents estimations with school level data of the effect of
superintendent value added on students’ achievement in math, English, and Hebrew. In columns 1-4 we
present the estimates of the effect of value added based on the first measure. Here we use the sample of
‘switchers’, schools that changed superintendent between two periods. These schools will have a
different superintendent in each period and so their superintendent Ȏjst value added will be period (t)
specific. The GEMS data provides panel data on schools where each school participates in two rounds
of national testing, between which it experiences a change in its superintendent. Schools that participate
in the 2002 testing round are also included in 2004. Similarly, schools included in the 2003 testing are
                                                  13
also included in 2005. We stack this panel data so that αj can be estimated as a school fixed effect. The
advantage of this school fixed effect model (which is equivalent to a difference equation at the school
level) is that it controls for omitted time-invariant variables biases that could potentially be correlated
to superintendents’ value added. We report results from four different specifications. In column 1 the
regression includes year effect as a control; in column 2 subject fixed effects are added as a control; in
column 3 schools' and mean students' characteristics are added as well, and in the fourth specification,
reported in column 4, we also include school fixed effects. The estimates in columns 1-3 are negative
but small and not significantly different from zero. The within school estimate (regressions with schools
fixed effect) presented in column 4 is, however, positive, 0.038, and significantly different from zero at
the 5 percent level of significance, suggesting that one standard deviation increase in superintendent
value added increases test scores in the three subjects by 3.8 percent of a standard deviation of the test
score distribution. In the second row of Table 6 we present the estimates based on the students’ sample.
Standard errors are therefore clustered at the superintendent level by year level. The estimates in this
row are similar to those presented in the first row. The respective estimate in this sample is 0.040
(se=0.015).13
         In columns 5-7 we report results based on the second value added measure from three different
specifications, identical to those in columns 1-3. The unit of observation is the student, but the level of
treatment is at the school level. The estimates in columns 5-7 are positive but only the estimate in
column 7, 0.061, is significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level of significance. Since both
the superintendent value added and the test scores are standardized to mean zero and a unit standard
deviation, this estimated effect implies that one standard deviation increase in superintendent value
added increases test scores in the three subjects by 6.1 percent of a standard deviation of the test score
distribution. The respective estimate using student level data is 0.053 and it is only significant at the 10
percent level of significance. This effect implies that one standard deviation increase in superintendent
value added increases test scores in the three subjects by 5.3 percent of a standard deviation in the test
score distribution.
         Remarkably, the two measures of superintendent value added yield similar estimated effect
sizes, especially when comparing the estimates using the micro students’ data: 0.053 versus 0.040. Both
are statistically different from zero but their confidence intervals overlap.
         As a robustness check of our results, we also estimated the effect of the superintendent’s quality
measure using two alternative estimation strategies. In the first strategy we implement a Bayes
shrinkage estimation strategy and construct an unbiased measure of superintendent value added that


13
  These results are robust to the exclusion of the 15 schools that were reassigned as a single-school or two-schools
cluster and their reassignment shows no clear spatial logic as discussed in section 4 (See Table A1.) In fact, results
are also robust to the exclusion of all the 40 schools that were reassigned as a single-school or two-schools cluster,
regardless of spatial distribution (See Table A2.)

                                                         14
accounts for noise in the measurement. Using this approach, the noisy measure of a superintendent
value added is multiplied by an estimate of its reliability, where the reliability of a noisy measure is the
ratio of signal variance to signal variance plus noise variance. Thus, less reliable measures are shrunk
back toward the mean of the distribution of the superintendent value added measure.14 In the second
strategy we use a two-step bootstrapping algorithm to account for the estimation of superintendents’
value added as a first step, and adjust their estimated standard errors.15
         In both of these alternative estimation strategies we use both measures of value added based on
method I and II and we focus on the specification that includes school fixed effects. The results are
presented in Table 7. The two alternative estimation strategies yield similar results to the respective
estimates presented in Table 6. The standard errors of the bootstrapping algorithm are almost identical
to those of the preferred specification, and accounting for the fact that empirical Bayes estimates are
smaller in absolute values than the initial estimates because of the shrinkage procedure (before
standardization, the pre-shrinkage mean value of superintendent value added is -0.17 while its post-
shrinkage value is 0.013), we compare the elasticities of superintendent value added effects at their
mean values which yields comparable outcomes.
         It is useful to benchmark the effect sizes presented in columns 4 and 7 of Table 6 against the
effect of teachers’ value added. For example, the findings of Rockoff (2004) and Rivkin, Hanushek,
and Kain (2005) both suggest a one standard deviation increase in teacher quality improves student
math scores by about 0.1 standard deviations. Aaronson, Barrow, and Sander (2007) find similar results
using high school data. Branch et al (2012) report that a one standard deviation increase in principal
leadership (i.e., a principal in the top 16 percent of the quality distribution) leads to 0.05 standard
deviation gain in test scores of all students in the school. Chetty (2014b) finds that one standard
deviation improvement in teacher value added in a single grade in primary school in NY City raises the


14
  Following Morris (1983) and the teacher value added literature (for example, Kane and Staiger 2008) we
construct the EB shrinkage factor for superintendent i by the ratio of signal variance to signal variance plus noise
variance of superintendent i. Similarly to the teacher value added literature, we assume that the measure of
superintendent bias includes an error component. Thus, estimating superintendents’ effects on students’ test scores
enables separation of the signal variance (variance of superintendents’ effects) and noise variance of
superintendent i (variance of the residuals for superintendent i). The EB estimate for each superintendent is a
weighted average of the superintendent estimated effect and the mean of superintendent estimates, where the
weight is the EB shrinkage factor. Implementing this methodology, the less reliable estimates of superintendent
value added (those with a large variation in estimated residuals) are shrunk towards the mean of superintendent
estimates.
15
   The bootstrap estimates of the standard errors are constructed as follows. In a first step, a random sample with
replacement is drawn from each superintendents’ schools. A new measurement of superintendent bias for each
superintendent is created, based on the new sample of schools. In a second step, the effect of these new value
added measures on student test scores in 5th grade is estimated (based on the preferred specification presented in
Table 6) and the coefficients are stored. This process of two-step bootstrap sampling and estimation is repeated
1,000 times. The standard deviations in the sample of 1,000 observations of coefficient estimates from the second
step are the bootstrap standard errors of the estimated effects of superintendent value added.

                                                        15
probability of college attendance at age 20 by 0.82 percentage points, relative to a sample mean of 37%.
In comparison to other schooling interventions, it would require one additional hour of instruction per
week in math, Hebrew and English (a 25 percent increase) in order to achieve the same effect as a one
standard deviation increase in superintendent value-added (Lavy 2015).
           Since 80 percent of the superintendents in our sample are female, we report in Panel B, third
and fourth rows of Table 6, the estimates from regressions when the sample is restricted to schools with
female superintendents. The estimated effect based on the school level means is 0.048 (se=0.022) when
using the first value added measure and 0.063 (se=0.032) when using the second value added measure,
both larger than the full sample estimates but not significantly different from them. The two estimates
obtained from the students’ sample level regressions are 0.053 and 0.055.
           In Panel C we present evidence based on sub-samples of students by parental education.
Father’s or mother’s years of schooling are good proxies for student’s socio-economic background.
Research on the causal impact of school inputs suggest that students from poorer backgrounds benefit
more from factors such lower class size, remedial education, higher quality peers and teacher quality.16
Our estimates show no such differences with respect to the effect of management quality in public
education.
           To check for potential non-linearity in the effect of superintendent value added, we report in
Table 8 estimates where we divide the distribution to ranges from low to high. First we split the range
above and below the median of superintendent’s value added. Using value added I, the estimate for the
indicator of above median quality is 0.065 (se=0.036) and using value added II yields a marginally
higher estimate, 0.082 (se=0.036). Secondly, we divide the distribution to quartiles of superintendent’s
value added. The estimates for three upper quartile value added indicators are increasing monotonically:
with value added I the estimates are 0.031, 0.055, and 0.130. With value added II they are 0.080, 0.099,
and 0.135, suggesting a non-linear effect of superintendent value added with a monotonically increasing
effect. The estimated effect of the upper quartile of ability is statistically significantly different from
zero for both value added estimates.
           Clearly the effect of superintendents’ value added is non-linear and it increases sharply with
value added. It is natural and interesting to compare this pattern of non-linear effect with that of the
effect of teachers’ value added but we did not find studies that provide such evidence.
           Since the middle school system in Israel (grades 7-9) shares the same model of superintendents
as that of primary schools, we replicated the analysis presented above with the data for middle schools.
We relied on value added I as the measure of superintendent quality because the sample of schools is
much smaller than the primary schools sample: only 15 schools had changed their superintendent from
2002-2003 to 2004-2005 and during the two periods, 13 different superintendents were the CEOs of


16
     For example, Angrist and Lavy (1999).

                                                    16
these schools. Using the students’ level data, the estimated effect of value added I for middle schools is
presented in Table 9. The point estimates are negative in the first three columns but change sign when
a school fixed effect is added to the regression as a control. The estimated effect is 0.048, very close to
the respective estimate based on the sample of primary schools (0.040, se=0.016) but much less
precisely estimated (se=0.055), probably due to the much smaller sample of schools, 15 versus 82.

5. Identifying Mechanisms of Effect of Superintendents’ Value Added
         The results reported above show that schools exhibit higher achievement when they have a
higher value added superintendent. In this section, we explore several potential mechanisms through
which superintendents’ value added may affect their students’ academic achievement. We use a rich set
of school practices and outcomes based on responses to questionnaires of primary school principals,
teachers and students.17 We focus on items that relate to the classroom and school environment (student
questionnaire), on school activities and programs in the area of improving school climate and students’
norms and on school resources (principal questionnaire), school procedures and teachers' on and off the
job training (teacher questionnaire). To obtain a more general picture of the possible mechanisms and
to gain statistical power, we also group outcomes into eight categories. We analyse each category by
creating a category-specific average effect. This allows us to control for the potential problem of over-
rejection of the null hypothesis due to multiple inference. Because different outcomes have different
data scales, simply averaging the estimators for the treatment effect is not likely to produce a meaningful
statistic. To address this concern, we follow the summary-index approach per Kling et al. (2007). The
average effect of multiple outcomes is the average of z-scores of each outcome variable. This summary
index is a special case of the z-score and is identical to the mean effect size of treatment if there is no
missing value.18 In general, the sign of the summary index reveals information on the direction of the




17
  See H. Jerome Freiberg (1999) and J. Barry Fraser (1998) for recent reviews of the educational research lit-
erature about the validity of students’ and teachers’ assessments of the classroom environment and their
associations with students’ achievements.
18
  In the regression specification this approach yields standardized estimators as follows: the treatment effects for
𝐾 outcomes are aggregated and reflected in a single standard normal statistic,
                                               1   𝜷1k
                                          𝜏=     ∑     ,     𝑘 = 1, … , 𝐾
                                               𝐾   𝜎𝑘𝐶
                                                  𝑘

where 𝜷1𝑘 indicates the average treatment effect for outcome 𝑘 and 𝜎𝑘𝐶 denotes the standard deviation of the 𝑘 th
control outcome. Having included the covariates, the 𝐾 average treatment effects (𝜷𝟏 ) and sample variances can
be easily acquired through a linear regression. By doing so, the above equation can be thought of as a point
estimator representing a collection of standardized treatment effects. However, this paper also takes into account
the covariance of effects and therefore adapt a seemingly uncorrelated regression (O’Brien 1984, Kling et al.
2007):

                                             𝐘 = 𝑰𝑲 ⨂(𝑻      𝑿)𝜷 + 𝝊

                                                        17
aggregate impact of a class of outcomes, and the more the summary index deviates from zero, the
stronger is the implied aggregate effect.
         We are aware, of course, that we are not able to measure all the relevant mechanisms, and we
cannot rule out the possibility that other mechanisms are in place, but the analysis presented in this
section provides important insights regarding the possible mediating factors that drive the positive effect
of the school superintendent on students’ achievements.19 Our hypothesis is that if the effects of the
superintendent value added are partially being driven by a particular mediating factor, observing a
significant effect of the superintendent value added on this factor provides some evidence for the
validity of this hypothesis.20 We use in this section value added I as our measure of superintendent
quality because its estimation is based on sample that is twice as large as the one use to estimate value
added II (497 schools versus 226 schools) and it allows for estimating within-school effects.
School Priorities, Working Procedures and Resources: In Table 10 we present evidence about three
potential channels for the effect of superintendent value added, priority setting by schools and working
procedures, school resources and students’ time allocated to homework. Three items in the teacher’s
questionnaire (“school has clearly defined priorities”, “teachers are involved in setting school
priorities”, and “school has clearly defined working procedures”) reflect management practices that can
affect the allocation and use of school resources and therefore be conducive or harmful to learning and
achievement. Clearly the scope, responsibilities and management directives of superintendent can affect
these school factors by the frequent interaction with school principals and teachers. In panel A we
present treatment effect estimates for these outcomes, the mean of which are very high, over 5 in a scale
of 1-6. The within school estimates show that a higher superintendent value added improves only the
first outcome, which reflects student-teacher relationship, but not the others. Panel B of Table 10
provides evidence on the impact of the superintendent’s value added on school resources, including
outcomes that are less likely to be affected by the superintendent, such as class size and instruction
budget per class. These school inputs are determined by national or regional educational authorities and
the superintendent should not be able to influence them. Indeed, we find no significant effect on these



where 𝑻 is the treatment indicator(s), and 𝑿 consists of controlled regressors as well as a constant term.
19
  A further limitation is that we cannot identify the causal effect of the mechanisms on outcomes because the
former are numerous and we have only one potential instrument.

20
   Lavy and Schlosser (2011) show in online Appendix Table 5 that all indicators of the quality of the classroom
environment, as described by the students, are highly correlated with students’ academic performances even after
controlling for school fixed effects and students’ background characteristics. For example, they report that lower
levels of classroom disruption and violence, better inter-student relationships, and a higher quality of interaction
between teachers and students are all positively associated with students’ test scores. Though they do not provide
a causal interpretation to these correlations, their results suggest that students’ assessments of their classroom
environment have a high informational content and that these mechanisms, as pointed out in the educational
literature, might play an important role in student’s learning process.

                                                        18
inputs. We also find no significant effects of superintend quality on instruction time on different subjects
and on the time students allocate to homework. These results are presented in Panel C.
School climate programs and outcomes: From two items in the school principal questionnaire we
define an indicator of whether, in the current year, the school assessed the school climate and norms,
and whether it had interventions aiming at improving norms, values, and discipline of students. In panel
A of Table 11 we report estimates from regressions when each of these two indicators is the dependent
variable. We use three different specifications identical to the three specifications used in Table 6.
Seventy one percent of the schools in the sample had in the current year an assessment of discipline,
violence and norms in school and 29 percent of schools had interventions targeted at improving these
aspects of the school environment. Superintendents’ value added has a positive and statistically
significant effect on both of these outcomes. The average effect shows similar positive outcomes.
        In panel B of Table 11 we present estimates of the effect of superintendents’ value added on
classroom and school violence. This analysis is based on the following items from the student’s
questionnaire: (1) “There are many fights among students in my classroom.”; (2) "This year I was
involved in many fights" (3) “Sometimes I’m scared to go to school because there are violent students.”
The estimates reported in panel B columns 2–4 of Table 11 suggest that a higher superintendent value
added significantly lowers the level of violence in school. This effect is evident in each of the three
items and also in their average effect. For example, the estimate for the effect of superintendent value
added on students’ reports regarding the level of violence in the classroom is −0.035 (se = 0.018). The
average effect of these three items is more precise than the estimates for the individual items. The
average estimate is −0.033 (se = 0.012). Overall, these results suggest that having a higher quality
superintendent improves the safety climate in school by lowering the incidence of fights, increasing the
safety of students, and lowering their anxiety about attending school.
        Three items in the student’s questionnaire ("When I have a problem at school there is always
someone I can turn to (from the teaching staff)", “I feel well-adjusted socially in my class,” and “I am
satisfied in school”) reflect school environment and climate, in particular the relationships between
students and teachers and the quality of inter-student relationships. These factors can be conducive or
harmful to learning and achievement. Being well-adjusted and accepted socially among classroom peers
may improve a student’s self-confidence, self-image, motivation, and other non-cognitive attributes that
might be essential for effective learning.21 In panel C we present treatment effect estimates for these
outcomes, the means of which are very high, over 5 in a scale of 1-6. The within school estimates show
that a higher superintendent value added improves only the first outcome, which reflects student-teacher


21
  Table A3 provides further evidence on the relationship between school climate and violence, and students’
scores. As the evidence cannot be interpreted as causal, the large and statistical within school conditional
correlations with students’ scores provide additional support for school climate and violence as a mechanism
through which superintendents affect students’ outcomes.

                                                    19
relationships, but not the others. The estimates of the social and school satisfaction are positive but they
are small and not statistically different from zero, and so is the average effect.
Scholastic Programs and Teachers Training: In Table 12 we present evidence on three additional
potential channels for the effect of superintendent’s value added: school scholastic programs in Hebrew,
math and English, and two forms of teachers’ training in each of these three subjects, in service on the
job training and external courses. The subject specific programs include additional instructional
resources for a given subject or improvements to teaching methods and practices. The effect of
superintendent value added is positive and significant in English but not in programs for the other two
subjects.
        The effect of superintendent quality on teachers’ training outside of schools is practically zero,
as seen by the estimated effect on external training in each of the three subjects. The estimated effect of
on the job training is positive and significant, in math it is positive but not precisely measured, and in
English it is negative but not different from zero. The average effect is positive but imprecise,
suggesting that the overall effect is negligible but the effect on the composition of the in school training
is meaningful. Angrist and Lavy (2001) estimated a large effect of such in school training on students’
test scores.
Changing School’s Principal: In Table 13 we present evidence on another important channel for the
effect of superintendent value added, changing the school principal. About 15 percent of the schools
change their principal every year, implying that the mean duration of a school principal is 6-7 years. In
columns 1-3 we present estimates of the effect of an indicator of change in the school superintendent
on the probability of a school changing its principal. This likelihood is lower by about 6 percent in the
year a new superintendent steps in, and it is 9 percent higher the following year. When both the
contemporaneous and one year lagged effect are included jointly the estimates change marginally,
though the pattern is the same. In columns 4-9 we present the estimates for each year separately. Most
interesting are the results for the academic year 2004-2005, because we can estimate the
contemporaneous effect and the one and two year lag effects. The pattern that emerges is striking: the
likelihood of a change in school principal in a new superintendent’s first year is lower by 7.6 percent;
higher by 14 percent in the second year, and zero in the third year. These estimates clearly suggest that
a change in school management is associated with the engagement of a new superintendent.

6. Concluding Remarks
        This is the first paper that measures the causal effect of the quality of management-supervision
in public education. The structure of the education system in Israel, as in many other countries, includes
a superintendent who is the CEO of a group of about 15 schools over which she/he has extensive
responsibility and authority. We exploit quasi-random turnover of superintendents over time to measure
their value added in terms of test score gains in English, Hebrew and math in primary schools in Israel.
This turnover is largely dictated by a routine in the system to rotate superintendents across schools every
                                                      20
3-5 years, and by other naturally occurring events such as retirement of superintendents. We show that
geographical considerations largely determine which schools are included in a superintendent’s cluster
of schools. We further demonstrate that the turnover of superintendents is unrelated to schools or
students’ potential outcomes. We measure superintendents’ value added similarly to recent measures of
teachers’ value added, including controls for school level lagged outcomes. We construct two
alternative value added measures: the first based on the common academic achievement level of all
schools that share the same superintendent, the second based on the common growth in academic
achievement shared by all schools that were assigned to the same new superintendent. We then show
that both measures of superintendents’ value added are uncorrelated with the probability that
superintendents experience turnover of schools.
        We estimate that superintendent value added has positive and significant effects on primary
students’ test scores in math, Hebrew, and English. Based on the first value added measure, one standard
deviation improvement in superintendent value added increases test scores by about 0.04 standard
deviations in the test score distribution. The effect is similar for students from lower and higher socio-
economic backgrounds, it is highly non-linear, increasing sharply for superintendents in the highest
quartile of the value added distribution, and larger but not statistically significantly so for female
superintendents. We obtain similar results when using the second measure of value added. We explore
several mechanisms for these effects and find that superintendents with higher value added are
associated with more focused school priorities and more clearly defined working procedures, but no
effect on school resources – as funding is determined centrally at the Ministry of Education, and no
effect on teachers’ on the job and external training. Schools with higher quality superintendents are
more likely to address school climate, violence and bullying, and implement interventions that lead to
lower violence in school and higher social school satisfaction among students. It is interesting to note
that this channel of effect of reducing violence and bullying in school is consistent with the strong
discipline ‘no excuse’ philosophy of charter schools (Dobbie and Fryer 2013, Angrist, Pathak and
Walters 2013) which also was effective in improving school outcomes when implemented in non-
charter public schools (Fryer 2014).
        Two additional remarks point to the relevance of our findings for public policy. First we note
that the effect size of superintendent’s value added is particularly cost effective, because an increase in
the quality of one manager can improve the outcomes of thousands of students. Therefore, investing in
the quality of these ‘CEOs’ of schools is very compelling resource wise, relative to investment in other
school inputs, for example teacher quality. Secondly, about 70 percent of all superintendents are
women, very different to the relative scarcity of women in leadership roles in other public sector
management roles, and in the private sector. Our findings suggest that the quality of women as
superintendents does not fall short of that of men in the same position, raising the policy concern of



                                                    21
why there are so few women in leadership roles even in the public sector, and how allocative efficiency
can be improved in this regard in the labor market.


6. References

Angrist JD, Pathak PA, Walters CR. Explaining Charter School Effectiveness. American Economic
    Journal: Applied Economics. 2013; 5(4):1-27.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 1999. “Using Maimonides Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class
    Size on Scholastic Achievement.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114(2):533–75.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy. 2001. "The Effect of Teachers' Training on Student
    Achievements.” Journal of Labor Economics, volume 19, no. 2, pp. 343-369.
Aaronson, Daniel, Lisa Barrow, and William Sander. 2007. “Teachers and Student Achievement in the
    Chicago Public High Schools.” Journal of Labor Economics 25(1):95–135.
Bacher-Hicks, A., T. J. Kane, and D. O. Staiger (2014): “Validating Teacher Effect Estimates Using
    Changes in Teacher Assignments in Los Angeles,” Working paper 20657, National Bureau of
    Economic Research.
Banerjee. A., R. Chattopadhyay, E. Duflo, D. Keniston and N. Singh (2014) “Improving Police
    Performance in Rajasthan, India: Experimental Evidence on Incentives, Managerial Autonomy and
    Training”, mimeo, MIT.
Benabou. R, and J. Tirole (2006) “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation,” Review of Economic Studies 70:
    489-520.
Bertrand Marianne and Antoinette Schoar, "Managing with Style: The Effect of Managers on Firm
    Policies" , The Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 2003, 118(4), pp. 1169-1208.
Besley. T and M. Ghatak (2005) “Competition and Incentives with Motivated Agents,” American
    Economic Review 95: 616-36.
Bloom. N and J. Van Reenen (2007) “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms
    and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122: 1351-1408.
Bloom. N and J. Van Reenen (2010) “New Approaches to Surveying Organizations,” American
    Economic Review 100: 105-9.
Bloom. N, Renata Lemos, Raffaella Sadun and J. Van Reenen (2015) "Does Management Matter in
    Schools?" Economic Journal Vol. 125, No. 584: 647-674.
Branch, Gregory F., Eric A. Hanushek, and Steven G. Rivkin. 2012. ‘Estimating the Effect of Leaders
    on Public Sector Productivity: The Case of School Principals’. Working Paper 17803. National
    Bureau of Economic Research.
Bryson, Alex, Lucy Stokes and David Wilkinson (2017) “Can HRM Improve Schools’ Performance?”
    Manuscript, October.


                                                  22
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff, (2014a): “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I:
    Evaluating Bias in Teacher Value-Added Estimates,” American Economic Review, 104, 2593–
    2632.
Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, and J. E. Rockoff, (2014b): “Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher
    Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood,” American Economic Review, 104, 2633–
    2679.
Clark, Damon, Paco Martorell, and Jonah E. Rockoff. 2009. ‘School Principals and School
    Performance’. 38. CALDER Working Papers. Center for Analysis of Longitudinal Data in
    Education Research.
Dal Bo. E, F. Finan and M. Rossi (2013) “Strengthening State Capabilities: The Role of Financial
    Incentives in the Call to Public Service,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 128: 1169-218.
Di Liberto. A, F. Schivardi and G. Sulis (2013) “Managerial Practices and Students’ Performance,”
    mimeo, LUISS.
Dobbie W, Fryer Jr. RG. Getting beneath the veil of effective schools: Evidence from New York City.
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics. 2013; 5(4):28–60.
Fehr. E, H. Herz and T. Wilkening (2013) “The Lure of Authority: Motivation and Incentive Effects of
    Power,” American Economic Review 103: 1325-59.
Fryer RG. Injecting charter schools best practices into traditional public schools: Evidence from field
    experiments. The Quarterly Journal of Economics. 2014;129(3):1355-1407.
Grissom, Jason A., and Susanna Loeb. 2011. ‘Triangulating Principal Effectiveness How Perspectives
    of Parents, Teachers, and Assistant Principals Identify the Central Importance of Managerial
    Skills’. American Educational Research Journal 48(5):1091–1123.
Hanushek, Eric A., Susanne Link, and Ludger Woessmann. 2013. ‘Does School Autonomy Make Sense
    Everywhere? Panel Estimates from PISA’. Journal of Development Economics 104 (September):
    212–32.
Horng, Eileen Lai, Daniel Klasik, and Susanna Loeb. 2010. ‘Principal’s Time Use and School
    Effectiveness’. American Journal of Education 116 (4): 491–523.
Imran Rasul, and Daniel Roggery, “Management of Bureaucrats and Public Service Delivery: Evidence
    from the Nigerian Civil Service,” June 2015.
Jacob, Brian A., and Lars Lefgren and David P. Sims, 2010. “The Persistence of Teachers-Induced
    Learning”, Journal of Human Resources 45(4):915-943.
Kane, T. J., D. F. McCaffrey, T. Miller, and D. O. Staiger (2013), “Have We Identified Eﬀective
    Teachers? Validating Measures of Eﬀective Teaching Using Random Assignment,” Research
    paper, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, Washington.
Kane, T. J., and Staiger, D. O., 2008. Estimating Teacher Impacts on Student Achievement: An
    Experimental Evaluation, NBER Working Paper No. 14607.

                                                   23
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. "Experimental analysis of neighborhood
    effects." Econometrica 75.1, 2007, 83-119.
Lavy Victor and Analia Schlosser (2011) “Mechanisms and Impacts of Gender Peer Effects at School”
    American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3 (April): 1–33.
Lavy Victor “Expanding School Resources and Increasing Time on Task: Effects of a Policy
    Experiment in Israel on Student Academic Achievement and Behavior”, Draft 2017.
McCormack, John, Carol Propper, and Sarah Smith. 2014. ‘Herding Cats? Management and University
    Performance’. The Economic Journal 124 (578): 534–564.
Morris, C. 1983. “Parametric Empirical Bayes Inference: Theory and Applications”. Journal of the
    American Statistical Association 78, 47-55.Murnane, R.J., J.B. Willett and F. Levy, 1995. “The
    Growing Importance of Cognitive Skills in Wage Determination”, Review of Economics and
    Statistics 77, 251-266.
Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 2005. “Teachers, Schools, and Academic
    Achievement.” Econometrica 73(2):417–58.
Rockoff, Jonah E. 2004. “The Impact of Individual Teachers on Student Achievement: Evidence from
    Panel Data,” American Economic Review 94(2):247–52.
Rothstein, J. (2009), “Student Sorting And Bias In Value-Added Estimation: Selection On Observables
    And Unobservables,” Education Finance and Policy, 4, 537–571.
Rothstein, J. (2010), “Teacher Quality in Educational Production: Tracking, Decay, and Student
    Achievement,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 125, 175–214.
——— (2015): “Teacher Quality Policy When Supply Matters,” American Economic Review, 105,
    100–130.
——— (2016): “Revisiting the Impacts of Teachers,” Manuscript, March.
Woessmann, Ludger, Elke Lüdemann, Gabriela Schütz, and Martin R. West. 2007. ‘School
    Accountability, Autonomy, Choice, and the Level of Student Achievement’. OECD Education
    Working Papers 13. Paris: OECD Publishing.




                                                 24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
      Figure 1: Superintendents’ Turnover: Central District 2004-05




Notes: One of Miryam’s 2005 schools is new. Two of Abraham’s 2005 schools are new. One
of Johanna’s 2004 schools closed at the end of the year. One of Ariela’s 2004 schools closed at
the end of the year.




                                          38
       Figure 2: Superintendents’ Turnover: South District 2002-03




Notes: Miryam had one middle school in 2002 and 4 middle schools in 2003. Uri had 2 middle
schools in both years. One of Sarah's 2002 schools closed at the end of the year. Bridget had
one middle school in 2002 and one of her 2002 schools closed at the end of the year. Ruth had
5 middle schools in 2002 and 8 middle schools in 2003.




                                         39
  Figure 3: Chart of Superintendents’ Schools Turnover in Haifa District 2003 - 2004




Notes: One of Sarah’s 2003 schools closed at the end of the year. Isaac had 6 middle schools
in 2003 and 5 middle schools in 2004. Solomon had one Arabic school in 2003 and none in
2004.




                                            40
41
42
43
44
45
Map 1: Central District 2005




            46
Map 2: Tel Aviv District 2005




             47
Map 3: South District 2005




           48
Map 4: Haifa District 2005




           49
Map 5: Jerusalem District 2005




             50
Map 6: North District 2005




           51
Map 7: North District 2005




           52
53
54
