NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PASS-THROUGH OF OWN AND RIVAL COST SHOCKS:
EVIDENCE FROM THE U.S. FRACKING BOOM
Erich Muehlegger
Richard L. Sweeney
Working Paper 24025
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24025

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017, Revised October 2019

We thank Ryan Kellogg, Katheryn Russ, Joe Shapiro, Jim Stock, Reed Walker and seminar
participants at Harvard, Duke, University of Connecticut, University of Maryland, the NBER
Hydrocarbon Infrastructure and Transportation workshop, the Empirical Methods in Energy
Economics workshop, and Berkeley Energy Camp for helpful comments. Both authors declare
they have no interests, financial or otherwise, that relate to the research described in this paper,
nor do they have any current ties, directly or indirectly to the energy industry. This work has been
supported by the Sloan Foundation and NBER Hydrocarbon Infrastructure and Transportation
workshop. Assistance with the data from the Energy Information Administration, especially
Joseph Conklin and Lawrence Stroud, is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Erich Muehlegger and Richard L. Sweeney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Pass-Through of Own and Rival Cost Shocks: Evidence from the U.S. Fracking Boom
Erich Muehlegger and Richard L. Sweeney
NBER Working Paper No. 24025
November 2017, Revised October 2019
JEL No. H22,H23,Q40,Q54
ABSTRACT
In imperfectly competitive settings, a firm's price depends on its own costs as well as those of its
competitors. We demonstrate that this has important implications for the estimation and
interpretation of pass-through. Leveraging a large input cost shock resulting from the fracking
boom, we isolate price responses to firm-specific, regional and industry-wide input cost shocks in
the US oil refining industry. The pass-through of these components vary from near zero to full
pass-through, reconciling seemingly disparate results from the literature. We illustrate the policy
implications of rival cost pass-through in the context of a tax on refinery carbon emissions.

Erich Muehlegger
University of California,Davis
Economics Department
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
emuehlegger@ucdavis.edu
Richard L. Sweeney
Economics Department
Boston College
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
sweeneri@bc.edu

1

Introduction

Pass-through of taxes or input costs onto prices is a central policy parameter with wide
ranging economic implications. Pass-through is used to estimate the incidence of actual
taxes (e.g., Marion and Muehlegger (2011); Fabra and Reguant (2014); Stolper (2016)), the
distributional impacts of trade tariffs (e.g., Amiti et al. (2019b); Fajgelbaum et al. (2019)),
the beneficiaries of major entitlement program subsidies (e.g., Duggan et al. (2016)), and
to forecast the incidence of hypothetical taxes (e.g., Ganapati et al. (2017)). It is used as
a sufficient statistic for welfare analysis (e.g., Chetty (2009)) and to recover other objects
of economic importance, such as trade costs (Atkin and Donaldson (2015)), international
propagation of inflation shocks (Gopinath and Rigobon (2008); Auer et al. (2017) or demand
elasticities (Miller et al. (2013)).
In this paper, we demonstrate that the nature of the tax or input cost shock used to
estimate pass-through is directly related to the pass-through rate recovered. In oligopolistic
settings, the price a firm sets depends directly on its own costs, but also indirectly on
its rivals’ costs. This simple observation has two important implications for pass-through
analysis. First, when estimating a firm’s response to a change in its own costs, it is important
to account for rival responses as well. While the close relationship between own price and
rival costs is apparent in even simple oligopoly models, the empirical pass-through literature
rarely conditions on, or even considers, the indirect effects of competitors’ cost changes.
Beyond simple omitted variable bias from correlated cost shocks, the strategic response of
seemingly untreated firms to rival cost changes invalidates them as a control group. Second,
when using pass-through for policy prediction, the identifying variation used in estimation
must match the policy application. For example, a pass-through estimate identified from
firm-level cost or tax shocks may substantially underestimate the price impact of an industrywide policy change.
We demonstrate these points empirically by studying the response of prices in the U.S.
oil refining industry to large input cost shocks resulting from the fracking boom. Our setting
allows us to overcome three challenges that have limited the consideration of rival cost
pass-through in past papers: (1) the need for comprehensive input and output prices for
the universe of firms, (2) the ability to observe which firms are direct competitors, and (3)
an exogenous input cost shock that differentially affects firms. We examine restricted-use
microdata on the universe of oil refiners in the United States from the Energy Information
Administration. For each firm, we observe crude oil procurement costs, detailed plant-level
production decisions, and monthly prices and quantities sold for all refined products at the
state-level. Such rich firm-level data on production, input and output prices are rarely

2

available.1 The confidential sales data allow us to incorporate the spatial supply patterns
of the industry directly, obviating the need to make assumptions about firm competition.2
Finally, our data span the U.S. fracking boom, which led to a near doubling of U.S. oil
production between 2008 and 2015. Despite the scale of the shock, a set of regulatory,
logistical and technological constraints limited the extent to which some refineries could
benefit. The net result was a large reduction in oil input costs of some refiners, while the
costs of other firms, producing identical products and often located nearby, remained largely
unchanged.
The heterogenous impact of this cost shock allows us to separately identify the response
to refiners’ own-costs, their direct competitors’ costs, and industry-wide cost shocks.3 We
estimate pass-through rates that vary from near zero, for firm-specific shocks, to full, for
industry-wide shocks. Viewed as a continuum, these estimates reconcile seemingly conflicting
pass-through estimates from the recent fuel cost literature. Using shift-share variation in
exposure to energy prices across refineries, Ganapati et al. (2017) find that refineries are
largely unable to pass-through costs; while using national variation in the cost of renewable
fuel credits, Knittel et al. (2017) and Lade and Bushnell (2019) find that the incidence
falls fully on consumers.4 We interpret previous estimates as reflective of the distinction
between idiosyncratic and shared cost variation, and show analytically that price changes
will naturally vary for these two shocks, even after conditioning on a firm’s own costs.
We conclude by demonstrating the relevance of these results for policy analysis. We
consider a hypothetical carbon tax on refineries, the second largest industrial point-source of
emissions in the U.S. When paired with a border adjustment tax, a carbon tax is equivalent
to an industry-wide cost shock. Properly accounting for the indirect effects of competitors,
our results suggest consumers bear virtually all (96 percent) of the tax. Moreover, 45 percent
of firms (less carbon-intensive firms that compete with more carbon-intensive rivals) more
than fully pass-on an industry-wide carbon tax. Yet, a prediction of the impact of this tax
based on within market-time variation in costs would suggest prices rise by a mere five cents
per dollar of tax imposed. This exercise underscores the importance of matching the cost
variation used to estimate pass-through with the scope of the policy to which the estimate
1

Fabra and Reguant (2014) is a notable exception, examining bids and carbon intensities for the universe
of Spanish electricity generators.
2
Miller et al. (2017) studies pass-through in the cement industry, with clearly defined markets, yet lacks
firm-specific input prices.
3
Sharing the spirit of this exercise, Amiti and Weinstein (2018) illustrates the importance of decomposing
firm-borrowing and bank-supply shocks as drivers of firm investment and Amiti et al. (2019a) examines
strategic complementarity in price setting in response to cost shocks amongst manufacturing firms.
4
Similar results on full pass-through are obtained in the transmission of state fuel taxes (e.g., Doyle Jr.
and Samphantharak (2008), Marion and Muehlegger (2011), and Stolper (2016)))

3

is applied.

2

Pass-through and Imperfect Competition

A long-standing theoretical literature studies pass-through in imperfectly competitive markets. Bulow and Pfleiderer (1983) and Fevrier and Linnemer (2004) consider pass-through
in Bertrand and Cournot markets, and Weyl and Fabinger (2013) provide a more general
framework. Similar links between pass-through and competition arise in the pricing-tomarket literature (e.g., Bernard et al. (2003); Atkeson and Burstein (2008); De Blas and
Russ (2015); Amiti et al. (2019a)) wherein endogenous firm-level markups are an outcome
of the competitive environment. We draw upon these papers to illustrate how pass-through
relates to the scope of a cost shock (that is whether a cost shock affects a single firm or a
firm and its rivals), and to highlight the importance of accounting for competitor costs in
empirical estimation.
Here, we consider the pass-through of a tax (τ ) onto the price of firm i, although an
input cost shock, like the oil price shock we explore, could be considered analogously. For
expositional simplicity, we consider competition in prices, although we present examples for
other models competition in Appendix A. Firm i sets profit-maximizing price pi and faces
marginal costs inclusive of taxes of αi . We allow each firm to be differentially exposed to
i
capturing the marginal per-unit tax rate faced by firm i.5 Formally, we
the tax, with ∂α
∂τ
decompose the pass-through of the tax onto firm i’s price as a direct effect and an indirect
effect operating through i’s competitors:


∂ ᾱ
∂pi ∂αi X ∂pi ∂pj ∂ ᾱ ∂pi ∂pj ∂αj
+
+
(
−
)
ρi (τ ) =
∂αi ∂τ
∂p
∂p
∂τ
j ∂αj ∂τ
j ∂αj ∂τ
j6=i

(1)

∂pi
where ∂∂τᾱ is the average marginal tax rate, and ∂p
reflects firm i’s optimal response to a
j
change in firm j’s price.
A tax affects a firm’s choice of strategy both directly, through the firm’s own costs, and
indirectly, in response to the strategic choice of the firm’s competitors. Thus, a tax borne
by the firm alone will be passed-through at a different rate than a tax affecting the firm and
its competitors. We further decompose the indirect effect into two components - the effect
of the mean shock to the firm’s competitors and the competitor-specific deviation from the
shock, reflected in the second and third terms of equation (1). If firm i’s competitors face
different tax exposure, pass-through depends on the covariance between relative exposure
5

In our empirical context, variation in exposure arises from differential access to low-cost crude oil and
in our policy exercise, from differential carbon-intensity of production.

4

∂α

∂pi
( ∂tj − ∂∂tᾱ ) and the degree to which firms i and j are close rivals, ∂p
. If a firm’s closest
j
rivals are more heavily impacted by a tax, the firm can pass-through their shock to a greater
degree.
These results have three implications relevant to the estimation and interpretation of
pass-through. First, omitting shocks to rival firms will bias own-cost pass-through estimates
if shocks are correlated across firms.6 Second, firms which are not directly affected by a shock
may still adjust their prices if their rivals are affected. This behavior violates the stable unit
treatment value assumption implicit in common estimation strategies, which use the price
of rivals not directly affected by a cost shock as contemporaneous counterfactual. Finally,
empirical pass-through rates are specific to the identifying variation used for estimation.
Even after conditioning on the shock faced by a firm, the resulting price change will vary
depending on whether that shock affects only the firm or is shared by its rivals as well. To
compute the full price response to a cost shock or policy change, it is necessary to incorporate
both the direct and indirect effects. However, empirical models that rely on rich temporal or
spatial fixed effects may subsume the latter. This constrains the econometrician to estimating
the pass-through rate of a firm-specific shock, which may or may not be of primary policy
interest. We illustrate each of these points in our empirical results.

3

Empirical Setting and Institutional Details

Oil refineries process crude oil into refined end-products like gasoline and diesel. Although the
United States imports substantial amounts of crude oil, U.S. refineries produce almost all endproducts consumed domestically. Most U.S. refineries are located proximate to traditional
oil deposits, such as Texas, Louisiana and California, rather than areas that demand refined
fuels.7 The industry relies heavily on pipelines to move crude oil to refineries and to ship
refined products to demand centers. These pipeline networks dictate both the locations from
refineries can cheaply acquire crude and end markets to which refiners can competitively ship.
Despite this spatial mismatch of supply and demand, entry is limited - no new refineries have
been built since the early 1980’s.

3.1

Data

Through a confidential data request, we obtained data on refinery operations from the Energy
Information Administration, described in detail in appendix Table B.1. In pass-through
6
7

Pennings (2017) notes a similar bias if real exchange rate shocks are correlated across countries.
Figure B.1 maps the locations of refineries based by distillation capacity.

5

studies, firm-level pricing and, especially, cost data are often unavailable. A key feature of
the EIA data is that we directly observe output prices and crude input costs (which account
for over 90% of variable costs), allowing us to directly observe margins for each firm. Every
firm that owns a refinery in the United States reports the total volume and cost of crude oil
acquired both domestically and abroad each month, by Petroleum Administration Defense
District (PADD).8 These firms also report detailed monthly production data at the refinery
level, including the quality of crude oil used. At the start of each calendar year, operable
capacity and exhaustive information the technology installed are also reported. Finally,
at the state level, each firm reports the monthly volume sold and average price of all end
products, broken out by sales to end users (retail) and sales for resale (wholesale). The data
provide us with relatively direct way of measuring which firms compete, as we observe the
physical location of production and the markets served.9 The sample in which all surveys
are observed spans 2004-2015, and the resulting 9,215 firm-PADD-month observations are
summarized in Table B.3.

3.2

Fracking background

The EIA data spans the U.S. fracking boom, which is the source of our input cost shock.
Shortly after the turn of the century, two complementary technologies, hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling, rapidly matured, unlocking trillions of dollars of previously uneconomical domestic oil reserves. The ensuing transformation of the U.S. oil industry is
documented in the four panels of Figure 1.
U.S. crude oil production nearly doubled between 2008 and 2015, abruptly reversing a
decades-long trend towards increasing reliance on foreign oil (Figure 1a). As a consequence,
a previously superfluous 1977 ban on the export of crude oil became binding, and U.S. crude
oil spot prices diverged from international crude markets (Figure 1b). Between 2000 and
2010, the West Texas Intermediate (“WTI”) spot price was roughly $1.41 per barrel higher
than the Brent spot price, the benchmark international crude. But in the early years of
the fracking boom, from 2010 to 2015, the WTI spot price averaged $12 per barrel below
the Brent spot price. In December 2015, the export ban was lifted. U.S. exports grew
and the discount at which U.S. oil spot markets were trading relative to the world oil price
disappeared.
[Figure 1 about here.]
8

PADD’s are a commonly used geographic aggregation for the industry dating back to World War II. For
a map, see Figure B.1.
9
Many firms own multiple refineries. In these cases, we match firm sales in each state to the refinery
which has the lowest transportation costs to the state. Additional details provided in appendix B.2.1.

6

Within the United States, the gains from the fracking boom were not equally shared
among domestic refiners. The most productive shale plays were in the middle of the country,
while domestic production elsewhere continued to decline (Figure 1a). In the Gulf Coast,
shale oil was proximate to major conventional oil fields, the largest concentration of refineries,
and the epicenter of the crude distribution system. But in the Midwest, primarily North
Dakota, relatively little pipeline capacity existed prior to the fracking boom to move “tight”
oil from shale fields to refineries. As a result, refineries in the Rocky Mountains (PADD 4)
and Midwest (PADD 2) could acquire crude oil at signficant discounts to the Brent spot
price, while crude costs for coastal refineries tracked foreign markets more closely (Figure 1
c).
Even within region, some refiners were better positioned to benefit from the boom than
others, due to the attributes of shale oil. Crude oil is a highly differentiated input, and
refineries are finely tuned to process specific types of crude oil. The most important dimension along which crudes are differentiated is density. Dense crudes (measured by a low
API gravity) require more processing and more sophisticated capital to convert them into
valuable end products, like gasoline. Given this, “heavy” (dense) crude historically traded
at a discount relative to “lighter” crudes. The oil produced from the most active shale plays
in the United States has been very light (high API gravity), and the recent boom in light oil
production lead to an inversion of the historical correlation between price and crude density
(Figure 1d). This reversal generated a large cost advantage for refineries designed to process light oil, while refineries set up to process heavy crude were unable to benefit without
incurring large adjustment costs or capital investment.
In sum, domestic refineries located near constrained shale deposits, tailored to process
light domestic crude benefited disproportionately from the shale boom. In Appendix C.4, we
confirm this with a panel regression of refiner input costs spanning the shale boom. Refineries
proximate to shale deposits in the Midwest and Rocky Mountains saw crude costs fall by
relative to the rest of the industry (by 5 and 7 dollars per barrel on average, respectively).
However, even conditional on region, refineries processing ”light”, domestic crude in the preperiod, or with the technological capability to more easily switch between crudes, experienced
statistically and economically significant relative reductions in crude prices during the shale
boom.

4

Estimation and Results

We use the exogenous shock to input prices caused by the fracking boom to demonstrate
how the nature of an input cost shock is central to the estimation and interpretation of
7

pass-through. We begin with the canonical pass-through regression, which projects the price
a firm f receives in a given state m at time t onto its own costs,
P ricef mt = αCostf t + Xf0 mt δ + νf m + µt + f mt

(2)

where X contains other demand and supply-side factors which may shift the level of prices.10
Here we estimate the model at the firm-state-month level, including firm-state and monthof-sample fixed effects. The dependent variable is average wholesale revenue per gallon11 ,
across all end products sold into the state.12 Costf t is the average price of crude oil per
gallon.13 Column 1 in Table 1 presents the results. The coefficient on own-cost indicates
that a $1 increase in a firm’s crude costs leads to an average increase in price of $0.067.
[Table 1 about here.]
A natural concern with the estimate in column 1 is the possibility of omitted factors that
affect prices and also co-vary with a firm’s own costs within a time period. Of particular
interest in our setting are spatially-correlated cost shocks. If present, the estimated coefficient
conflates the direct response to a firm’s own cost with the indirect response to the omitted
cost shock to competitors. In column 2, we replace the month-of-sample fixed effects with
state-month-of-sample fixed effects as a way to address spatially correlated cost shocks.
Here, deviations in a firm’s own costs relative to the average costs firms serving the same
state identify the parameter on a firm’s own-cost. Our estimate of own-cost pass-through
falls slightly, to 5.3 percent, consistent with positive correlation in cost shocks and strategic
complementarity of prices.
An alternative would be to condition on competitors’ costs directly. Consider augmenting
10

Consistent with Borenstein et al. (1997) that finds oil price changes are incorporated within several
weeks into terminal prices, we focus on contemporaneous changes in costs and prices. In contrast, the macro
and trade literature (e.g., Boivin et al. (2009); Maćkowiak et al. (2009); Andrade and Zachariadis (2016))
emphasizes menu costs, sticky prices and rational inattention as explanations for gradual incorporation of
global and sectoral shocks.
11
In this sample, roughly 15 percent of refiner sales are retail. Results using a total average price, inclusive
of retail sales, instead of the wholesale price as the dependent variable are similar. These are presented in
Appendix D.4
12
The literature to date has typically focused on gasoline prices. However, all refiners are multi-product
firms, and these products are produced jointly. Given this, single product markups will be misleading:
simply subtracting gasoline prices from crude prices overstates the true markup because it doesn’t take into
account the fact that less than 50% of the barrel could be converted to gasoline. Product-specific results are
presented in Appendix D.4.
13
Ideally Costf t would reflect the marginal cost of supplying market m at time t. We observe average
crude costs, which in our setting, closely track the WTI crude spot price, as documented in Appendix D.1.

8

equation (2) as follows,
P ricef mt = αCostf t + βf (RivalCost−f,mt ) + Xf0 mt δ + νf m + µt + f mt

(3)

where f (RivalCost−f,mt ) denotes a weighted average of f ’s competitors’ costs in m at time
t.14 Model 3 returns to the use of firm-state and month-of-sample fixed effects from column
1, but includes the average cost of other refiners, weighted by inverse shipping costs.15 After
accounting for rivals’ costs, we see a modest reduction in own-cost pass-through, similar to
column 2. In this specification, strategic complementarity in prices is now observable – a
firm’s price increases by 17 cents for every dollar increase in the average costs of competitors.
Just as the inclusion of market-time fixed effects precluded our ability to recover the
pass-through of cost shocks faced by local rivals, the inclusion of time fixed effects in model
3 subsumes industry-wide cost shocks common to all firms in a given period. To estimate
the effects of an industry-wide shock, we must further coarsen the fixed effects. Column
4 replaces month-of-sample fixed effects with year fixed effects and calendar-month fixed
effects, to control for time trends and seasonality. As in column 1, one might worry that
omitted shocks (here to foreign refiners) might be correlated with domestic input prices.
Thus, in Column 5 we add the Brent spot price, to capture variation in world oil prices
and act as a proxy for the costs international refineries. As in column 1, the coefficient
on rivals’ costs in column 4 are biased upwards (significantly) by the omission of the Brent
crude spot price. Once we include the Brent crude spot price in column 5, the magnitude of
the coefficients on own-costs and rival-costs are similar to those in column 3. This suggests
that foreign competition disciplines U.S. refiners’ ability to pass-along domestic cost shocks.
Comparing results across specifications highlights the relationship between the scope of a
cost-shock and the degree to which it is passed-onto downstream prices. Model 2 suggests a
low rate of pass-through of firm-specific shocks, conditional on the average cost of all rivals.
But, Model 3 reveals that a cost shock experienced by all domestic refineries would be
passed-through at a higher rate of 22 percent. Coarsening the fixed effects further, in model
5, we estimate that industry-wide cost shock, affecting both domestic and foreign refineries,
are (roughly) fully passed-through to the consumer. Increasing rates of pass-through for
progressively more “expansive” shocks echo the literature on exchange rate pass-through.16
14

In this paper, we consider only reduced form pass-through approximations, consistent with the vast
majority of the empirical pass-through literature. This representation, with average competitor costs entering
linearly, will only recover the structural pass-through rate under Cournot competition with linear demand.
For a discussion of bias in reduced form measures of pass-through, see MacKay et al. (2014).
15
Additional information on shipping cost construction is provided in Appendix B.2.1. Results using
geographic distance are similar. Alternative weightings are discussed below.
16
Exploiting variation in real exchange rates (akin to a domestic cost shock in our context), Gopinath and

9

Next, we consider how the competitive proximity of a rival affects the indirect passthrough rate. In many settings, it is difficult to know if two firms are direct competitors.
Products may be unobservably differentiated, or logistical constraints may limit the competition of spatially-proximate firms.17 In our case, the data allow us to observe the frequency
with which two rival firms supply the same (undifferentiated) product to the same state. A
natural decomposition is, therefore, to estimate separate pass-through rates for the costs of
“direct” rivals, which typically serve a state, and the costs of the “fringe” of firms who do
not.18 Model 2 in the top panel of Table 2 presents the results (for comparison, model 5
from the previous table is reproduced in column 1). Less than half of the weighted rival cost
pass-through estimated in model 1 comes from firms directly serving the state, while the
remainder comes from “fringe” competitors.19
[Table 2 about here.]
When researchers have multiple price observations per firm in a single period, a decision
must also be made about the appropriate level of aggregation. In our setting, we observe
refiners serving multiple states each month. In panel (a), “fringe” firms in one state might be
direct rivals in another. Moreover, since the products supplied are homogenous and produced
in the same facility, a profit maximizing firm will equate expected marginal revenues (net
of transportation costs) across states. In panel (b) we repeat these two specifications after
aggregating to the firm-PADD level. The dependent variable is the average wholesale revenue
earned by the firm in the PADD. Intuitively, the own-cost results are very similar a higher
level of geographic aggregation. At either the state or the regional level, firms have relatively
little ability to pass-on cost shocks unique to themselves. However the direct rival costs in
column 2 of panel (b) are now larger than they were in panel (a), while the fringe firm’s
costs are attenuated. This suggests that the importance of “fringe” firms in panel (a) was
primarily driven by firms serving other states in the same PADD rather than more distant
competitors.
Rigobon (2008); Fitzgerald and Haller (2013); Auer and Schoenle (2016) find endogenous markups manifest
in relatively low rates of pass-through onto import prices, on the order of 0.15 - 0.30. In contrast, Nakamura
and Zerom (2010) find close to full pass-through from the wholesale coffee price indices to retail prices,
consistent with our finding of nearly full pass-through of industry-wide shocks.
17
For example, due to transportation constraints, refineries in the Gulf Coast supply the vast majority of
refined products to New York, rather than “nearer” refineries in the Upper Midwest.
18
One justification for including firms in other states is that they are potential entrants, disciplining
markups. Another is that seemingly non-competing firms are often bound strategically when some firms
serve multiple markets, as discussed in (Bulow et al., 1985).
19
In some markets, such as electricity, strict capacity constraints and heterogeneous costs impose a natural
“dispatch” ordering across firms. In these models, the price would be set by the “marginal firm”, rather
than the average over inframarginal firms serving a market. While these forces are not present in refined
product markets, we present results on pass-through of the highest cost rival in a market in appendix Table
D.4.

10

We repeat these specifications using instrumental variables to address two potential problems. First, if realized costs are correlated unobserved demand shocks, this would bias estimated pass-through rates upwards. Second, while we observe firm-specific crude prices,
which comprise over 90% of variable costs, storage might lead to measurement error in costs.
If large, this would attenuate our pass-through estimates. As was discussed in Section 3.2,
the shale boom primarily benefitted refiners processing light, domestic crude, located in the
Plains or upper Midwest. Following the intuition of Bartik (1991), we construct own-price
instruments by interacting time-invariant measures of pre-shock refinery characteristics with
time-varying nationwide crude input prices.20 Instruments for rival and fringe firms are
constructed by averaging the own-cost instruments for these firms accordingly.
Columns 3 and 4 of Table 2 present the results. Overall, the IV and OLS estimates are
qualitatively consistent. At the state level, the IV estimates of own-cost pass-through are
slightly higher, suggesting some degree of measurement error. Conversely, rival costs, which
are averaged and thus less prone to measurement error, are passed-through at a considerably
lower rate. This is also consistent with the possibility of unobserved demand shocks at the
state level being correlated with the costs of firms serving those states. At the PADD level,
where own cost measurement error is less severe, the own cost estimates now appear smaller
(although the confidence intervals include the OLS estimate). However at this level, rival
costs are only sightly smaller than the OLS estimates.

5

Implications for a Tax on Refinery Emissions

We illustrate the implications of our estimates for a hypothetical tax on refinery carbon
emissions.21 Approximately 20 percent of the lifecycle emissions from gasoline occur prior
to the pump, of which half come from the refining process (Lattanzio, 2014). With average
annual emissions of 1.22 MMT CO2e, refineries are the second highest-emitting domestic
point-sources, behind the electric power sector. Collectively, the 145 domestic refineries
produce approximately 3% of total U.S. GHG emissions.22 Taxes levied on facility emissions
at the current social cost of carbon ($51/ton) would raise refiners cost of production by $1.43
20

We provide further details on the construction of the instruments and the first-stage estimates in Section

D.2
21

In this section, we only consider a tax on carbon emissions from processing fuel not from the fuel itself.
Taxing embedded emissions would imply a cost shock that is approximately nine times larger than the
one considered here, which may in turn induce complicated input and demand substitution response that
complicate the simple counterfactual considered here. Readers willing to make those assumptions can simply
scale the results reported by nine.
22
Authors’ calculations, based on data from EPA Greenhouse Gas Reporting Program, https://www.
epa.gov/ghgreporting, accessed January 12, 2018.

11

per barrel (bbl) processed on average.23
We begin by considering the implications of our estimates for the incidence of taxes of
different scope, on average. Consider first a tax applying to a single refinery. The estimates
from column (2), panel (b) of Table 2 predict that prices for the average refinery would only
increase by $0.08/bbl. If the scope of the policy were expanded to include a firm and all
of its regional competitors, prices would rise by $0.38/bbl. Applying the $51/ton tax to
all domestic refiners would increase prices by $0.46/bbl, while pairing it with an equivalent
border adjustment tax on imports (effectively taxing the industry) would cause prices to rise
by $1.37/bbl on average. In the first case, producers bear close to the full burden of the tax,
while in the final case consumers do.
Interpreting pass-through predictions as a function of the scope of a shock, our results
reconcile seemingly disparate estimates of refinery pass-through from the recent literature.
Ganapati et al. (2017) use regional variation in energy input costs and estimate that 24 33% of a carbon tax on refineries would be born by consumers. This lines up closely with
our estimates of pass-through for a shock affecting a firm and at its regional rivals, of 26
percent. In contrast, Knittel et al. (2017) studies common input cost shocks stemming from
the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) that apply to every gallon of surface transportation fuel
sold in the U.S., regardless of origin. In this case, incidence of RFS credit prices falls almost
fully on consumers, consistent with our estimates of pass-through of a border adjustment
tax in both spirit and magnitude.
While average incidence provides a useful guide for the policy impacts a carbon tax,
the carbon intensity of the refining process varies substantially across domestic refineries.
Differences in capital investment allow some refineries to use denser crudes or to maximize
gasoline yields, both of which increase CO2 emissions per barrel. These differences translate
into substantial heterogeneity in tax exposure under a $51 per ton carbon tax (graphed in
Figure 2a). The effective tax in dollars per barrel of crude varies from under $1 for the least
carbon-intensive decile, to over $2 for the most carbon-intensive decile.
[Figure 2 about here.]
Heterogeneity in carbon intensity leads to dispersion in firm-level pass-through rates. As
was noted earlier when discussing equation (1), if a firm’s closest rivals are more carbonintensive, a tax provides the firm a competitive advantage, allowing the firm to pass-through
a greater fraction of the tax. In contrast, competition with less carbon-intensive rivals may
discipline the firm’s ability to pass-through the tax.
23

For context, the average reported refining margin from 2004-2009 (the last year available) in the EIA
Financial Reporting System was $2.98/bbl.

12

Figure 2b graphs the distribution of firm-level pass-through rates for the four policies
described above. Under a tax that applies to a single firm (leftmost line), firm-level passthrough rates are identical, since rivals are unaffected.24 Extending to a regional tax, firmlevel pass-through rates begin to differ. Some firms pass-through as little as 20 percent
of their cost change, while others pass-though more than half. Here, a carbon tax disadvantages carbon-intensive firms relative to less carbon-intensive rivals, limiting the ability
of relatively carbon-intensive firms from passing-on the carbon tax. Extending the tax to
the national level increases the average pass-through rate, but also further increases the
pass-through heterogeneity. Finally, the rightmost line presents the distribution using the
full-pass through estimates across an domestic carbon tax, coupled with a commensurate
border tax on imported fuels. Although consumers bear virtually all of the tax on average,
firm-level pass-through rates vary substantially. Fifty-five percent of refineries pass-through
the carbon tax less than fully, bearing some of the costs of the carbon tax. But, the remaining 45 percent of refiners experience an increase in markups under the tax. Although
the tax affects all firms, less carbon-intensive firms are competitively advantaged relative to
more carbon-intensive rivals, allowing them to more than fully pass on the carbon tax. Such
variation in firm-level pass-through rates is of direct political importance when considering
whether particular firms might oppose (or support) such a policy.

6

Conclusion

Pass-through is an important tool with wide ranging economic applications. The extent to
which prices change after a policy or event is also of paramount interest to policymakers.
Due to its policy import and conceptual simplicity, pass-through is widely estimated. In this
paper, we call attention to an underappreciated aspect of pass-through analysis: strategic
responses. In imperfectly competitive settings, the price a firm sets is a function of not just
its own costs, but those of its rivals as well. Using a simple framework, we demonstrate
that the link between the price a firm sets and competitor costs has important implications
for estimation, interpretation and application of pass-through. These spillovers not only
confound many standard research designs, but also they cannot simply be subsumed or
ignored in estimation if the parameter of interest is the full response of prices to a common
shock.
Using rich data from the U.S. oil refining industry, we demonstrate the empirical relevance
24

Heterogeneity in pass-through may also arise from differences in regional demand or supply conditions.
Tables that include interaction with firm size and HHI are not substantively different than our main results,
and are provided in Appendix Table D.14.

13

of these points. We study the fracking boom, which upended the U.S. oil market and
generated deep input cost discounts for some refineries but not others. Leveraging this
shock, we demonstrate that firm prices do respond to competitor costs in practice, and that
these own price adjustments vary intuitively with the proximity and scope of the shock.
Comparing input cost shocks of different scope, our estimates of pass-through vary from
near zero for firm-specific shocks to near one for shocks affecting all firms in the industry,
reconciling seemingly disparate estimates of input cost pass-through from the literature.
Finally, we illustrate the benefit of explicitly considering indirect cost pass-through in the
context of a hypothetical carbon tax on refinery emissions. Conditional on the direct effect
on a firm’s costs, the actual incidence borne varies dramatically depending on the extent
to which that firm’s rivals are taxed as well. Furthermore, we demonstrate that strategic
spillovers generate large heterogeneity in pass-through across firms. This wide heterogeneity
amongst firms may partially explain some of the intransigence of industry groups to carbon
prices, despite the fact that the average incidence will fall primarily on consumers.

14

References
Amiti, Mary and David E Weinstein, “How much do idiosyncratic bank shocks affect
investment? Evidence from matched bank-firm loan data,” Journal of Political Economy,
2018, 126 (2), 525–587.
, Oleg Itskhoki, and Jozef Konings, “International shocks, variable markups, and
domestic prices,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2019.
, Stephen J Redding, and David Weinstein, “The Impact of the 2018 Trade War on
US Prices and Welfare,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Andrade, Philippe and Marios Zachariadis, “Global versus local shocks in micro price
dynamics,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 98, 78–92.
Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, “Pricing-to-market, trade costs, and international
relative prices,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (5), 1998–2031.
Atkin, David and Dave Donaldson, “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Implications of Intra-national Trade Costs,” Working Paper 21439, National Bureau of Economic
Research July 2015. DOI: 10.3386/w21439.
Auer, Raphael A and Raphael S Schoenle, “Market structure and exchange rate passthrough,” Journal of International Economics, 2016, 98, 60–77.
, Andrei A Levchenko, and Philip Sauré, “International inflation spillovers through
input linkages,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2017, (0).
Bartik, Timothy J., “Who Benefits from State and Local Economic Development Policies?,” Books from Upjohn Press, W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research 1991.
Bernard, Andrew B, Jonathan Eaton, J Bradford Jensen, and Samuel Kortum,
“Plants and productivity in international trade,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93
(4), 1268–1290.
Blas, Beatriz De and Katheryn N Russ, “Understanding markups in the open economy,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2015, 7 (2), 157–80.
Boivin, Jean, Marc P Giannoni, and Ilian Mihov, “Sticky prices and monetary policy:
Evidence from disaggregated US data,” American Economic Review, 2009, 99 (1), 350–84.
Borenstein, Severin, A. Colin Cameron, and Richard Gilbert, “Do Gasoline Prices
Respond Asymmetrically to Crude Oil Price Changes?,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1997, 112 (1), 305–339.
Bulow, Jeremy I. and Paul Pfleiderer, “A Note on the Effect of Cost Changes on
Prices,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1983, 91 (1), 182–185.
, John D. Geanakoplos, and Paul D. Klemperer, “Multimarket Oligopoly: Strategic
Substitutes and Complements,” Journal of Political Economy, 1985, 93 (3), 488–511.
15

Chetty, Raj, “Sufficient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural and
Reduced-Form Methods,” Annual Review of Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 451–488.
Duggan, Mark, Amanda Starc, and Boris Vabson, “Who benefits when the government pays more? Pass-through in the Medicare Advantage program,” Journal of Public
Economics, 2016, 141, 50–67.
Fabra, Natalia and Mar Reguant, “Pass-Through of Emissions Costs in Electricity
Markets,” American Economic Review, September 2014, 104 (9), 2872–2899.
Fajgelbaum, Pablo D, Pinelopi K Goldberg, Patrick J Kennedy, and Amit K
Khandelwal, “The Return to Protectionism,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2019.
Fevrier, Philippe and Laurent Linnemer, “Idiosyncratic shocks in an asymmetric
Cournot oligopoly,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, June 2004, 22 (6),
835–848.
Fitzgerald, Doireann and Stefanie Haller, “Pricing-to-market: evidence from plantlevel prices,” Review of Economic Studies, 2013, 81 (2), 761–786.
Ganapati, Sharat, Joseph S. Shapiro, and Reed Walker, “The Incidence of Carbon
Taxes in U.S. Manufacturing: Lessons from Energy Cost Pass-Through,” April 2017.
Gopinath, Gita and Roberto Rigobon, “Sticky borders,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2008, 123 (2), 531–575.
Jr., Joseph J. Doyle and Krislert Samphantharak, “$2.00 Gas! Studying the effects
of a gas tax moratorium,” Journal of Public Economics, April 2008, 92, 869–884.
Knittel, Christopher R., Ben S. Meiselman, and James H. Stock, “The PassThrough of RIN Prices to Wholesale and Retail Fuels under the Renewable Fuel Standard,”
Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, March 2017, 4 (4),
1081–1119.
Lade, Gabriel E. and James Bushnell, “Fuel Subsidy Pass-Through and Market Structure: Evidence from the Renewable Fuel Standard,” Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 2019, 6 (3), 563–592.
Lattanzio, Richard K., “Canadian Oil Sands: Life Cycle Assessments of Greenhouse Gas
Emissions,” 2014.
MacKay, Alexander, Nathan H Miller, Marc Remer, and Gloria Sheu, “Bias in
reduced-form estimates of pass-through,” Economics Letters, May 2014, 123 (2), 200–202.
Maćkowiak, Bartosz, Emanuel Moench, and Mirko Wiederholt, “Sectoral price
data and models of price setting,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2009, 56, S78–S99.
Marion, Justin and Erich Muehlegger, “Fuel tax incidence and supply conditions,”
Journal of Public Economics, October 2011, 95 (9), 1202–1212.
16

Miller, Nathan H., Marc Remer, and Gloria Sheu, “Using cost pass-through to
calibrate demand,” Economics Letters, March 2013, 118 (3), 451–454.
, Matthew Osborne, and Gloria Sheu, “Pass-through in a concentrated industry:
empirical evidence and regulatory implications,” The RAND Journal of Economics, March
2017, 48 (1), 69–93.
Nakamura, Emi and Dawit Zerom, “Accounting for Incomplete Pass-Through,” The
Review of Economic Studies, July 2010, 77 (3), 1192–1230.
Pennings, Steven, “Pass-through of competitors’ exchange rates to US import and producer prices,” Journal of International Economics, 2017, (105), 41–56.
Stolper, Samuel, “Who Bears the Burden of Energy Taxes? The Role of Local PassThrough,” October 2016.
Weyl, E. Glen and Michal Fabinger, “Pass-Through as an Economic Tool: Principles
of Incidence under Imperfect Competition,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2013, 121
(3), 528–583.

17

Figure 1: Shale Boom and U.S. Refining
(a) U.S. Oil Production

(b) U.S. vs Global Spot Prices

(c) Regional Input Cost Differential

(d) Domestic Light-Heavy Crude Spread

Description: (a) U.S. oil production by PADD; (b) West Texas Intermediate (WTI) and
Brent spot prices; (c) Average crude price paid by refiners, minus the contemporaneous
Brent spot price, by PADD (PADD-level data only available beginning in 2004); and, (d)
U.S. light - heavy crude spread, as approximated by the difference between the average
price for crudes with API gravity between 35 and 40, minus the average price for crudes
with API gravity between 20 and 25.

18

Figure 2: Within-industry Heterogeneity in Carbon Intensity and Pass-through Rates
(b) Pass-through

(a) Carbon Taxes

Notes: Pass-through estimates in panel (b) based on model (5) of panel (b) in Table 2.

19

Table 1: Fixed Effect Comparison Table

Own

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0668
(0.0131)

0.0534
(0.0133)

0.0521
(0.0131)

0.0393
(0.0141)

0.0447
(0.0133)

0.173
(0.0427)

0.938
(0.0147)

0.282
(0.0164)

Rival
Brent Spot
Time FE
N
r2

0.625
(0.0113)
MoS
71570
0.962

MoS-St
71489
0.973

MoS
71570
0.962

Y,M
71570
0.939

Y,M
71570
0.945

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Regressions are run at the firm-state-month level, and include firm-state fixed effects. Time
FEs “Mos” reflect month-of-sample dummies, “Y-M” reflect year-month dummies, while “Y,M” implies separate year and month dummies. Rival costs include the average crude price of all other firms, weighted by
the inverse shipping cost of serving a particular state. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-state level, are
presented in parentheses. All models include demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling
degree days) and supply shifters (proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

20

Table 2: Competition measure results
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0447
(0.0133)

0.0485
(0.0134)

0.0606
(0.0255)

0.0704
(0.0252)

Rival

0.282
(0.0164)

0.128
(0.0214)

0.146
(0.0299)

0.0357
(0.0387)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.159
(0.0220)
0.625
(0.0113)

0.617
(0.0101)

0.112
(0.0357)
0.732
(0.0124)

0.722
(0.0105)

Yes
4651
71570

Avg
Yes
3137
71529

(3)

(4)

Avg

71570

71529

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

Own

0.0493
(0.0312)

0.0552 -0.00498
(0.0286) (0.0517)

0.0102
(0.0501)

Rival

0.285
(0.0368)

0.204
(0.0408)

0.163
(0.0858)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.211
(0.0663)

0.0604
(0.0379)
0.622
(0.0181)

0.635
(0.0168)

0.00838
(0.0654)
0.736
(0.0252)

0.757
(0.0235)

Yes
288
9169

Avg
Yes
190
9169

Avg

9169

9169

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects;
Panel (b) is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications
include year fixed effects and month fixed effects. In columns 1 and 3, rival costs are the average costs of
all firms, inverse shipping cost weighted. In columns 2 and 4, rival costs are the average costs of firms that
serve the location in the same calendar year, and fringe costs are the average of all other firms’ costs, inverse
shipping cost weighted. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the firm-state level in panel (a) and
the firm-PADD level in panel (b). All models include demand shifters and supply shifters.

21

A

Pass-through and Competition

In this appendix, we illustrate the main points from Section 2 in the context of specific
assumptions about the nature of competition.
In each of the cases below, we show that pass-through depends on the nature of the
cost shock. Firm-specific cost shocks have lower rates of pass-through than cost shocks that
are common to all firms. Moreover, the patterns of pass-through distinguish the nature of
competition. Under Cournot, cost shocks have identical effects, regardless of the affected
party, whereas under models with differentiated products, the degree of competition between
two parties plays a central role in determining the pass-through of own and competitor cost
shocks.
Following the notation in Weyl and Fabinger (2013), we use ρα to denote the passthrough of a shock α onto the vector of firm-specific prices. Firm i chooses a unidimensional
strategic variable, σi , to maximize profits. To illustrate the distinct effect of idiosyncratic
versus common cost shocks, we define ci = ᾱ +αi as the marginal cost of production faced by
firm i, which is the sum of a shared (market-wide) cost shock (ᾱ) and a firm-specific shock
(αi ). We characterize the pass-through of firm i as a direct effect of shock on firm i and an
indirect effect operating through firm i’s rivals.
ρα =

A.1

X ∂p ∂σi X ∂σi dσj
)
(
+
∂σ
∂α
∂σ
dα
i
i
j
i
j6=i

Cournot competition

In the Cournot model, the strategic variable σi is simply the quantity produced by a particular firm. Under constant marginal costs, the market price is determined by the sum of the
marginal costs of the market participants. Following the n-firm asymmetric case examined
in Fevrier and Linnemer (2004) , we sum across the n first-order conditions and take the
derivative with respect to αi and ᾱ respectively, to obtain:
1
dQ
=
;
0
dαi
(n + 1)P (Q) + QP 00 (Q)

dQ
n
=
.
0
dᾱ
(n + 1)P (Q) + QP 00 (Q)

(4)

These equations illustrate that the general points highlighted in Section 2 clearly apply to
the static Cournot model. First, a firm-specific shock is passed along at a rate of 1/n relative
to commensurate market-wide shock. As the number of competitors increases, a change in
the affected firm’s production is offset by an increase in production by an increasing number
of firms, and the pass-through of a firm-specific shock declines. In contrast, a common
shock causes all firms to lower production, and pass-through to increase with the number of
competitors - asymptotically approaching full pass-through in the case of linear demand.
Second, a firm-specific shock to any single market participant has a similar effect on the
market price, regardless of firm’s initial market share and marginal cost. Finally, in the case
of monopoly, both expressions are identical and reduce to the
standard expression for the
P 0 (Q)
pass-through of a cost-shock under monopoly, dP
=
, highlighted by Bulow
dc
2P 0 (Q)+QP 00 (Q),
and Pfleiderer (1983).

22

A.2

Differentiated Nash-in-Prices

Next we consider the differentiated Nash-in-price model.25 In this model, the strategic
variable σi represents the price set by a firm. As in the previous case, Nash competition
dp
implies that the only non-zero term in dσ
is the one corresponding to a firm’s own price,
i
simplifying the expression for ρα . For expositional simplicity, we focus on the two firm case,
for which we can express the pass-through of a cost shock α onto firm i’s price as:
ρα =

∂σi
∂α

∂σi ∂σj
∂σj ∂α
∂σi ∂σj
∂σj ∂σi

+

1−

.

(5)

The pass-through of a cost shock depends on three terms - the direct effect of the cost
shock on firm i’s strategy, the indirect response to a competitor’s shock and the strength of
strategic complementarity. We can express the ratio of pass-through for a firm-specific shock
to a common shock as:
∂σi
ραi
i
.
(6)
= ∂σ ∂α∂σ
∂σ
i
ρᾱ
+ i j
∂αi

∂σj ∂αj

The pass-through predictions under this model differ from those under Cournot. Although in both cases, the pass-through of a firm-specific shock is lower than that for a
common shock affecting both firms, under differentiated Nash, the degree to which the two
types of shocks differ in magnitude depends on the degree of competition between the two
∂σi
firms. As the products become closer substitutes (reflected as an increase in ∂σ
), a comj
petitor’s cost shock exerts an increasingly large impact on the firm i’s optimal price and the
pass-through rates of the two different shocks diverge. Second, in the Cournot model, the
pass-through of a cost shock was independent of the identity of the affected party. This is
not the case with differentiated products. The pass-through of a competitor’s cost onto firm
i’s price depends on the degree of strategic complementarity. Furthermore, a cost shock to
∂σi ∂σj
∂σi
> ∂σ
, be passed on more
the firm itself will, under typical circumstances in which ∂α
i
j ∂αj
fully than a commensurate cost shock to the firm’s competitor.

B

Refining Industry Background and Data

B.1

Background on the U.S. Refining Industry

Oil refineries process crude oil into refined products. Although the U.S. imports substantial
amounts of crude oil, much of the gasoline and diesel fuel consumed in the U.S. is produced
U.S. refineries. Figure B.1 maps the locations of refineries scaled by their distillation capacity.
The regions are Petroleum Administration Defense Districts (PADDs), which are commonly
used geographic aggregation for the industry dating back to World War II. The regions
correspond to: (1) East Coast, (2) Midwest, (3) Gulf Coast, (4) Rockies, and (5) West
Coast.
25

In the context of refining, differentiation could reflect the geographic nature of delivery and competition.

23

Figure B.1: Refinery locations and PADD Map

Source: EIA “Today in Energy”

Roughly fifty percent of U.S. refining capacity is located in areas with historical petroleum
deposits, Texas, Louisiana and California. Other refineries are located proximate to major
end markets like Chicago and Philadelphia and are served either by crude oil pipeline from
the gulf coast or import terminals that deliver crude from international markets. From
these refineries, a network of refined product pipelines transport gasoline and diesel fuel to
wholesale terminals near most major metropolitan areas. A key feature of both pipeline
systems is that they are incomplete (Figure B.2). As a result, not every refinery can obtain
crude from every domestic oil field (the black lines) or send refined product to every end
market (the dotted red lines). The pipeline map also leads to spatially complex patterns of
competition. For example, refineries in Philadelphia face intense competition from refineries
in the Gulf Coast, but operate in markets that are distinct from seemingly closer refineries
in the Midwest.

24

Figure B.2: Crude and Refined Product Pipelines Map

Refined product pipelines are denoted with dashed red lines, and crude oil pipelines are depicted with black lines. Shapefiles
for all spatial data come from the EIA state energy mapping system. All location information comes from the EIA state energy
map

Another important industry detail is that crude oil is a differentiated input, and oil
refineries are highly tailored to process specific types of crude. Crudes are differentiated
mainly based on how dense it is and how much sulfur it contains. These characteristics
define what refining equipment is necessary to convert crude into usable refined products.
Denser products (those with low API gravity) contain smaller naturally occurring shares of
valuable end products (like gasoline). Refineries must further process these crude oils to
yield high shares of gasoline and diesel fuel. Similarly, “sour” (high-sulfur) crudes require
additional processing to low sulfur levels, reducing the corrosiveness of refined products and
reducing harmful health effects post-combustion. Under typical market conditions, denser,
higher-sulfur crudes sell at a discount to crude oils that are more easily processed into
valuable end products. In response to this input cost differential, some refineries made large
capital investments in order to process lower quality crudes.26

B.2

Data Appendix

The Energy Information Administration administers detailed surveys at every level of the
petroleum industry. The surveys used in this paper are described in Table B.1. The survey
forms and additional information,, as well as instructions for requesting access, can be found
at http://www.eia.gov/survey/.
26

For example, BP’s recent installation of a cracking unit, which processes heavy crude, was described as
the largest private investment in Indiana history.

25

Table B.1: Description of EIA Surveys
Survey
Monthly Refinery
Report
(EIA-810)

Dates
1986-2015

Annual Refinery
Report
(EIA-820)

1986-1995
1997
1999-2015

Refiners’
Monthly Cost
Report (EIA-14)

2002-2015

Refiners’/Gas
Plant Operators’
Monthly
Petroleum
Product Sales
Report
(EIA-782A)
Monthly Report
of Prime Supplier
Sales of
Petroleum
Products Sold for
Local
Consumption
(EIA-782C)

1986-2015

1986-1990
1992-2015

Description
Collects information regarding the balance between the
supply (beginning stocks, receipts, and production) and
disposition (inputs, shipments, fuel use and losses, and
ending stocks) of crude oil and refined products located
at refineries.
Collects data on: fuel, electricity, and steam purchased
for consumption at the refinery; refinery receipts of
crude oil by method of transportation; current and
projected capacities for atmospheric crude oil
distillation, downstream charge, and production
capacities.
Collects data on the weighted cost of crude oil at the
regional Petroleum for Administration Defense District
(PADD) level at which the crude oil is booked into a
refinery.
Price and volume data at the State level for 14
petroleum products for various retail and wholesale
marketing categories are reported by the universe of
refiners and gas plant operators

Prime supplier sales of selected petroleum products into
the local markets of ultimate consumption are reported
by refiners, gas plant operators, importers, petroleum
product resellers, and petroleum product retailers that
produce, import, or transport product across State
boundaries and local marketing areas and sell the
product to local distributors, local retailers, or end
users.

Every firm that owns a refinery in the United States reports the total volume and cost
of crude oil acquired both domestically and abroad each month, by Petroleum Administration Defense Districts (PADDs), a commonly used geographic aggregation for the industry
dating back to World War II.27 Every firm reports detailed monthly production data at the
refinery level, including the quality of crude oil used, and the exact mix of all end products.
This monthly data is supplemented with an annual refinery survey which records exhaustive
information about the capacity and technology installed at each refinery at the start of each
year. On the sales side, every firm which owns a refinery in the United States reports sales for
each state where a transfer of title occurred (regardless of where that product is ultimately
27

For a map, see Figure B.1.

26

consumed). Both the volume sold and the price are reported, by end product, broken out
by sales to end users (retail) and sales for resale (wholesale).
Despite the richness of the data, the different levels of spatial aggregation for reporting
purposes necessitate additional assumptions to relate input costs to product prices. The
primary challenge stems from the fact that firms own multiple refineries. Since crude costs
are only reported at the firm-PADD level, if a firm owns more than one refinery in a PADD,
we only observe a single, aggregated input cost for these facilities. For this reason, we conduct
our analysis at the firm-PADD-month level (rather than the refinery level). A breakdown of
the number of unique firms by PADD in each year is provided in Table B.2.
Table B.2: Number of Firms
Year

PADD 1

PADD 2

PADD 3

PADD 4

PADD 5

2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015

8
7
6
6
6
5
5
5
8
7
7
7

17
18
17
17
18
20
19
21
15
15
15
16

21
22
21
21
20
20
20
21
21
21
20
21

10
11
12
12
12
12
12
13
12
11
12
12

10
10
11
11
11
10
11
11
11
11
10
11

A similar aggregation issue exists on the sales side, as sales into a state are reported at
the firm level, not for each refinery. In cases where firms own refineries making the same
product in multiple regions in a given month, we proceed by matching each sales state the
refinery with the lowest shipping cost to each state. Table B.3 reports the summary statistics
for our sample period.

27

Table B.3: Summary statistics
mean
Crude cost (2013 $/gal) 1.860
Crude - Brent
-0.157
% Domestic
0.574
Price Gas
2.362
Price Distillate
2.492
Price Total
2.388
Resale Price Total
2.373
% Gas
0.531
% Distillate
0.386
% Resale
0.851
N
B.2.1

sd
0.573
0.218
0.368
0.583
0.676
0.613
0.612
0.220
0.200
0.158

9215

Shipping cost construction

One limitation of the EIA data is that sales in each state are reported by firm, as opposed to
the refinery level. We overcome this by assuming that firms minimize transportation costs
when serving end markets. We obtained GIS maps of the US refined product pipeline system
and waterways suitable for petroleum transportation from EIA, along with GIS coordinates
of each refinery. Costs for transporting petroleum products by pipelines, barges and trucks
of 2, 4.5 and 30 cents per gallon per thousand miles are taken from estimates presented
before the Federal Trade Commission (Jacobs 2002).

28

C

The Impact of the Shale Boom on Refining

Hydraulic fracturing injects a mixture of sand, water and chemicals at high pressure into
horizontally drilled shale formations. The pressure cracks the shale formation and releases
previously unrecoverable natural gas and “tight oil” from the newly-created fissures in the
shale. The rapid maturity of this technology in the late 2000’s unlocked billions of barrels of
previously uneconomical crude oil reserves. As a result, U.S. oil production nearly doubled
during the ensuing decade (Figure C.1).
Figure C.1: Domestic Oil Production by PADD

In this appendix, we illustrate that this surge in domestic oil extraction resulted large,
heterogenous reductions in input costs are U.S. refineries. Specifically, we highlight that:
(1) U.S. crude oil prices fell relative to the prevailing world price, (2) prices fell more in
regions proximate to fracking, (3) even within these regions, input prices of refiners fell
idiosyncratically, and (4) the degree to which input prices fell was correlated with exogenous
factors, driven by capital decisions made by firms many years earlier.

C.1

The fracking boom lowered U.S. crude prices relative to world
crude prices

This rapid reversal in U.S. crude production caused US prices to diverge from global prices.
Prior to 2015, the United States prohibited the export of the vast majority of domestically
produced crude oils in the name of energy security.28 While this measure had been in place
28

A handful of exceptions are allowed: (1) export of crude to U.S. territories, (2) export of North Shore
crude, (3) export of California heavy oil, amongst others.

29

since the 1970’s, equilibrium import and production patterns were such that domestic crude
prices moved in lockstep with foreign prices for most of this period. Figure C.2 graphs the
West Texas Intermediate spot price and the Brent spot price, which are the benchmark crude
prices for the United States and Europe, along with the spread between the two spot prices.
From 2000 to 2010, the WTI spot price was only $1.40 per barrel more expensive on average.
After the tight oil boom, the WTI spot price diverged from its historical position relative to
Brent crude, trading at an $11 per barrel reduction on average between 2011 and 2015.
Figure C.2: Crude Oil Spot Prices ($/bbl)

C.2

Initially, fracking primarily benefitted refineries close to shale
deposits

The extent of this divergence from global prices varied considerably within the United
States, due to the highly uneven geographic nature of the fracking boom. In locations with
oil-bearing shale deposits, such as North Dakota and Texas, oil production has increased
tremendously, while production from conventional resources, such as Alaskan and federal
offshore deposits fell approximately 20 percent between 2010 and 2015. Figure C.1, also
includes domestic oil production broken out by Petroleum Administration Defense Districts.
PADDs 2 and 3, which contain North Dakota and Texas respectively, both show sharp
increases in production around 2010. However, these two areas differ significantly in their
pre shale boom conventional production. The Gulf Coast (PADD 3) is home to the most
productive on-shore conventional resources. It also contains almost half of U.S. refining
capacity, as well as the most active trading hubs. Conversely, PADD 2 had very little
conventional production. As a crude oil transportation infrastructure in the upper Midwest
30

was essentially non-existent at the start of the shale boom. This severely limited the ability
of oil producers to move product to locations with greater refining capacity.
The result was an unprecedented divergence in crude acquisition costs across refining
regions within the United States. In Figure C.3, we plot the average crude acquisition price
discount (relative to the Brent spot) at refineries located in each region. Prior to 2010, crude
acquisition prices in all five regions were reasonably close to the Brent spot price. After
2011, though, refinery acquisition costs in PADDs 2 (Midwest) and 4 (Rocky Mountain)
begin trading at a deep discount, consistent with production of crude exceeding refinery and
transportation capacity in these PADDs.
Figure C.3: Average Refinery Crude Price Minus Brent Spot by PADD

C.3

Even within region, realized cost reductions varied across refineries

These two divergences, between U.S. and foreign refinery input costs due to the export ban
and between Midwest refiners and the rest of the country due to pipeline constraints, are
easily observable in the publicly available EIA data. However, using the rich microdata, we
are also able to document substantial heterogeneity within U.S. refining regions. Figure C.4
presents the distribution of average crude oil acquisition costs by year, within each PADD.
We calculate crude oil acquisition costs relative to the Brent spot price - thus, declining
values correspond to domestic acquisition costs at a greater discount relative to the the
Brent crude spot price. Consistent with Figure C.3, the average acquisition price in PADDs
2 and 4 fell differentially during the early years of the fracking boom. However, the spread
of oil acquisition prices within these regions also increases, with some refiners continuing to
pay a premium above global spot prices, despite the glut of oil in their region.
31

Figure C.4: Average Refinery Crude Price by PADD
2

3

0
−.5
−1

2005

2015

5

−.5

0

.5

4

2010

−1

Firm Crude Price − Brent Spot ($/gal)

.5

1

2005

2010

2015

2005

2010

2015

Graphs presented by PADD. Bars represent 95% confidence intervals

One source of within-region variation comes from the fact the some refineries get their
crude from outside of the United States. Figure C.5 plots the average share of crude consumed in each region that is extracted domestically. While refineries near ocean ports were
more reliant on imports than others, no region was entirely reliant on or devoid of imports.
However, what is remarkable about this graph is how stable these import shares are across
time, in light of the massive discounts in domestic crude prices. The one exception is the
East Coast, which was initially shut out of domestic crude markets via pipeline, then belatedly obtained access via rail. It was this rail transportation which closed the inter-regional
differential in Figure C.3.

32

.2

% Dom Crude
.4
.6

.8

Figure C.5: Domestic Crude Acquisition Shares by PADD

2008m1

2010m1

2012m1

(1) East Coast
(4) Plains

2014m1

(2) Midwest
(5) West Coast

2016m1
(3) Gulf

The primary explanation for low substitution towards domestic inputs is that crude oils
are highly differentiated, and refineries are finely tuned to process a particular type of crude.29
As a result of this input differentiation and decades of costly investment, refineries are
highly tailored to process specific crudes. Substantial changes to the crude slate require either
months of reconfiguration or large capital changes. This is important, because the fracking
boom has largely increased domestic supply of “light” (low density) crudes. Figure C.6 shows
the price domestic oil producers of “light” crude received, less the contemporaneous amount
received by producers of “heavy” crude. Historically, lighter crudes traded at a premium,
since they have larger naturally occurring shares of valuable end products. However, from
2010-2015, this long standing ordering was reversed, with the most valuable input trading
at a substantial discount.
29
Another is that some domestic refineries are part of a vertically integrate international oil company like
Citgo (Venezuela) or Aramco (Saudi Arabia).

33

Figure C.6: Domestic Light-Heavy Crude Price Differential

U.S. light - heavy crude spread, as approximated by the difference between the average price for crudes with API gravity
between 35 and 40, minus the average price for crudes with API gravity between 20 and 25.

C.4

Fracking Boom Regressions

We document that location and technological sophistication, which were determined before
fracking transformed the U.S. oil market, correlated strongly with the extent to which firms
benefited from the fracking boom. To do this, we first split the sample into a ”pre” fracking
period, prior to 2008, and a ”post” fracking period, beginning in 2010.30 We then calculate ”pre” period average crude density (API), domestic crude share, size and technology
(“downstream capacity”) for each refinery. These pre-period averages are interacted with an
indictor for the post-period, as are indicators for which region the refinery is in (excluding
PADD 1). Finally, we project monthly crude price paid by each firm onto these interacted
variables, along with firm and month-of-sample dummies.
CrudeP ricef t = 1{P ostt }X̄fpre β + νf + µt + f t

(7)

Table C.1 presents the results. Consistent with the exposition above, refineries proximate
to shale deposits in the Midwest and Plains states saw large declines in crude costs relative
to the omitted group, the East Coast. However, geography alone does not tell the whole
story. Refineries processing ”light” (high API gravity) crude in the pre-period, or with the
technological capability to more easily switch between crudes, experienced larger gains. This
regression confirms that pre-period factors like location and the type of crude a refinery is
designed for, which were chosen before the shale boom, determined which refineries benefited.
30

The trough of US oil production occurred in August 2008 (see Figure 1(a)). For simplicity we exclude
2008 and 2009 from this ”pre”-”post” analysis, although the results are similar with them included.

34

This panel variation underpins the identification strategy employed in the paper.
Table C.1: Within-PADD Fracking Boom Beneficiaries
API Gravity

-0.00743**
(0.00294)

% Domestic Crude

-0.101***
(0.0376)

Log(Capacity)

0.000155
(0.0123)

Downstream Capacity

-0.0673*
(0.0359)

(P2) Midwest

-0.116*
(0.0597)

(P3) Gulf

0.0557
(0.0632)

(P4) Plains

-0.173***
(0.0613)

(P5) West Coast

0.0758
(0.0661)

N
r2

7653
0.958

The dependent variable is the crude price paid ($/gal). All models contain firm-PADD fixed effects and
month of sample dummies. The presented coefficients are the average pre-2008 values interacted with an
indicator for the post boom period (post 2009). Years 2008 and 2009 are omitted. The sample is restricted to
firms with at least 24 months of observations in both periods. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-PADD
level, presented in parentheses.

35

D
D.1

Supplementary Analysis
Inputs costs and the WTI spot price

To evaluate whether the average input costs reported by refineries reflect marginal costs,
we compare input costs to our closest observable proxy for marginal costs, the West Texas
Intermediate Spot Price. If long-run contracts that are not-indexed to spot prices dominate
firms’ crude acquisition, we would expect a relatively weak link between average input costs
and spot prices. In contrast, if firms acquire crude entirely on the spot market or through
long-run contracts indexed to the spot price, we would expect high correlation between the
two price series - in which case, average crude costs might offer a close approximation to
marginal crude costs.
Comparing average input costs and WTI crude costs, we find evidence that the two
move in concert - consistent with average crude costs being a relatively good proxy for
marginal costs. As a graphical illustration, Figure D.1 plots U.S. average crude costs for all
(composite), domestic and international crude streams against WTI crude spot price. More
formally, we can empirical test whether changes in average input costs are closely correlated
with crude spot prices. Table D.1 presents the coefficients from regressing first-differenced
average input costs against contemporaneous and lagged first-differenced crude spot prices.
Consistent with the graphical evidence, we find changes in input costs are correlated with 80
percent of comtemporaneous changes in spot prices and effectively 100 percent of changes in
spot prices, after including the first lagged month.
Figure D.1: Average Input Crude Costs and WTI Spot Prices, by Source

36

Table D.1: Average Input Costs and WTI Spot Prices, by Source

∆W T ISpott
∆W T ISpott−1
∆W T ISpott−2
∆W T ISpott−3
∆W T ISpott−4
Constant

(1)
Composite

(2)
Domestic

(3)
Imported

0.80∗∗∗
(0.012)
0.17∗∗∗
(0.018)
0.0046
(0.013)
-0.016
(0.014)
-0.030∗
(0.015)
0.012
(0.038)

0.76∗∗∗
(0.013)
0.22∗∗∗
(0.018)
0.019
(0.015)
-0.025∗∗
(0.011)
0.010
(0.016)
0.015
(0.039)

0.81∗∗∗
(0.019)
0.15∗∗∗
(0.022)
-0.0020
(0.019)
-0.013
(0.019)
-0.054∗∗∗
(0.020)
0.0033
(0.052)

387
0.96

387
0.96

387
0.93

Observations
R-Squared

Notes: Dependent variables in Cols 1 - 3 are the average nationwide refinery costs of input from all, domestic
and imported sources, respectively.

D.2

Instrumental variables

Based on the preceding discussion on refinery heterogeniety (Appendix B) and the fracking
boom (Appendix C), we construct four instrumental variables at the firm-month level. The
first is an index based measure of the average for the specific type of crude that each refinery
is configured to process. To construct this, we first compute the average API gravity for
each firm over the entire sample. We then convert this to a time-varying price measure by
taking a weighted average of national monthly crude prices for the API gravity category
that average falls in. This is our “API“ instrument. To leverage the fact the refineries with
better technology have greater flexibility to substitute crudes, we also construct a second
instrument by interact this index price with the average ratio of sophisticated technology to
base refining capacity over the sample. (our “Downstream” instrument). The logic of these
instruments is similar to Bartik (1991).
In addition to these instruments based on heterogeneity in refinery design, we also construct two instruments based on refinery location. As was discussed in Section 3, the large
price declines resulting from the shale boom were concentrated primarily in PADD’s 2 and
4. Following a similar logic, we interact time invariant indicators for whether a refinery is
in one of these two regions, with time-varying measures price divergence: the WTI - Brent
spot differential and the US light-heavy crude spread.
These own cost instruments are create for every firm-month. Then, instruments for rival
and fringe costs are constructed by applying the same weighting function to rival and fringe
firm’s own cost instruments. Tables D.2 and D.3 present the first stage results from columns
(3) and (4) in Table 2 of the main text.
37

Table D.2: Instrumental Variables First Stage - State Level
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Own API

0.641
(0.0253)

-0.00223
(0.00550)

0.629
(0.0252)

-0.00309
(0.00684)

-0.00235
(0.00589)

Own Downstream

0.0118
(0.00731)

0.00340
(0.00201)

0.0124
(0.00735)

0.00667
(0.00264)

-0.00519
(0.00190)

Own Padd 2,4 - HL

0.444
(0.0241)

-0.00583
(0.00452)

0.440
(0.0239)

0.00857
(0.00846)

0.000231
(0.00543)

Own Padd 2,4 - WTI

0.404
(0.0255)

0.00945
(0.00508)

0.405
(0.0252)

-0.0172
(0.00758)

0.00693
(0.00473)

Rival API

0.205
(0.0300)

0.847
(0.0108)

0.175
(0.0354)

0.819
(0.0171)

-0.0348
(0.0102)

Rival Downstream

0.000453
(0.0235)

-0.0319
(0.00810)

0.0331
(0.0116)

0.0309
(0.00698)

-0.00624
(0.00314)

Rival Padd 2,4 - HL

-0.187
(0.0527)

0.314
(0.00854)

-0.122
(0.0507)

0.203
(0.0206)

0.0467
(0.00998)

Rival Padd 2,4 - WTI

0.106
(0.0464)

0.489
(0.0114)

0.0430
(0.0359)

0.565
(0.0167)

0.0142
(0.00847)

Fringe API

0.0438
(0.0408)

0.0273
(0.0151)

0.958
(0.0115)

Fringe Downstream

-0.0176
(0.0149)

-0.0257
(0.00473)

-0.0770
(0.00480)

Fringe Padd 2,4 - HL

-0.0692
(0.0630)

0.0364
(0.0223)

0.215
(0.0130)

Fringe Padd 2,4 - WTI

0.0293
(0.0537)

-0.000599
(0.0200)

0.319
(0.0155)

Avg
Own
71529
0.975

Avg
Rival
71529
0.995

Avg
Fringe
71529
0.997

Rival Measure
Endogenous Var
N
r2

Own
71570
0.975

Rival
71570
0.997

This table presents the first stage results from the state level instrumental variable regressions presented
in panel (a) of Table 2. Models (1)-(2) contain the first stage results for the three crude cost variables in
the second stage model with month of sample fixed effects (regression 6 from Table 2), and models (3)-(4)
contain the first stage results for the second stage model with month and year fixed effects (regression 7
from Table 2). The rows list the excluded variables from each regression, with “Domestic” referring to the
domestic crude share instrument, and “API” referring to the API gravity instrument. These are averaged
over rival and non-rival firms to match the structure of these variables in the second stage.

38

Table D.3: Instrumental Variables First Stage - Firm Level
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

Own API

0.619
(0.0845)

0.0178
(0.0153)

0.597
(0.0876)

0.000388
(0.0172)

-0.0306
(0.0194)

Own Downstream

0.00224
(0.0172)

0.00294
(0.00407)

0.00555
(0.0164)

0.00658
(0.00473)

-0.000777
(0.00352)

Own Padd 2,4 - HL

0.406
(0.0896)

0.0257
(0.0225)

0.381
(0.0974)

0.0239
(0.0314)

0.0250
(0.0252)

Own Padd 2,4 - WTI

0.200
(0.0980)

0.00612
(0.0228)

0.184
(0.0755)

-0.0361
(0.0379)

-0.00335
(0.0181)

Rival API

0.0795
(0.0748)

0.841
(0.0300)

0.103
(0.163)

0.862
(0.0431)

-0.112
(0.0308)

Rival Downstream

0.0568
(0.0694)

-0.0318
(0.0188)

0.132
(0.0607)

0.0692
(0.0208)

-0.0499
(0.0131)

Rival Padd 2,4 - HL

-0.108
(0.216)

0.219
(0.0449)

-0.0817
(0.243)

0.129
(0.0662)

0.0730
(0.0452)

Rival Padd 2,4 - WTI

0.540
(0.196)

0.500
(0.0528)

0.441
(0.143)

0.604
(0.0773)

-0.0652
(0.0380)

Fringe API

-0.0237
(0.163)

-0.0162
(0.0282)

1.111
(0.0322)

Fringe Downstream

-0.0114
(0.0362)

-0.00820
(0.00641)

-0.0666
(0.00877)

Fringe Padd 2,4 - HL

0.153
(0.195)

0.156
(0.0403)

0.154
(0.0566)

Fringe Padd 2,4 - WTI

-0.0528
(0.153)

-0.0851
(0.0320)

0.366
(0.0361)

Avg
Own
9169
0.969

Avg
Rival
9169
0.996

Avg
Fringe
9169
0.995

Rival Measure
Endogenous Var
N
r2

Own
9169
0.969

Rival
9169
0.997

This table presents the first stage results from the firm-PADD level instrumental variable regressions presented in panel (b) of Table 2. Models (1)-(2) contain the first stage results for the three crude cost variables
in the second stage model with month of sample fixed effects (regression 6 from Table 2), and models (3)-(4)
contain the first stage results for the second stage model with month and year fixed effects (regression 7
from Table 2). The rows list the excluded variables from each regression, with “Domestic” referring to the
domestic crude share instrument, and “API” referring to the API gravity instrument. These are averaged
over rival and non-rival firms to match the structure of these variables in the second stage.

39

D.3

Alternative Rival Definitions

In our main specification, rival costs enter as the inverse shipping cost weighted average of
competing firms. In this appendix, we consider two alternatives. First, rather than using
shipping cost, we also consider simple inverse linear distance between refineries. Those results
are presented in columns 1 and 3 of Table D.4.
In some markets, such as electricity, strict capacity constraints and heterogeneous costs
impose a natural “dispatch” ordering across firms. In these situations, the market price
is set by the cost of the “marginal firm”, rather than the average over inframarginal firms
serving a market. Such a simple dispatch model does not well describe refinery competition,
where capacity constraints are less stark and storage is possible. Nevertheless, we estimate
a dispatch-curve model in this setting, replacing the average of rival costs with the contemporaneous cost of the rival which is highest cost on average in the other months during the
same year. These results are presented in columns 2 and 4.

40

Table D.4: Competition measure results
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0513
(0.0131)

0.0562
(0.0132)

0.0705
(0.0248)

0.0476
(0.0237)

Rival

0.0854
(0.0171)

0.0435
(0.0109)

0.00624
(0.0313)

0.118
(0.0272)

Fringe

0.196
(0.0195)

0.253
(0.0159)

0.146
(0.0311)

0.0820
(0.0286)

Brent Spot

0.620
(0.0102)

0.601
(0.0102)

0.718
(0.0107)

0.691
(0.0116)

Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

AvDist

Max

71529

71517

AvDist
Yes
3041
71529

Max
Yes
1339
71517

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0508
(0.0298)

0.0782
(0.0269)

-0.0252
(0.0707)

0.00687
(0.0435)

Rival

0.171
(0.0369)

0.105
(0.0238)

0.165
(0.106)

0.247
(0.0710)

Fringe

0.0907
(0.0351)

0.150
(0.0321)

0.0479
(0.0599)

-0.0256
(0.0559)

Brent Spot

0.642
(0.0159)

0.621
(0.0185)

0.752
(0.0231)

0.707
(0.0273)

Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

AvDist

Max

9169

9169

AvDist
Yes
123
9169

Max
Yes
167
9169

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects;
Panel (b) is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications include year fixed effect and month fixed effects. Rival costs include the average crude price of other
firms selling into the same market each month, and non-rival costs are the average cost of all other firms,
weighted by the inverse shipping cost of supplying the market. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
clustered at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include demand
shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree days) and supply shifters (diesel and gasoline
shares, proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

41

D.4

Alternative Price Measures

As described in the text, a single wholesale revenue per gallon measure, across all products
sold, is used as the dependent variable in all regressions. In the literature, pass-through is
often estimated using only gasoline or, sometimes, diesel prices. In this section, we reproduce
tables 1 and 2, using only gasoline or diesel prices. We also include results using total revenue
per gallon, inclusive of retail sales.
D.4.1

Gasoline
Table D.5: Fixed Effect Comparison Table - Gasoline

Own

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0206
(0.00605)

0.00620
(0.00390)

0.00543
(0.00612)

0.00208
(0.00947)

0.00265
(0.00683)

0.169
(0.0222)

0.958
(0.00983)

0.351
(0.00995)

Rival
Brent Spot
Time FE
N
r2

0.585
(0.00727)
MoS
66713
0.980

MoS-St
66612
0.993

MoS
66713
0.980

Y,M
66713
0.945

Y,M
66713
0.950

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using wholesale gasoline prices as the dependent
variable. Regressions are run at the firm-state-month level, and include firm-state fixed effects. Time FEs
“Mos” reflect month of sample dummies, “Y-M” reflect year-month dummies, while “Y,M” implies year
and month dummies. Rival costs include the average crude price of all other firms, weighted by the inverse
shipping cost of serving a particular state. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-state level, are presented
in parentheses. All models include demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree
days) and supply shifters (proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

42

Table D.6: Competition Measure Results - Gasoline
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.00265
(0.00683)

0.00636
(0.00632)

-0.0102
(0.0117)

0.00624
(0.0108)

Rival

0.351
(0.00995)

0.135
(0.0125)

0.226
(0.0156)

0.0339
(0.0176)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.239
(0.0138)
0.585
(0.00727)

0.562
(0.00796)

0.202
(0.0163)
0.708
(0.00850)

0.685
(0.00847)

Yes
4576
66713

Avg
Yes
3126
66657

Avg

66713

66657

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

Own

-0.0260
(0.0174)

-0.0106
(0.0170)

-0.0613 -0.00950
(0.0352) (0.0343)

Rival

0.396
(0.0282)

0.265
(0.0332)

0.290
(0.0499)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

(3)

0.103
(0.0312)
0.566
(0.0185)

0.577
(0.0191)

8225

0.107
(0.0574)
0.138
(0.0338)

0.692
(0.0244)

0.686
(0.0224)

Yes
318
8225

Avg
Yes
168
8225

Avg

8225

(4)

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using wholesale gasoline prices as the dependent
variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects; Panel (b)
is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications include
year fixed effect and month fixed effects. Rival costs include the average crude price of other firms selling
into the same market each month, and non-rival costs are the average cost of all other firms, weighted by
the inverse shipping cost of supplying the market. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, clustered
at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include demand shifters
(state population, income, heating and cooling degree days) and supply shifters (diesel and gasoline shares,
proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

43

D.4.2

Distillate
Table D.7: Fixed Effect Comparison Table - Distillate

Own

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0284
(0.00571)

0.00356
(0.00455)

0.0138
(0.00553)

0.000400
(0.00889)

0.0116
(0.00597)

0.181
(0.0183)

1.063
(0.00893)

0.240
(0.00790)

Rival
Brent Spot
Time FE
N
r2

0.781
(0.00584)
MoS
65165
0.988

MoS-St
64929
0.994

MoS
65165
0.988

Y,M
65165
0.965

Y,M
65165
0.972

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using wholesale distillate prices as the dependent
variable. Regressions are run at the firm-state-month level, and include firm-state fixed effects. Time FEs
“Mos” reflect month of sample dummies, “Y-M” reflect year-month dummies, while “Y,M” implies year
and month dummies. Rival costs include the average crude price of all other firms, weighted by the inverse
shipping cost of serving a particular state. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-state level, are presented
in parentheses. All models include demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree
days) and supply shifters (proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

44

Table D.8: Competition Measure Results - Distillate
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0116
(0.00597)

0.0125
(0.00582)

-0.00369
(0.00970)

-0.00289
(0.00945)

Rival

0.240
(0.00790)

0.127
(0.00971)

0.152
(0.0116)

0.122
(0.0148)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.116
(0.0115)
0.781
(0.00584)

0.778
(0.00570)

0.0128
(0.0153)
0.874
(0.00610)

0.888
(0.00553)

Yes
4044
65165

Avg
Yes
2683
65123

Avg

65165

65123

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

-0.00106
(0.0167)

-0.000223
(0.0164)

0.00104
(0.0262)

-0.0110
(0.0321)

Rival

0.245
(0.0218)

0.193
(0.0300)

0.127
(0.0334)

0.153
(0.0548)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.0360
(0.0264)
0.787
(0.0143)

0.800
(0.0145)

-0.0294
(0.0330)
0.890
(0.0154)

0.903
(0.0132)

Yes
261
8743

Avg
Yes
135
8743

Avg

8743

8743

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using wholesale distillate prices as the dependent
variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects; Panel (b)
is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications include
year fixed effect and month fixed effects. Rival costs include the average crude price of other firms selling
into the same market each month, and non-rival costs are the average cost of all other firms, weighted by
the inverse shipping cost of supplying the market. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, clustered
at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include demand shifters
(state population, income, heating and cooling degree days) and supply shifters (diesel and gasoline shares,
proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

45

D.4.3

Total Sales
Table D.9: Fixed Effect Comparison Table - Total Sales

Own

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0566
(0.0130)

0.0463
(0.0132)

0.0472
(0.0128)

0.0328
(0.0139)

0.0386
(0.0131)

0.130
(0.0467)

0.944
(0.0146)

0.283
(0.0167)

Rival
Brent Spot
Time FE
N
r2

0.629
(0.0119)
MoS
71664
0.962

MoS-St
71601
0.972

MoS
71664
0.962

Y,M
71664
0.939

Y,M
71664
0.945

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average prices, inclusive of retail sales,
as the dependent variable. Regressions are run at the firm-state-month level, and include firm-state fixed
effects. Time FEs “Mos” reflect month of sample dummies, “Y-M” reflect year-month dummies, while “Y,M”
implies year and month dummies. Rival costs include the average crude price of all other firms, weighted by
the inverse shipping cost of serving a particular state. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-state level, are
presented in parentheses. All models include demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling
degree days) and supply shifters (proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

46

Table D.10: Competition Measure Results - Total Sales
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0386
(0.0131)

0.0414
(0.0134)

0.0512
(0.0256)

0.0598
(0.0260)

Rival

0.283
(0.0167)

0.132
(0.0219)

0.147
(0.0304)

0.0364
(0.0386)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.162
(0.0221)
0.629
(0.0119)

0.618
(0.0101)

0.119
(0.0348)
0.739
(0.0129)

0.724
(0.0107)

Yes
4676
71664

Avg
Yes
3151
71624

(3)

(4)

Avg

71664

71624

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

Own

0.0458
(0.0321)

0.0503 -0.00128
(0.0296) (0.0484)

0.0150
(0.0480)

Rival

0.296
(0.0355)

0.214
(0.0415)

0.166
(0.0813)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.216
(0.0608)

0.0688
(0.0386)
0.614
(0.0165)

0.622
(0.0155)

0.0170
(0.0585)
0.727
(0.0231)

0.742
(0.0195)

Yes
338
8886

Avg
Yes
224
8886

Avg

8886

8886

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average prices, inclusive of retail sales,
as the dependent variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state
fixed effects; Panel (b) is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects.
All specifications include year fixed effect and month fixed effects. Rival costs include the average crude
price of other firms selling into the same market each month, and non-rival costs are the average cost of all
other firms, weighted by the inverse shipping cost of supplying the market. Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, clustered at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include
demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree days) and supply shifters (diesel and
gasoline shares, proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

47

D.5

Balanced Sample

While there is no entry and minimal exit during our sample, there are several mergers,
acquisitions and divestitures. As a result, not every firm-PADD is present throughout the
entire sample (see Table B.2). At the state level, while the vast majority of firms serve
the same states every month, marginal firms do enter the market when demand spikes or,
more commonly, one of the usual suppliers goes down. These imbalances in our sample call
into question the broad identification strategy employed, which looks with firm or firm-state
before and after the fracking boom.
To test wether these changes are biasing our results, we re-estimate our primary models
on a restricted sample of firm-PADDs or firm-PADD-states which we observe for at least
eight years. The results are presented in Tables D.11 and D.12. The point estimates are
similar in all cases, and generally more precise.
Table D.11: Fixed Effect Comparison Table - Balanced Sample

Own

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

0.0821
(0.0154)

0.0731
(0.0160)

0.0676
(0.0151)

0.0504
(0.0168)

0.0609
(0.0153)

0.149
(0.0505)

0.920
(0.0175)

0.256
(0.0189)

Rival
Brent Spot
Time FE
N
r2

0.630
(0.0139)
MoS
50174
0.966

MoS-St
50063
0.978

MoS
50174
0.966

Y,M
50174
0.943

Y,M
50174
0.949

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Regressions are run at the firm-state-month level, and include firm-state fixed effects. Time
FEs “Mos” reflect month of sample dummies, “Y-M” reflect year-month dummies, while “Y,M” implies year
and month dummies. Rival costs include the average crude price of all other firms, weighted by the inverse
shipping cost of serving a particular state. Standard errors, clustered at the firm-state level, are presented
in parentheses. All models include demand shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree
days) and supply shifters (proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

48

Table D.12: Competition Measure Results - Balanced Sample
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0609
(0.0153)

0.0656
(0.0151)

0.104
(0.0262)

0.118
(0.0253)

Rival

0.256
(0.0189)

0.109
(0.0234)

0.102
(0.0315)

0.00432
(0.0410)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.155
(0.0250)
0.630
(0.0139)

0.618
(0.0117)

0.0967
(0.0395)
0.729
(0.0148)

0.717
(0.0114)

Yes
3949
50174

Avg
Yes
2676
50133

Avg

50174

50133

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0561
(0.0386)

0.0623
(0.0345)

0.00234
(0.0480)

0.0329
(0.0448)

Rival

0.282
(0.0436)

0.208
(0.0503)

0.224
(0.0571)

0.151
(0.0847)

Fringe
Brent Spot
Rival Measure
IV
fstat
N

0.0561
(0.0452)
0.616
(0.0195)

0.627
(0.0172)

0.0222
(0.0695)
0.717
(0.0231)

0.734
(0.0198)

Yes
243
6906

Avg
Yes
169
6906

Avg

6906

6906

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects;
Panel (b) is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications include year fixed effect and month fixed effects. Rival costs include the average crude price of other
firms selling into the same market each month, and non-rival costs are the average cost of all other firms,
weighted by the inverse shipping cost of supplying the market. Standard errors are presented in parentheses,
clustered at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include demand
shifters (state population, income, heating and cooling degree days) and supply shifters (diesel and gasoline
shares, proportion of retail sales, API gravity, and operating refinery capacity).

49

D.6

Carbon tax
Figure D.2: GHG heterogeneity

Based on annual data (2011-2015) in EPA GHGRP

Table D.13: Determinants of CO2 Heterogeneity
(1)
API Gravity

0.000174***
(0.0000613)

log(Capacity)

0.0000794
(0.000473)

% Coking

0.0238***
(0.00373)

% Cracking

0.0201***
(0.00203)

Constant

0.0220***
(0.00574)

mean(Y)
TimeFes
N
r2

.027
Y
615
0.347

Dependent variable: Metric tons of CO2 equivalent per barrel of inputs processed. Data from EPA GHGRP
(2011-2015). Model includes PADD and year dummies.

50

D.7

Heterogeneity

The models in the text estimate a single average reduced-form pass-through rate for the
entire industry. Structurally, we know that pass-through varies with the relative convexity
of residual demand and supply (Weyl and Fabinger, 2013). Mapping these to observed
market structure requires assumptions about the nature of competition. Nevertheless, we
can check if average pass-through varies with observables likely correlated with these factors.
Table D.14 presents the results of estimating models 1 and 3 from Table 2 with the main
pass-through terms interacted with correlates for market structure. In models 1 and 3, passthrough is interacted with an indicator for whether the average HHI for that market during
other months in the same year is above the median for the sample. In models 2 and 4, the
interaction term is an indicator for whether the firm had more than a 10 percent share of
refining capacity in that PADD at the start of the year.

51

Table D.14: Heterogeneity Results
(a) State Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0445
(0.0180)

0.0373
(0.0171)

0.0478
(0.0320)

0.0348
(0.0369)

Own X Int

0.000282
(0.0211)

0.0286
(0.0289)

0.0273
(0.0382)

0.0549
(0.0600)

Rival

0.282
(0.0200)

0.295
(0.0214)

0.157
(0.0354)

0.181
(0.0452)

Rival X Int

-0.00213
(0.0213)

-0.0418
(0.0307)

-0.0299
(0.0384)

-0.0685
(0.0618)

Brent Spot

0.626
(0.0112)

0.625
(0.0115)

0.734
(0.0124)

0.729
(0.0134)

Interaction
Time FE
IV
fstat
N

HHI
Y,M

Cap.PADD
Y,M

71570

71570

HHI
Y,M
Yes
2329
71570

Cap.PADD
Y,M
Yes
1551
71570

(b) Firm Level Results

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Own

0.0486
(0.0400)

0.0368
(0.0369)

-0.0433
(0.0624)

-0.0822
(0.0677)

Own X Int

0.00100
(0.0406)

0.0795
(0.0572)

0.136
(0.0860)

0.243
(0.0825)

Rival

0.285
(0.0444)

0.306
(0.0402)

0.238
(0.0741)

0.309
(0.0810)

Rival X Int

-0.00189
(0.0386)

-0.105
(0.0559)

-0.137
(0.0845)

-0.268
(0.0821)

Brent Spot

0.622
(0.0176)

0.619
(0.0180)

0.747
(0.0242)

0.722
(0.0246)

Interaction
Time FE
IV
fstat
N

HHI
Y,M

Cap.PADD
Y,M

9169

9169

HHI
Y,M
Yes
120
9169

Cap.PADD
Y,M
Yes
114
9169

This table presents the results of estimating Equation (3) using total average wholesale prices as the dependent variable. Panel (a) is estimated at the firm-state-month level, and includes firm-state fixed effects;
Panel (b) is estimated at the firm-PADD-month level and includes firm-PADD fixed effects. All specifications
include year fixed effect and month fixed effects. “X 52
Int” variables reflect the cost measure listed, interacted
with a binary indictor based on the measure listed in the Interaction row. Standard errors are presented in
parentheses, clustered at the firm-state level in panel (a) and the firm level in panel (b). All models include

