                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            ARE NEGATIVE NOMINAL INTEREST RATES EXPANSIONARY?

                                      Gauti B. Eggertsson
                                      Ragnar E. Juelsrud
                                       Ella Getz Wold

                                      Working Paper 24039
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24039


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We are grateful to compricer.se and especially Christina Soderberg for providing and assisting
with bank level interest rate data. We are also grateful to seminar and conference participants at
Brown University, the University of Maryland, Bank of Portugal, the European Central Bank and
John Shea, Larry Summers, Dominik Thaler and Michael Woodford for discussion. We thank
INET for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gauti B. Eggertsson, Ragnar E. Juelsrud, and Ella Getz Wold. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Negative Nominal Interest Rates Expansionary?
Gauti B. Eggertsson, Ragnar E. Juelsrud, and Ella Getz Wold
NBER Working Paper No. 24039
November 2017
JEL No. E3,E30,E31,E32,E4,E41,E42,E43,E5,E50,E52,E58,E65

                                          ABSTRACT

Following the crisis of 2008 several central banks engaged in a radical new policy experiment by
setting negative policy rates. Using aggregate and bank-level data, we document a collapse in
pass-through to deposit and lending rates once the policy rate turns negative. Motivated by these
empirical facts, we construct a macro-model with a banking sector that links together policy rates,
deposit rates and lending rates. Once the policy rates turns negative the usual transmission
mechanism of monetary policy breaks down. Moreover, because a negative interest rate on
reserves reduces bank profits, the total effect on aggregate output can be contractionary.


Gauti B. Eggertsson                              Ella Getz Wold
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Brown University                                 Brown University
64 Waterman Street                               64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912                             Providence, RI 02912
and NBER                                         ella.getz.wold@gmail.com
gauti_eggertsson@brown.edu

Ragnar E. Juelsrud
Department of Economics
BI Norwegian Business School
Nydalsveien 37
0483 Oslo
Norway
ragnar@juelsrud.no
1    Introduction
Would you give me one dollar today if I promise to give you less than one dollar back
tomorrow? Conventional macroeconomic theory typically assumes that the answer is no.
Rather than giving me one dollar for less in return tomorrow, you would prefer to hold on to
that dollar yourself. At the heart of this argument is the role of currency as a store of nominal
value: one dollar will never be worth less that one dollar in nominal terms. This logic gives
rise to the so called zero lower bound on short term nominal interest rates. That is, everybody
will demand at least the nominal value of what they lend out returned to them. This is a
key assumption behind a vast recent literature on the zero lower bound, see e.g. Krugman
(1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) for two early contributions. Recent experience
in a number of countries however, put this key assumption into question. From 2012 to
2016, central banks in Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, Japan and the Eurozone reduced
their key policy rates below zero for the first time in economic history, going as far as -0.75
percent in Switzerland. The rationale behind this policy measure was to stimulate economic
activity. The implementation of negative policy rates represents a new macroeconomic policy
experiment. To date, there is no consensus on the eﬀects of negative nominal interest rates
- either empirically or theoretically. This paper contributes to filling this gap.
    Understanding how negative nominal interest rates aﬀect the economy is important in
preparing for the next economic downturn. Interest rates have been declining for more
than three decades, resulting in worries about secular stagnation (see e.g. Summers 2014,
Eggertsson and Mehrotra 2014 and Caballero and Farhi 2017). In a recent working paper,
Kiley and Roberts (2017) estimate that the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates will
bind 30-40 percent of the time going forward. Whether setting a negative interest rate is
expansionary is therefore of first order importance. Why did central banks try this untested
policy? In short, they argued that there is nothing special about policy rates falling below
zero. When announcing a negative policy rate, the Swedish Riksbank wrote in their monetary
policy report that ”Cutting the repo rate below zero, at least if the cuts are in total not very
large, is expected to have similar eﬀects to repo-rate cuts when the repo rate is positive,
as all channels in the transmission mechanism can be expected to be active” (The Riksbank
2015). Similarly, the Swiss National Bank declared that “the laws of economics do not change
significantly when interest rates turn negative” (Jordan, 2016). Many are skeptical however.
For instance, Mark Carney of the Bank of England is “... not a fan of negative interest rates”
and argues that “we see the negative consequences of them through the financial system”
(Carney, 2016). Waller (2016) coins the policy as a “tax in sheep’s clothing”, arguing that
negative interest rates act as any other tax on the banking system and thus reduces credit


                                               2
growth1 .
     In this paper we investigate the impact of negative central bank rates on the macroecon-
omy, both from an empirical and theoretical perspective2 . The first main contribution of the
paper is to use a combination of aggregate and bank-level data to examine the pass-through
of negative nominal central bank rates via the banking system. Using aggregate data, across
six diﬀerent economies, we show how negative policy rates have had limited pass-through to
bank deposit rates, i.e. the rates customers face when they deposit their money in banks,
and to lending rates, i.e. the rate at which customers borrow from banks. Making inferences
about whether negative interest rates are expansionary based on aggregate data is challeng-
ing, however. We therefore proceed by using a novel, high-frequency bank level dataset on
interest rates from Sweden, to explore the decoupling of lending rates from the policy rate.
We document a striking decline in pass-through, and a substantial increase in heterogeneity
across banks, once the policy rate becomes negative. We show that this increase in hetero-
geneity is linked to variation in the reliance on deposit financing: the higher the dependence
on deposit financing, the smaller the eﬀect on borrowing rates. Using a diﬀerence-in-diﬀerence
approach, we show that banks with high deposit shares have significantly lower growth in
loan volumes once the policy rate becomes negative, consistent with similar findings for the
Euro Area (Heider, Saidi, and Schepens, 2016).
     Motivated by these empirical results, the second main contribution of the paper is method-
ological. We construct a model, building on several papers from the existing literature, which
allows us to address in the most simple setting how changes to the central bank policy rate
filters though the banking system to various other interest rates, and ultimately determines
aggregate output. At a minimum, such a model needs to recognize the role of money as
a store of value, give a role to banks in order to allow for separate lending and borrowing
rates, as well as having a well defined policy rate that may diﬀer from the rates depositors
and borrowers face. We construct a simple New Keynesian DSGE model which nests the
standard one-period interest rate textbook New Keynesian model (see e.g. Woodford, 2003)
and other recent variations. Our framework has four main elements. First, we explicitly
introduce money along with storage costs to clarify the role of money as a store of value
and how this may generate a bound on deposit rates. Second, we incorporate a banking
sector and nominal frictions along the lines of Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei (2014), which
delivers well defined deposit and lending rates. Third, we incorporate demand for central
   1
    Other skeptics include Stiglitz (2016) and McAndrews (2015).
   2
    Note that we do not attempt to evaluate the impact of other monetary policy measures which occurred
simultaneously with negative interest rates. That is, we focus exclusively on the eﬀect of negative interest
rates, and do not attempt to address the eﬀectiveness of asset purchase programs or programs intended to
provide banks with cheap financing (such as the TLTRO program initiated by the ECB).



                                                     3
bank reserves as in Curdia and Woodford (2011) in order to obtain a policy rate which can
potentially diﬀer from the commercial bank deposit rate. Fourth, we allow the cost of bank
intermediation to depend on banks’ net worth as in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010)3 . The central
bank sets the interest rate on reserves, and can choose to implement a negative policy rate
as banks are willing to pay for the transaction services provided by reserves. However, due
to the possibility of using money to store value, the deposit rate faced by commercial bank
depositors is bounded at some level (possibly negative), in line with our empirical findings.
The reason is simple: the bank’s customers will choose to store their wealth in terms of paper
currency if charged too much by the bank. We stipulate explicit conditions on the storage
cost of money that guarantees a well-defined lower bound.
    Away from the lower bound on the deposit rate, the central bank can stimulate the
economy by lowering the policy rate. This reduces both the deposit rate and the rate at
which households can borrow, thereby increasing demand. We show however, that once
the deposit rate reaches its eﬀective lower bound, reducing the policy rate further is no
longer expansionary. As the central bank looses its ability to control the deposit rate, it
cannot stimulate the demand of savers via the traditional intertemporal substitution channel.
Furthermore, as banks’ funding costs (via deposits) are no longer responsive to the policy
rate, the bank lending channel of monetary policy breaks down. There is no stimulative eﬀect
via lower borrowing rates. Hence, as long as the deposit rate is bounded, a negative central
bank rate fails to bring the economy out of a recession. We further show that if bank profits
aﬀect banks’ intermediation costs, due to for instance informational asymmetries between
the bank and its creditors as in Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010), negative interest rates can be
contractionary through a reduction in banks’ net worth.

Literature Review Jackson (2015) and Bech and Malkhozov (2016) document the limited
pass-through of negative policy rates to aggregate bank rates, but do not evaluate the eﬀects
on the macroeconomy. In an empirical paper on the pass-through of negative policy rates
to Euro Area banks, Heider, Saidi, and Schepens (2016) find that banks with higher deposit
shares have lower lending growth in the post-zero environment. While the authors argue
that this is a result of the lower bound on deposit rates, no attempt is made to formalize
the mechanisms at play. Given the radical nature of the policy experiment pursued by
several central banks, the theoretical literature is perhaps surprisingly silent on the expected
   3
    Relative to the literature cited above, our model is closest to Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei (2014).
The main diﬀerences are that we explicitly incorporate cash to derive the interest rate bound rather than
imposing it exogenously. Furthermore, we introduce reserves to allow the policy rate to diﬀer from the deposit
rate. Finally, we allow for the net worth of banks to have an eﬀect on their intermediation costs.




                                                      4
eﬀect of this policy within the current monetary framework45 . Two important exceptions are
Brunnermeier and Koby (2016) and Rognlie (2015). The former paper defines the reversal
rate as the interest rate at which further interest rate reductions become contractionary. This
reversal rate, however, can in principle be either positive or negative, so it is unrelated to the
observed lower bound on deposit rates resulting from money storage costs, which is central
to our paper. Rognlie (2015) allows for a negative interest rate due to money storage costs.
However, in that model households face only one interest rate, and the central bank can
control this interest rate directly. Thus, the model does not capture the bound on deposit
rates which we model here. Hence, neither of these papers capture the key mechanism in our
paper, which is driven by an empirical observation which was by no means obvious ex ante:
as the lower bound on the commercial bank deposit rate becomes binding, the connection
between the central bank’s policy rate (which can be negative) and the rest of the interest
rates in the economy breaks down.
    There is a older literature however, dating at least back to the work of Silvio Gesell more
than a hundred years ago (Gesell, 1916), which contemplates more radical monetary policy
regime changes than we do here. This literature has been rapidly growing in recent years.
In our model, the storage cost of money, and hence the lower bound, is treated as fixed.
However, policy reforms can potentially alter the lower bound or even remove it completely.
An example of such policies is a direct tax on paper currency, as proposed first by Gesell and
discussed in detail by Goodfriend (2000) and Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (2003). This scheme
directly aﬀects the storage cost of money, and thereby the lower bound on deposits which
we derive in our model. Another possibility is abolishing paper currency altogether. This
policy is discussed, among others, in Agarwal and Kimball (2015), Rogoﬀ (2017c) and Rogoﬀ
(2017a), who also suggest more elaborate policy regimes to circumvent the ZLB. An example
of such a regime is creating a system in which paper currency and electronic currency trade
at diﬀerent exchange rates. The results presented here should not be considered as rebuﬃng
any of these ideas. Rather, we are simply pointing out that under the current institutional
framework, empirical evidence and a stylized variation of the standard New Keynesian model
do not seem to support the idea that a negative interest rate policy is an eﬀective tool to
stimulate aggregate demand. This should, in fact, be read as a motivation to study further
more radical proposals such as those presented by Gesell over a century ago and more recently
in the work of authors such as Goodfriend (2000), Buiter and Panigirtzoglou (2003), Rogoﬀ
   4
     There is however a large literature on the eﬀects of the zero lower bound. See for example Krugman
(1998) and Eggertsson and Woodford (2006) for two early contributions.
   5
     Our paper is also related to an empirical literature on the connection between interest rate levels and
bank profits (Borio and Gambacorta 2017, Kerbl and Sigmund 2017), as well as a theoretical literature linking
credit supply to banks net worth (Holmstrom and Tirole 1997, Gertler and Kiyotaki 2010).



                                                     5
(2017c) and Agarwal and Kimball (2015). In the discussion section we comment upon how
our model can be extended to explore further some of these ideas, which we consider to be
natural extensions.


2     Negative Interest Rates In Practice
In this section we use aggregate and bank-level data to document three facts about the
pass-through of negative policy rates to bank interest rates. These facts will motivate our
theoretical model presented in the next section. The aggregate data is retrieved from central
banks and statistical agencies for each of the six economies we discuss. For Sweden, we
also use two bank-level datasets. First, we use bank level data on monthly lending volumes
from Statistics Sweden. Second, we use daily bank level data on mortgage rates for thirteen
Swedish banks and credit institutions, which was provided by the price comparison site
compricer.se 6 .

Fact 1: Limited Pass-Through to Deposit Rates In Figure (1) we plot deposit rates
for six economic areas in which the policy rate is negative. Starting in the upper left corner,
the Swedish central bank lowered its key policy rate below zero in February 2015. Deposit
rates, which in Sweden are usually below the policy rate, did not follow the central bank rate
into negative territory. Instead, deposit rates for both households and firms remain stuck at,
or just above, zero. A similar picture emerges for Denmark, as illustrated in the upper right
corner. The Danish central bank crossed the zero lower bound twice, first in July 2012 and
then in September 2014. As was the case for Sweden, the negative policy rate has not been
transmitted to deposit rates.
    Consider next the Swiss and Japanese case in the middle row of Figure (1). Switzerland
implemented a negative policy rate in December 2014, while the central bank in Japan lowered
its key policy rate below zero in early 2016. The deposit rates in both countries were already
very low, and did not follow the policy rate into negative territory. As a result, the impact
on deposit rates was limited.
    Finally, interest rates for the Euro Area are depicted in the bottom row of Figure (1).
The ECB reduced its key policy rate below zero in June 2014. As seen from the left panel,
aggregate deposit rates are high in the Euro Area and therefore have more room to fall
before reaching the zero lower bound. Moreover, the deposit rate does not normally follow
   6
     We have mortgage rates for diﬀerent periods of fixed interest rates, ranging from three months to ten
years. The fixed interest rate periods for which all financial institutions provide interest rates are 3 months,
1 year, 2 years, 3 years and 5 years. In the text we depict the results using five year periods, but we replicate
our results using other interest rates in Figure (8) in the appendix.


                                                       6
the policy rate as closely as in the other cases we consider. One reason for this may be the
underlying heterogeneity of the Euro Area7 . Looking at Germany only, in the bottom right
of the figure, we see a similar pattern emerge as in the other countries. That is, despite
negative policy rates, the deposit rate appears bounded by zero. To sum up, the aggregate
evidence is strongly suggestive of a lower bound on deposit rates.

                                                   Sweden                                                                 Denmark
                       6




                                                                                              6
                                                                                              4
                       4
                 Percent




                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                              2
                       2




                                                                                              0
                       0




                                                                                              -2
                             2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018                 2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018

                                           Corporations          Households                                        Corporations               Households
                                           Policy rate                                                             Policy rate




                                                Switzerland                                                                    Japan



                                                                                              .6
                       3




                                                                                              .4
                       2
                 Percent




                                                                                           Percent
                                                                                             .2
                    1  0




                                                                                              0
                                                                                              -.2
                       -1




                             2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018                 2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018

                                            Households           Policy rate                                           Total             Policy rate




                                                 Euro Area                                                                Germany
                       5




                                                                                              4
                       4




                                                                                              3
                         3
                 Percent




                                                                                              2
                  2




                                                                                              1
                       1




                                                                                              0
                       0




                                                                                                     2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018
                             2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018

                                           Corporations          Households                                        Policy Rate                Households
                                           Policy rate                                                             Corporations




Figure 1: Aggregate Deposit Rates for Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, Japan, the Euro Area
and Germany. The policy rates are defined as the Repo Rate (Sweden), the Certificates of
Deposit Rate (Denmark), SARON (Switzerland), the Uncollaterized Overnight Call Rate
(Japan) and the Deposit Rate (Euro Area and Germany). The red vertical lines mark the
month in which policy rates became negative. Source: The Riksbank, Statistics Sweden, the
NB, the SNB, Bank of Japan, and the ECB.
   7
    When considering the Euro Area it is worth noting that the negative interest rate policy was implemented
together with a host of other credit easing measures, some of which implied direct lending from the ECB to
commercial banks at a (potentially) negative interest rate. That policy is better characterized as a credit
subsidy rather than charging interest on reserves, which the commercial banks hold in positive amounts at
the central bank.




                                                                                       7
Fact 2: Limited Pass-Through to Lending Rates Although deposit rates appear
bounded by zero, one might still expect negative policy rates to lower lending rates. As
lending rates are usually above the central bank policy rate, they are all well above zero.
Here we show that the pass-through of the policy rate to lending rates appears aﬀected by
the policy rate becoming negative, an empirical finding our model will replicate. In Figure
(2) we plot bank lending rates for the six economic areas considered above. While lending
rates usually follow the policy rate closely, there appears to be a disconnect once the policy
rate breaks the zero lower bound, a feature which will become starker once we consider
disaggregated bank data. Looking at the aggregate data in Figure (2), lending rates in
Sweden, Denmark and Switzerland seem less sensitive to the respective policy rates once
they become negative. There appears to be some reduction in Japanese lending rates at the
time the policy rate went negative, but because there are no further interest rate reductions in
negative territory the Japanese case is less informative8 . Again, the Euro Area is somewhat
of an outlier, as lending rates appear to have decreased. This is not surprising in light of the
higher-than-zero deposit rates we documented in the previous fact. Again, for the case of
Germany, in which the zero lower bound on the deposit rate is binding, lending rates appear
less responsive.
   8
    The initial reduction in Japanese lending rates could be caused by the positive part of the policy rate
cut, i.e. going from a positive policy rate to a zero policy rate.




                                                    8
                                                 Sweden                                                                 Denmark




                     8




                                                                                            8
                                                                                            6
                     6
               Percent




                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                             4
                   4




                                                                                            2
                     2




                                                                                            0
                     0

                           2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018                 2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018

                                         Corporations          Households                                        Corporations               Households
                                         Policy rate                                                             Policy rate




                                              Switzerland                                                                    Japan




                                                                                            2.00
                     4
                     3




                                                                                            1.50
                       2
                Percent




                                                                                         Percent
                                                                                           1.00
               1




                                                                                            0.50
                     0




                                                                                            0.00
                     -1




                           2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018                 2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018

                                          Households           Policy rate                                           Total             Policy rate




                                               Euro Area                                                                Germany
                     6




                                                                                            6
                                                                                            4
                     4
               Percent




                                                                                            2
                     2




                                                                                            0
                     0




                                                                                                   2008   2010       2012            2014            2016   2018
                           2008   2010       2012       2014           2016   2018

                                         Corporations          Households                                        Policy Rate                Households
                                         Policy rate                                                             Corporations




Figure 2: Aggregate Lending Rates for Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland, Japan, the Euro
Area and Germany. The policy rates are defined as the Repo Rate (Sweden), the Certificates
of Deposit Rate (Denmark), SARON (Switzerland), the Uncollaterized Overnight Call Rate
(Japan) and the Deposit Rate (Euro Area and Germany). The red vertical lines mark the
month in which policy rates became negative. Source: The Riksbank, Statistics Sweden, the
NB, the SNB, Bank of Japan, and the ECB.

    Perhaps the most compelling evidence on the breakdown in correlation between the policy
rate and the lending rate of banks, comes from daily bank-level data from Sweden. In the left
panel of Figure (3) we plot bank-level mortgage rates for thirteen banks or credit institutions.
The vertical lines capture days on which the key policy rate (the repo rate) was lowered. The
first two lines capture repo rate reductions in positive territory. On both of these occasions,
there is an immediate and homogeneous decline in bank lending rates. The solid vertical
line marks the day the repo rate turned negative for the first time, and the three proceeding
lines capture repo rate reductions in negative territory. The response in bank lending rates
to these interest rate cuts are strikingly diﬀerent. While there is some initial reduction in
lending rates, most of the rates increase again shortly thereafter. As a result, the total impact

                                                                                     9
on lending rates is limited9 . There is also a substantial increase in dispersion, with several
banks keeping their lending rate roughly unchanged despite repeated interest rate reductions
below zero. In the right panel of Figure (3) we plot the minimum and maximum bank lending
rate, along side the repo rate (the dashed black line). Again, the increase in dispersion after
the repo rate turned negative is clearly visible. We also note that the minimum bank lending
rate has stayed constant since the first quarter of 2015, despite three policy rate reductions
in negative territory.

                  Swedish Bank Lending Rates                               Min/Max Bank Lending Rate and the Repo Rate




                                                                                                                         1.25
   4




                                                                  4
                                                                  3.5




                                                                                                                         .75
   3.5




                                                              Bank Rates




                                                                                                                         Repo Rate
                                                                                                                            .25
                                                                  3
   3




                                                                                                                         -.25
                                                                  2.5
   2.5




                                                                                                                         -.75
                                                                  2
   2




          0.75     0.25   0   -0.1 -0.25   -0.35   -0.50             1/1/2014               2/18/2015              5/26/2016




Figure 3: Bank Level Lending Rates Sweden. Interest rate on five-year mortgages. The red
vertical lines mark days in which the repo rate was lowered. Left panel: lending rates by
bank - the label on the x-axis shows the value of the repo rate. Right panel: the solid green
(blue) line depicts the maximum (minimum) bank lending rate, while the dashed black line
depicts the repo rate.


Fact 3: Increased Dispersion in Pass-Through Figure (3) showed an increase in the
dispersion of bank lending rates once the policy rate fell below zero. In the left panel of
Figure (4), we illustrate this explicitly by plotting the standard deviation of lending rates
over time. We first note that the dispersion in bank rates appears to spike around the time
when changes to the repo rate are announced. Second, and more importantly for our purpose,
there is a sustained increase in dispersion after the zero lower bound is breached.
    In the right panel of Figure (4) we plot the bank level correlations between the lending
rates and the policy rate. The correlations captured by the blue bars are calculated for the
pre-zero period, and show correlations close to one for all banks in our sample. The red
bars capture correlations for the post-zero period, and show a very diﬀerent picture. First,
the correlations are much lower, averaging only 0.02. Second, the correlations now vary
   9
    The response in aggregate deposit rates is relatively large and stable for the first four policy rate cuts in
our sample. For the two last policy rate cuts, the response in the deposit rate is very limited. This lines up
well with the low average response in lending rates for the final two policy rate cuts.

                                                       10
substantially across banks, ranging from -0.46 to 0.62. We therefore conclude that bank
responses to negative interest rates are more heterogeneous than bank responses to positive
interest rates.

                    Dispersion in Lending Rates                                    Correlations Lending Rates and Repo Rate
        .2




                                                                  1
                                                                  .75
        .15




                                                                  .5
                                                                  .25
        .1




                                                                  0
        .05




                                                                  -.25
        0




                                                                         Danske Bank                        Nordea SEB               Handelsbanken
         1/1/2014           2/18/2015             1/1/2016
                                                                                        Postive Repo Rate            Negative Repo Rate




Figure 4: Left panel: Cross-sectional standard deviation in lending rates Sweden. Interest
rate on five-year mortgages. Right panel: Bank-level correlations between lending rates and
the repo-rate.

    What is causing the dispersion in bank responses to negative interest rates? We first
note that several banks initially cut interest rates when the policy rate became negative,
only to raise them again shortly thereafter. This could indicate that banks are uncertain
about how to set prices in the new and unfamiliar environment. However, there could also be
more structural reasons why bank responses are heterogeneous. Given that there are frictions
in raising diﬀerent forms of financing and some sources of financing are more responsive to
monetary policy changes than others, cross-sectional variation in balance-sheet components
can induce cross-sectional variation in how monetary policy aﬀects banks (Kashyap and Stein
2000). This is especially relevant in our setting. Negative interest rates have had a more
limited pass-through to deposit financing relative to other sources of financing (see Figure (12)
in the appendix). To investigate whether banks’ funding structures aﬀect their willingness
to lower lending rates, we plot the bank level correlation between lending rates and the repo
rate after the repo rate turned negative, as a function of banks’ deposit shares. The result is
depicted in Figure (5), and shows a correlation of -0.16. The small number of observations
makes it diﬃcult to draw any firm conclusions. However, we note that banks with high deposit
shares consistently have small lending rate responses, in line with our proposed explanation.
This is suggestive of the lower bound on deposit rates leading to cross-sectional diﬀerences
in pass-through based on banks’ share of deposit financing.




                                                             11
                                              Correlation Lending Rates and Repo Rate




                                 .6
                                 .4
                                 .2
                                 0
                                 -.2
                                       0.20           0.40                   0.60       0.80
                                                             Deposit Share




Figure 5: Correlation between lending rate and repo rate after the repo rate turned negative,
as a function of the banks’ deposit share. Swedish banks. Interest rate on 5 year mortgages.

    Another way to investigate whether the degree of deposit financing aﬀects bank behavior
is to look at lending volumes, rather than interest rates. This is done in Heider, Saidi,
and Schepens (2016) for Euro Area banks. Consistent with our proposed explanation, they
find that banks with higher deposit shares had lower lending growth after the policy rate
turned negative. Here we show that their results also hold for Swedish banks. Following
Heider, Saidi, and Schepens (2016) we use the diﬀerence in diﬀerence framework specified in
equation (1). Itpost is an indicator variable equal to one after the policy rate became negative,
while DepositSharei is the deposit share of bank i in year 2013. We include bank fixed
eﬀects δi and month-year fixed eﬀects δt . Standard errors are clustered at the bank level.
We restrict our sample to start in 2014, following Heider, Saidi, and Schepens (2016) in
choosing a relatively short time period around the event date. The coeﬃcient of interest is
the interaction coeﬃcient β. If banks with high deposit shares have lower credit growth than
banks with low deposit shares after the policy rate breaches the zero lower bound, we expect
to find β̂ < 0.

                 ∆log(Lendingit ) = α + β Itpost × DepositSharei + δi + δt + ϵit                       (1)

   The regression results are reported in Table (1). The interaction coeﬃcient is negative as
expected, and significant at the ten percent level. Hence, the results for European banks from
Heider, Saidi, and Schepens (2016) seem to hold also for Swedish banks10 : credit growth in
the post-zero environment is lower for banks which rely heavily on deposit financing. We thus
conclude that the bound on the deposit rate is limiting the reaction in banks’ lending rates.
This observation is important for our theoretical evaluation in the next section, where we
make the assumption that banks are entirely funded via deposits. The bound on the deposit
  10
    Our estimate of β is larger in absolute value than the one found in Heider, Saidi, and Schepens (2016),
but we lack the statistical power to establish whether the coeﬃcients are in fact significantly diﬀerent.

                                                              12
rate then creates a bound on the banks’ financing costs, creating a link between deposit and
lending rates as seen in the data.

                                                               (1)
                                                         ∆log(Lending)
                     I post × DepositShare                  -0.0297*
                                                             (-1.72)

                     Constant                                0.00962
                                                              (1.46)
                     Clusters                                   31
                     Bank FE                                   yes
                     Month-Year FE                             yes
                     Observations                             1,046
                     t statistics in parentheses, Std. err. clustered at bank level
                     * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .01

Table 1: Regression results from estimating equation (1). Monthly bank level data from
Sweden.

    To summarize, we conclude that the repeated reductions in central bank rates below zero
have not led to negative deposit rates. In fact, in most countries deposit rates appear stuck
at zero, and do not react to further interest rate reductions. Further, lending rates appear
elevated as well, causing the spread between deposit rates and lending rates to remain fairly
constant - or even increase for some banks. Finally, the variation in bank responses to
negative interest rates is consistent with the theory that the pass-through to lending rates
is lower for banks which largely finance themselves with deposits, due to the apparent lower
bound on deposit rates. This is important, for deposits will be the principal way in which
banks finance themselves in our theoretical model. Motivated by these empirical facts, we
now develop a formal framework for understanding the impact of negative central bank policy
rates. As in the data, the deposit rate will be subject to a lower bound, resulting from storage
costs associated with holding money. This lower bound on the deposit rate will aﬀect banks’
willingness to lower lending rates. Although the policy rate in our model can be negative,
what matters for the eﬀectiveness of monetary policy is to what degree negative policy rates
are transmitted to other interest rates in the economy.




                                                  13
3       Model
3.1       Households
We consider a closed economy, populated by a unit-measure continuum of households. House-
holds are of two types, either patient (indexed by superscript s) or impatient (indexed by
superscript b). Patient households have a higher discount factor than impatient agents, i.e.
β s > β b . The total mass of patient households is 1 − χ, while the total mass of impatient
households is χ. In equilibrium, impatient households will borrow from patient households via
the banking system, which we specify below. We therefore refer to the impatient households
as “borrowers” and the patient households as “savers”.
    Households consume, supply labor, borrow/save and hold real money balances. At any
time t, the optimal choice of consumption, labor, borrowing/saving and money holdings for
a household j ∈ {s, b} maximizes the present value of the sum of utilities

                                                [           (      )          ]
                               ∑∞
                                    (    ) T −t    (   )      M  j
                                                                        (   )
                      Utj = Et        βj          U CTj + Ω     T
                                                                     − V NTj ζt              (2)
                               T =t
                                                              P T


    where ζt is a random variable following some stochastic process and acts as a preference
shock11 . Ctj and Ntj denote consumption and labor for type j respectively, and the utility
function satisifies standard assumptions clarified below.
    Households consume a bundle of consumption goods. Specifically, there is a continuum
of goods indexed by i, and each household j has preferences over the consumption index

                                                 (∫   1                       ) θ−1
                                                                                 θ
                                                                   θ−1
                                       Ctj   =            Ct (i)    θ    di                  (3)
                                                  0

    where θ > 1 measures the elasticity of substitution between goods.
    Agents maximize lifetime utility (equation (2)) subject to the following flow budget con-
straint:


                    (          )                                   ( j )
         Mtj + Bt−1
                j
                      1 + ijt−1 = Wtj Ntj + Btj + Mt−1
                                                   j
                                                       − Pt Ctj − S Mt−1 + Ψjt + ψtj − Ttj   (4)


    Btj denotes one period risk-free debt of type j ( Bts < 0 and Btb > 0). For the saver,
Bts consists of bank deposits and government bonds, both remunerated at the same interest
 11
      We introduce the preference shock as a parsimonious way of engineering a recession.


                                                           14
rate ist by arbitrage. Borrower households borrow from the bank sector only, at the banks’
                    ( j )
lending rate ibt . S Mt−1    denotes the storage cost of holding money. Ψjt is type j’s share
of firm profits, and ψtj is type j’s share of bank profits. Let Ztf irm denote firm profits, and
Zt denote bank profits. We assume that firm profits are distributed to both household types
based on their population shares, i.e. Ψbt = χZtf irm and Ψst = (1 − χ)Ztf irm . Bank profits on
the other hand are only distributed to savers, which own the deposits by which banks finance
themselves12 . Hence, we have that ψtb = 0 and ψts = Zt .
    The optimal consumption path for an individual of type j has to satisfy the standard
Euler-equation

                               ( )          (       ) (         ( j )    )
                            U ′ Ctj ζt = β j 1 + ijt Et Π−1   ′
                                                         t+1 U Ct+1 ζt+1                                     (5)

   Optimal labor supply has to satisfy the intratemporal trade-oﬀ between consumption and
labor13

                                                  ( )
                                               V ′ Ntj  Wj
                                                  ( j) = t                                                   (6)
                                               U ′ Ct   Pt

       Finally, optimal holdings of money have to satisfy14
                                           (     )
                                               j
                                             M
                                        Ω′     t
                                                            ( )
                                             Pt    ijt + S ′ Mtj
                                            ( ) =                                                            (7)
                                         U ′ Ctj        1 + ijt
    The lower bound on the deposit rate is is typically defined as the lowest value of ist
satisfying equation (7). The lower bound therefore depends crucially on the marginal storage
cost. With the existence of a satiation point in real money balances, zero (or constant)
storage costs imply S ′ (Mts ) = 0 and is = 0. That is, the deposit rate is bounded at exactly
zero. With a non-zero marginal storage cost however, this is no longer the case. If storage
cost are convex, for instance, the marginal storage cost is increasing in Mts . In this case, there
is no lower bound. Based on the data from section (2), a reasonable assumption is that the
deposit rate is bounded at a value close to zero. This is consistent with a proportional storage
  12
      Distributing bank profits to both household types would make negative interest rates even more con-
tractionary. The reduction in bank profits would reduce the transfer income of borrower households, causing
them to reduce consumption. We believe this eﬀect to be of second order significance, and so we abstract
from it here.
   13
      We assume that the function V is increasing in N and convex with well defined first and second derivatives.
   14
      We assume a satiation point for money. That is, at some level m̄j households become satiated in real
money balances, and so Ω′ (m̄j ) = 0.



                                                       15
cost S (Mts ) = γMts , with a small γ > 0. We therefore assume proportional storage costs for
the rest of the paper, in which the lower bound on deposit rates is given by is = −γ 15 .
    We assume that households have exponential preferences over consumption, i.e. U (Ctj ) =
1 − exp{−qCtj } for some q > 0. The assumption of exponential utility is made for simplicity,
as it facilitates aggregation across agents. Under these assumptions, the labor-consumption
trade-oﬀ can easily be aggregated into an economy-wide labor market condition16

                                             V ′ (Nt )   Wt
                                               ′
                                                       =                                               (8)
                                             U (Ct )     Pt

       Letting Gt denote government spending17 , aggregate demand is given by


                                     Yt = χCtb + (1 − χ) Cts + Gt                                      (9)



3.2       Firms
Each good i is produced by a firm i. Production is linear in labor, i.e.


                                             Yt (i) = Nt (i)                                          (10)

    where Nt (i) is a Cobb-Douglas composite of labor from borrowers and savers respectively,
               (       )χ
i.e. Nt (i) = Ntb (i) (Nts (i))1−χ , as in Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei (2014). This
ensures that each type of labor receives a total compensation equal to a fixed share of total
labor expenses. That is,



                                       Wtb Ntb = χWt Nt                                               (11)
                                      Wts Nts = (1 − χ) Wt Nt                                         (12)

                   ( )χ                      ∫1
       where Wt = Wtb (Wts )1−χ and Nt = 0 Nt (i) di.
       Given preferences, firms face a downward-sloping demand function
  15
     This nests the case of no storage costs, in which case γ = 0.
  16
     To see this, just take the weighted average of equation (6) using the population shares χ and 1 − χ as
the respective weights.
  17
     Government policies are explained below.




                                                    16
                                                   (            )−θ
                                                       Pt (i)
                                        Yt (i) =                      Yt                             (13)
                                                        Pt

    We introduce nominal rigidities by assuming Calvo-pricing. That is, in each period, a
fraction α of firms are not able to reset their price. Thus, the likelihood that a price set in
period t applies in period T > t is αT −t . Prices are assumed to be indexed to the inflation
target Π. The firm problem is standard and is solved in Appendix D.


3.3     Banks
Our banking sector is made up of identical, perfectly competitive banks. Bank assets consist
of one-period real loans lt . In addition to loans, banks hold real reserves Rt ≥ 0 and real
                        Mt
money balances mt =          ≥ 0, both issued by the central bank18 . Bank liabilities consist of
                         Pt
real deposits dt . Reserves are remunerated at the interest rate irt , which is set by the central
bank. Loans earn a return ibt . The cost of funds, i.e. the deposit rate, is denoted ist . Banks
take all of these interest-rates as given.
    Financial intermediation takes up real resources. Therefore, in equilibrium there is a
spread between the deposit rate ist and( the lending )    rate ibt . We assume that banks’ intermedi-
                                         lt                                  Zt
ation costs are given by a function Γ       , Rt , mt , zt , in which zt =      is real bank profit. In
                                         lt                                  Pt
order to allow for the intermediation cost to be time-varying for a given set of bank charac-
teristics, we include a stochastic cost-shifter lt . This cost-shifter may capture time-variation
in borrowers default probabilities, changes in borrower households borrowing capacity, bank
regulation etc. (Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei 2014).
    We assume that the intermediation costs are increasing and convex in the amount of
real loans provided. That is, Γl > 0 and Γll ≥ 0. Central bank currency plays a key role
in reducing intermediation costs19 . The marginal cost reductions from holding reserves and
money are captured by ΓR ≤ 0 and Γm ≤ 0 respectively. We assume that the bank becomes
satiated in reserves for some level R̄. That is, ΓR = 0 for R ≥ R̄. Similarly, banks become
satiated in money at some level m̄, so that Γm = 0 for m ≥ m̄. Banks can thus reduce their
intermediation costs by holding reserves and/or cash, but the opportunity for cost reduction
can be exhausted. Finally, we assume that higher profits (weakly) reduce the marginal cost
of lending. That is, we assume Γlz ≤ 0. We discuss this assumption below.
  18
     Because we treat the bank problem as static - as outlined below - we can express the maximization
problem in real terms.
  19
     For example, we can think about this as capturing in a reduced form way the liquidity risk that banks
face. When banks provide loans, they take on costly liquidity risk because the deposits created when the
loans are made have a stochastic point of withdrawal. More reserves helps reduce this expected cost.


                                                   17
   Following Curdia and Woodford (2011) and Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei (2014) we
assume that any real profits from the bank’s asset holdings are distributed to their owners
in period t and that the bank holds exactly enough assets at the end of the period to pay
oﬀ the depositors in period t + 120 . Furthermore, we assume that storage costs of money are
proportional and given by S (M ) = γM . Under these assumptions, real bank profits can be
implicitly expressed as:

                                                                              (                       )
                           ib − ist      ist − irt      ist + γ                   lt
                      zt = t        lt −           Rt −         mt − Γ               , Rt , mt , zt       (14)
                           1 + ist       1 + ist        1 + ist                   lt

   Any interior lt , Rt and mt have to satisfy the respective first-order conditions from the
bank’s optimization problem21


                                                                (                    )
                                            ibt − ist      1       lt
                                     lt   :           = ¯ Γl          , Rt , mt , zt                      (15)
                                            1 + ist        lt      lt
                                                  (                     )
                                                      lt                      is − irt
                                    Rt    : −ΓR          , Rt , mt , zt = t                               (16)
                                                      l                       1 + ist
                                                   (t                   )
                                                      lt                      is + γ
                                    mt    : −Γm          , Rt , mt , zt = t s                             (17)
                                                      lt                      1 + it

    The first-order condition for real loans says that the banks trade oﬀ the marginal profits
from lending with the marginal increase in intermediation costs. The next two first-order
conditions describe banks demand for reserves and cash. We assume that reserves and money
are not perfect substitutes, and so minimizing the intermediation cost implies holding both
reserves and money. This is not important for our main result22 .
    The first-order condition for loans pins down the equilibrium credit spread ωt defined as

                                                   1 + ibt       ibt − ist
                                            ωt ≡           − 1 =                                          (18)
                                                   1 + ist       1 + ist

       Specifically, it says that
                                                    (      )
  20
     The latter is equivalent
                       (       to assuming)    that 1 + ibt lt + (1 + irt ) Rt + mt − S (mt ) = (1 + ist ) dt .
  21                     lt
     Assuming that Γ        , Rt , mt , zt is such that there exists a unique z solving equation (14).
                         lt
  22
     The assumption that banks always wants to hold some reserves is however important for the eﬀect of
negative interest rates on bank profitability. If we instead assume that the sum of money holdings and
reserves enters the banks cost function as one argument, the bank would hold only money once ir < −γ.
Hence, reducing the interest rate on reserves further would not aﬀect bank profits. However, such a collapse in
central bank reserves is not consistent with data, suggesting that banks want to hold some (excess) reserves.




                                                           18
                                                     (                        )
                                            1            bbt
                                      ωt =      Γl           , Rt , mt , zt                              (19)
                                           χb̄t          bt
    where we have used the market clearing condition in equation (20) to express the spread
as a function of the borrowers real debt holdings bbt 23 .

                                                  lt = χbbt                                              (20)

   That is, the diﬀerence between the borrowing rate and the deposit rate is an increasing
function of the aggregate relative debt level, and a decreasing function of banks’ net worth.

Why do bank profits aﬀect intermediation costs? We have assumed that the marginal
cost of extending loans (weakly) decreases with bank profits. That is, Γlz ≤ 0. This assump-
tion captures, in a reduced form manner, the established link between banks’ net worth
and their operational costs. We do not make an attempt to microfound this assumption
here, which is explicitly done in among others Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) and Gertler and
Kiyotaki (2010)24 .
    In Gertler and Kiyotaki (2010) bank managers may divert funds, which means that banks
must satisfy an incentive compatibility constraint in order to obtain external financing. This
constraint limits the amount of outside funding the bank can obtain based on the banks net
worth. Because credit supply is determined by the total amount of internal and external
funding, this means that bank lending depends on bank profits. In an early contribution,
Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) achieve a similar link between credit supply and bank net
worth by giving banks the opportunity to engage (or not engage) in costly monitoring of its
non-financial borrowers. For recent empirical evidence on the relevance of bank net worth in
explaining credit supply, see for example Jiménez and Ongena (2012).
    Importantly, our main result is that negative interest rates are not expansionary. This
does not depend on profits aﬀecting intermediation costs. However, the link between profits
and the intermediation cost is the driving force behind negative interest rates being contrac-
tionary. If we turn oﬀ this mechanism, negative interest rates still reduce bank profits, but
this does not feed back into aggregate demand25 .
  23
     Following equation (20) we also assume that ¯lt = χb̄t .
  24
     Another way to interpret the implied link between bank profits and credit supply is to include a capital
requirement. In Gerali, Neri, Sessa, and Signoretti (2010) a reduction in bank profits reduces the banks’
capital ratio. In order to recapitalize the bank lowers credit supply.
  25
     Alternatively, we could assume that bank profits do not aﬀect intermediation costs, but that bank profits
are distributed to all households. A reduction in bank profits would then reduce aggregate demand through
the borrowers budget constraint.




                                                     19
3.4    Policy
The consolidated government budget constraint is given by

          Btg + Mttot + Pt Rt = (1 + igt−1 )Bt−1
                                             g      tot
                                                 + Mt−1 + (1 + irt−1 )Pt Rt−1 + Gt − Tt      (21)

where Btg is one period government debt, Mttot = Mt +Mts +Mtb is total money supply - which
is the sum of money held by banks and each household type, igt is the one period risk-free rate
on government debt, Gt is government spending, and Tt = χTtb + (1 − χ) Tts is the weighted
sum of taxes on the two household types.
    The conventional way of defining monetary and fiscal policy, abstracting from reserves and
the banking sector (see e.g. Woodford 2003), is to say that fiscal policy is the determination
of end of period government liabilities, i.e. Btg + Mttot , via the fiscal policy choice of Gt and
Tt . Monetary policy on the other hand, determines the split of end of period government
liabilities Btg and Mttot , via open market operations. This in turn determines the risk-free
nominal interest rate igt through the money demand equations of the agents in the economy.
The traditional assumption then, is that the one period risk-free rate on government debt
corresponds to the policy rate which the monetary authority controls via the supply of money
through the money demand equation.
    We define monetary and fiscal policy in a similar way here. Fiscal policy is the choice of
fiscal spending Gt and taxes Tt . This choice determines total government liabilities at the
end of period t – the left hand side of equation (21). Total government liabilities are now
composed of public debt and the money holdings of each agent, as well as reserves held at the
central bank. Again, monetary policy is defined by how total government liabilities is split
between government bonds Btg , and the overall supply of central bank issuance. In addition,
we assume that the central bank sets the interest rate on reserves irt . The supply of central
bank currency is then given by

                                  St = Pt Rt + Mt + Mts + Mtb                                (22)

    Given these assumptions, the financial sector itself determines the allocation between re-
serves and money. That is, the split between the money holdings of diﬀerent agents and
reserves held by banks is an endogenous market outcome determined by the first order con-
ditions of banks and households.
    In order to clarify the discussion, it is helpful to review two policy regimes observed in
the US at diﬀerent times. Consider first the institutional arrangement in the US prior to
the crisis, when the Federal Reserve paid no interest on reserves, so that irt = 0. As seen
from equation (16), this implies that banks were not satiated in reserves. The policy maker

                                               20
then chose St so as to ensure that the risk-free rate was equal to its target. In this more
general model, the policy rate is simply the risk-free nominal interest rate, which is equal to
the deposit rate and, assuming that depositors can also hold government bonds, the interest
rate paid on one period government bonds, i.e. ist = igt .
    Consider now an alternative institutional arrangement, in which paying interest on re-
serves is a policy tool. Such a regime seems like a good description of the post-crisis monetary
policy operations, both in the US and elsewhere. The central bank now sets the interest rate
on reserves equal to the risk-free rate, i.e. irt = ist = igt , and chooses St to implement its
desired target. From the first order condition for reserves (16), we see that ist = irt implies
that ΓR = 0 . Hence, as long as banks are satiated in reserves, the central bank implicitly
controls ist via irt . A key point, however, is that ΓR = 0 is not always feasible due to the lower
bound on the deposit rate. If the deposit rate is bounded at is = −γ, and the central bank
lowers irt below −γ , then ist > irt . The first order condition then implies ΓR > 0. Intuitively,
it is not possible to keep banks satiated in reserves when they are being charged for their
reserve holdings. More explicitly, we assume that the interest rate on reserves follows a Tay-
lor rule given by equation (23). Because of the reserve management policy outlined above,
the deposit rate in equilibrium is either equal to the reserve rate or to the lower bound, as
specified in equation (24). We can now ask a well defined question: what happens if the
interest rate on reserves is lowered below the lower bound on the deposit rate?

                                         irt = rtn Πϕt π YtϕY                                 (23)


                                        ist = max {is , irt }                                 (24)

    Before closing this section it is worth pointing out that it seems exceedingly likely that
there also exists a lower bound on the reserve rate. Reserves are useful for banks because they
are used to settle cash-balances between banks at the end of each day. However, banks could
in principle settle these balances outside of the central bank, for example by ferrying currency
from one bank to another (or more realistically trade with a privately owned clearing house
where the commercial banks can store cash balances). Hence, because banks have the option
to exchange their reserves for cash, there is a limit to how negative irt can become. We do
not model this bound here, as it does not appear to have been breached (yet) in practice.
Instead we focus on the bound on deposit rates - which is observable in the data.




                                                 21
3.5      Equilibrium Conditions: A Summary
After having introduced central bank policy in the previous section we are now ready to define
an equilibrium in our model26 . For a given initial price dispersion ∆0 and debt level bb0 , and
                               {         }∞
a sequence of shocks ζt , lt t=0 , an equilibrium is a process for the 17 endogenous variables
{Ctb , Cts , bbt , mbt , mst , τts , st , Yt , Πt , Ft , Kt , ∆t , λt , lt , Rt , mt , zt }∞
                                                                                           t=0 and the 3 endogenous in-
                    b s r ∞
terest rates {it , it , it }t=0 such that the following equilibrium conditions hold27 . First, from
the household problem we have the borrowers budget constraint (4) with j = b28 , the Euler
equations and money demand (5) and (7) with j = {s, b}. Further we have the aggregate
demand condition outlined in equation (9), leaving us with six equations from the demand
side of the economy.
    From the firm side we have the variables Πt , Ft , Kt , ∆t and λt . Πt denotes inflation, while
Ft and Kt are defined in appendix D. ∆t and λt denote price dispersion and the weighted
marginal utility of consumption respectively. The five equilibrium conditions from the firm
side are are listed in appendix D as equations (35), (36), (37), (38), and (39).
    From the bank side we have four equilibrium conditions. These are bank profits given
by equation (14), the first order condition for lending given by equation (15), the first order
condition for reserves given by equation (16), and the first order condition for money given
by equation (17). In addition, market clearing in the credit market requires that equation
(20) is satisfied.
    Government policy is summarized by the consolidated budget constraint in equation (21),
which pins down the overall tax level, and the supply of base money in equation (22).
    The final two equilibrium conditions are the policy equations from the previous section.
Specifically, the interest rate on reserves follows the Taylor rule in equation (23) and the
deposit rate is determined by equation (24). That leaves us with 20 equations to solve
for the 20 endogenous variables listed above. These non-linear equilibrium conditions are
summarized in appendix E.
  26
     We make a few assumptions that simplifies the model. First, we set Gt = Btg = 0. Transfers then only
represent central bank profits/losses, which we assume accrue to the saver along with bank profits. If we
instead assume that bank and central bank profits are distributed to both household types, negative interest
are in fact even more contractionary.
                                                              Ts
  27
     Inflation is defined as Πt ≡ PPt−1
                                     t
                                        , and we define τts ≡ Ptt .
  28
     Technically, we also need to solve for firm profits and labor income which enter into the borrowers budget
constraint. When we list the non-linear equilibrium equations in Appendix E we have inserted for firm profits,
and then labor income cancels. Hence we do not need to explicitly solve for these two variables.




                                                          22
3.6     Generalization of the Standard New Keynesian Model
We take a log-linear approximation of the equilibrium conditions around the steady state.
The steady state equations, as well as the log-linearized equilibrium conditions are listed in
appendix E29 . Here we reproduce the key equations in order to make the following observation:
in the absence of interest rate bounds, and any shocks that create a trade-oﬀ between inflation
and output, our model reduces to the standard New Keynesian model. The central bank can
replicate a zero inflation target and keep output at its natural level at all times. Our log-
linearized model is therefore a natural generalization of the textbook New Keynesian model
with an endogenous natural rate of interest.
    We first note that the supply side collapses to the standard case. That is, the supply side
can be summarized by the generic Phillips curve30

                                             π̂t = κŷt + βEt π̂t+1                                          (25)

   The demand side is governed by the IS-curve in equation (26), which is derived by com-
bining the aggregate resource constraint and the Euler equations of the savers and borrowers,
             1 31
where σ ≡         .
            qY
                                               (                     )
                             ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ ît − Et π̂t+1 − r̂t
                                                  s                n
                                                                                         (26)

    In the standard model, the natural rate of interest rtn is exogenous. In our case the natural
rate of interest is endogenous, and depends on the shocks to the economy and the agents’
decisions. Specifically, the natural rate of interest takes the following form

                                           r̂tn = ζ̂t − Et ζ̂t+1 − χω̂t                                      (27)

   The natural rate of interest depends on the preference shock and the spread between the
deposit rate and the borrowing rate, ω̂t ≡ îbt − îst . Given the assumed functional form for the
banks intermedation cost Γ outlined in Appendix E , the feedback eﬀect from bank profits
  29
     The log-linearized equilibrium conditions listed in the appendix are the IS-curve in equation (68), the
expression for the real interest rate in equation (69), the borrowers Euler equation in equation (70), the savers
Euler equation in (71), the borrowers budget constraint in equation (72), the borrowers money demand in
equation (73), the savers money demand in equation (74), total central bank currency in equation (75),
the governments consolidated budget constraint in equation (76), the Phillips curve in equation (77), the
definition of the interest rate spread in equation (78), the value of the interest rate spread in equation (79),
bank profits in equation (80), banks’ reserve demand in equation (81), banks’ money demand in equation
(82), the Taylor rule in equation (83), and the lower bound on the deposit rate in equation (84).
                                          −1
     We define κ = 1−αα (1 − αβ)(η + σ       ), in which β = χβ b + (1 − χ)β s .
  30
                                                                     b           s
  31
     The log-linearized resource constraint is given by ŷt = χcy ĉbt + (1−χ)cy   ĉst , in which we have used the
assumption that Gt = 0.



                                                        23
to the marginal intermediation cost is captured by the parameter ι ≥ 0. A higher ι means
higher feedback from profits to intermediation costs. The credit spread is then pinned down
by the relative amount of debt and bank profits.

                                    ib − is (                 ˆb̄ − ιẑ
                                                                         )
                             ω̂t =            (ν − 1)b̂ b
                                                        t − ν    t     t                    (28)
                                    1 + ib
    More private debt increases the interest rate spread, thereby reducing the natural rate of
interest. In addition, the interest rate spread now depends on bank profits. The reason is
that higher profits reduces intermediation costs, thereby lowering the banks’ required interest
rate margin. Both the preference shock and the shock to the economy’s debt capacity are
exogenous. However, the total debt level and bank profits are endogenous. In order to solve
for these two variables, the entire system of equations outlined in the appendix needs to be
solved.
    While the standard New Keynesian model only has one interest rate, our model has three
distinct interest rates. We have an interest rate on borrowing ibt , as well as an interest rate
on savings ist . In addition we also have an interest rate on reserves irt . The log-linearized
reserve rate is set by the central bank according to the standard Taylor rule

                                     îrt = r̂tn + ϕπ π̂t + ϕy ŷt                         (29)

   Because the central bank keeps the bank sector satiated in reserves whenever feasible, the
deposit rate is equal to the reserve rate when the lower bound is not binding, and is equal to
the lower bound otherwise
                                                  {s }
                                        îst = max î , îrt                               (30)

            s   βs
    where î =      (1 − γ) − 1 is the lower bound on the deposit rate expressed in deviation
                π
from steady state. The current characterization of the model, given by equations (25) - (30)
is incomplete, but we relegate to the appendix the full set of equations needed to describe
the dynamics of private debt and bank profits in order to conserve space. This partial
representation, however, is suﬃcient to make several observations. If there is no constraint
on the policy rate and we set ist = irt , then the central bank can fully oﬀset any variations
in rtn via the policy rate. In this case, as in the standard model, it is easy to confirm that
there is an equilibrium in which îst = îrt = r̂tn and π̂t = ŷt = 0, and the model reduces to
the standard model. Recall that we have abstracted from any shocks that trigger a trade-oﬀ
between inflation and output, making this outcome feasible.
    More generally, the characterization above clarifies how our model provides additional


                                                 24
details on the transmission of monetary policy. If the central bank lowers the reserve rate, this
lowers the deposit rate through equation (30). The reduction in the deposit rate stimulates
the consumption of saver households. In addition, lowering the deposit rate reduces the banks
financing costs. This increases their willingness to lend, putting downwards pressure on the
borrowing rate and thereby stimulating the consumption of borrower households. Hence, the
reduction in the reserve rate leads to a reduction in the other interest rates in the economy,
thereby stimulating aggregate demand.
    Most macro models either implicitly or explicitly impose a zero lower bound on the interest
rate controlled by the central bank, an assumption recent experience has called into question.
Despite negative policy rates however, the deposit rate seems stuck at an apparent lower
bound. As evident from equation (30), lowering the reserve rate below this bound and
into negative territory has no eﬀect on the deposit rate. Further, because the deposit rate
stays unchanged, there is no stimulative eﬀect on banks’ financing costs and so no increase
in their willingness to lend. As a result, there is no longer a boost to aggregate demand.
Moreover, because charging a negative interest rate on reserves reduces bank profits, the
interest rate spread in equation (28) increases. This implies an increase in the borrowing
rate, and so aggregate demand falls. Hence, when the deposit rate is stuck at the lower
bound, further reductions in the reserve rate have a contractionary eﬀect on the economy.
Note that this result is due to the feedback eﬀect from bank profits to the interest rate spread.
If we shut down this channel by setting ι = 0 in equation (28), negative interest rates are
neither expansionary nor contractionary. We now highlight these results with two numerical
examples.


4    The Eﬀects of Monetary Policy in Positive and Neg-
     ative Territory
In this section, we compare our baseline model (which we refer to as the negative reserve
rates model) to two other models. The first is the standard lower bound NK model. In this
case, there is an identical eﬀective lower bound on both the deposit rate and the central
banks policy rate. The second is the frictionless model, in which both the deposit rate and
the central bank policy rate can fall below zero.
    We consider two diﬀerent shocks. First, a temporary preference shock, which eﬀectively
makes agents more patient and so delays consumption. Second, a debt deleveraging shock in
which the economy faces a permanent reduction in the borrowing capacity given by lt . We
then evaluate to which degree the central bank can stimulate aggregate demand by lowering


                                               25
the reserve rate.


4.1     Calibration
We pick the size of the two shocks to generate an approximately 4.5 percent drop in output
on impact. This reduction in output is chosen to roughly mimic the average reduction in
real GDP in Sweden, Denmark, Switzerland and the Euro Area in the aftermath of the
financial crisis, as illustrated in figure (9) in the Appendix32 . The drop in output in the US
was of similar order. The persistence of the preference shock is set to generate a duration
of the lower bound of approximately 12 quarters. We choose parameters from the existing
literature whenever possible. We target a real borrowing rate of 4 %33 and a real deposit rate
of 1.5 %, yielding a steady state credit spread of 2.5 %. The preference parameter q is set
to 0.75, which generates an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of approximately 2.75, in
line with Curdia and Woodford (2011). We set the proportional storage cost to 0.01, yielding
an eﬀective lower bound of - 0.01 %. This is consistent with the deposit rate being bounded
at zero for most types of deposits, with the exception of slightly negative rates on corporate
deposits in some countries. We set R = 0.07, which yields steady-state reserve holdings in
line with average excess reserves relative to total assets for commercial banks from January
2010 and until April 201734 . We set m = 0.01, implying that currency held by banks in
steady state accounts for approximately 1.5 percent of total assets. This currency amount
corresponds to the diﬀerence between total cash assets reported at US banks and total excess
reserves from January 2010 until April 2017.
    The parameter ν measures the sensitivity of the credit spread to private debt. We set ν
so that a 1 % increase in private debt increases the credit spread by 0.12 %, as in Benigno,
Eggertsson, and Romei (2014). Given the steady-state credit spread, l pins down the steady-
state level of private debt. We choose l to target a steady state private debt-to-GDP ratio
of approximately 95 percent, roughly in line with private debt in the period 2005 - 2015
(Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei, 2014). The final parameter is ι. In our baseline scenario
  32
      Detrended real GDP fell sharply from 2008 to 2009, before partially recovering in 2010 and 2011. The
partial recovery was suﬃciently strong to induce an interest rate increase. We focus on the second period of
falling real GDP (which occurred after 2011), as negative interest rates were not implemented until 2014-2015.
Targeting a reduction in real GDP of 4.5 percent is especially appropriate for the Euro Area and Sweden.
Real GDP fell by somewhat less in Denmark, and considerably less in Switzerland. This is consistent with the
central banks in the Euro Area and Sweden implementing negative rates because of weak economic activity,
and the central banks in Denmark and Switzerland implementing negative rates to stabilize their exchange
rates.
   33
      This is consistent with the average fixed-rate mortgage rate from 2010-2017. Series MORTGAGE30US
in the St.Louis Fed’s FRED database.
   34
      We use series EXCSRESNS for excess reserves and TLAACBW027SBOG for total assets from commercial
banks, both in the St.Louis Fed’s FRED database.


                                                     26
we set ι = 0.2. While ι is not important for our main result that negative interest rates are
not expansionary, it is important for determining the feedback eﬀect from bank profits to
aggregate demand. In Table 3 in the next section we show how the potentially contractionary
eﬀect of negative interest rates depends quantitatively on ι.
   All parameter values are summarized in Table (2). Due to the occasionally binding
constraint on ist , we solve the model using OccBin (Guerrieri and Iacoviello, 2015) for the
preference shock. For simplicity, we consider a cashless limit for the household’s problem 35 .


4.2     Preference Shock
We start by investigating how the economy responds to a shock to agents marginal utility
of consumption, a standard ZLB shock dating at least back to Eggertsson and Woodford
(2003).
    The results of the exercise are depicted in Figure (6). We start by considering the com-
pletely frictionless case, referred to as the No bound case. In this scenario it is assumed that
both the policy rate and the deposit rate can turn negative, as illustrated by the dashed black
lines in Figure (6). The preference shock reduces aggregate demand and inflation, triggering
an immediate response from the central bank. The policy rate is lowered well below zero. The
central bank keeps banks satiated in reserves whenever it can. As long as the deposit rate
is not bounded, this policy is feasible. A reduction in the reserve rate is then accompanied
by an identical reduction in the deposit rate. The reduction in deposit rates reduces banks’
financing costs. As a result, banks supply more credit and the borrowing rate declines. In
the frictionless case, the aggressive reduction in the policy rate means that the central bank
is able to perfectly counteract the negative shock. Hence, all of the reaction comes through
interest rates, with no reduction in aggregate demand.
  35
   There are no additional insights provided by allowing households to hold money in the numerical exper-
iments, even if this feature of the model was essential in deriving the bound on deposits.




                                                   27
                    Parameter                                      Value                                      Source/Target
    Inverse of Frisch elasticity of labor supply                   η=1                                    Justiniano et.al (2015)
                Preference parameter                             q = 0.75                    Yields IES of 2.75(Curdia and Woodford, 2011)
                 Share of borrowers                              χ = 0.61                                 Justiniano et.al (2015)
          Steady-state gross inflation rate                     Π = 1.005                          Match annual inflation target of 2%
               Discount factor, saver                          β s = 0.9901                          Annual real savings rate of 1.5 %
             Discount factor, borrower                         β b = 0.9963                         Annual real borrowing rate of 4 %
           Probability of resetting price                         α = 2/3                                       Gali (2008)
         Taylor coeﬃcient on inflation gap                       ϕΠ = 1.5                                       Gali (2008)
          Taylor coeﬃcient on output gap                       ϕY = 0.5/4                                       Gali (2008)
Elasticity of substitution among varieties of goods              θ = 7.88                            Rotemberg and Woodford (1997)
         Proportional storage cost of cash                     γ = 0.01 %                           Eﬀective lower bound ist = −0.01%




  28
               Reserve satiation point                           R = 0.07                    Target steady-state reserves/total assets of 13 %
               Money satiation points                           m = 0.01                      Target steady-state cash/total assets of 1.5 %
     Marginal intermediation cost parameters                       ν=6                           Benigno, Eggertsson, and Romei (2014)
                 Level of safe debt                               l = 1.3                             Target debt/GDP ratio of 95 %
  Link between profits and intermediation costs                   ι = 0.2               1 % increase in profits ≈ 0.01 % reduction in credit spread

                     Shock                                       Value                                      Source/Target
                Preference shock                      2.5 % temporary decrease in ζt           Generate a 4.5 % drop in output on impact
         Persistence of preference shock                        ρ = 0.9                         Duration of lower bound of 12 quarters
            Debt deleveraging shock                   50 % permanent reduction in l            Generate a 4.5 % drop in output on impact
                                                            Table 2: Parameter values
Figure 6: Impulse response functions following an exogenous decrease in the marginal utility
of consumption (ζt ), under three diﬀerent models. Standard model refers to the case where
there is an eﬀective lower bound on both deposit rates and the central bank’s policy rate.
No bound refers to the case where there is no eﬀective lower bound on any interest-rate.
Negative rates refers to the model outlined above, where there is an eﬀective lower bound on
the deposit rate but no lower bound on the policy rate.

    Contrast the frictionless case to the standard case, in which both the policy rate and the
deposit rate are bounded. In this case, the central bank is not able to oﬀset the shock, and
output is below its steady state value for the full duration of the shock. This scenario is
outlined by the solid black line in Figure (6). As before, the central bank reacts to the shock
by lowering the policy rate. However, the policy rate soon reaches the lower bound, and
cannot be lowered further. As a result, both the policy rate and the deposit rate are stuck at
the lower bound for the duration of the shock. This transmits into the borrowing rate, which
falls less than in the previous case, due to the limited reduction in financing costs. Because
of the inability of interest rates to fully adjust to the shock, aggregate output and inflation
remain below their steady state values for the full duration of the shock.
    Finally, we consider the case deemed to be most relevant compared to what we see in
the data. While the policy rate is not bounded, there exists an eﬀective lower bound on the
deposit rate. This case is illustrated by the red dashed lines in Figure (6). The central bank


                                              29
reacts to the shock by aggressively reducing the policy rate36 . However, the deposit rate
only responds until it reaches its lower bound, at which point it is stuck. As a result, the
borrowing rate does not fall as much as in the frictionless case, and the central bank is once
again unable to mitigate the negative eﬀects of the shock on aggregate demand and inflation.
Hence, the central bank cannot stimulate aggregate demand by lowering its policy rate below
zero.
    At first glance, the model with negative interest rates looks similar to the standard model.
Interestingly, there is an important diﬀerence between imposing negative interest rates and
not doing so - which in eﬀect makes negative interest rates contractionary in our exercise.
Output declines more if the central bank chooses to lower its policy rate below zero. The
reason is the negative eﬀect on bank profits resulting from the negative interest rate on
reserves. Banks hold reserves in order to reduce their intermediation cost, but when the
policy rate is negative they are being charged for doing so. At the same time, their financing
costs are unresponsive due to the lower bound on the deposit rate. Hence, bank profits are
lower when the policy rate is negative37 .This decline in bank profits feeds back into aggregate
demand through the eﬀect of bank net worth on the marginal lending cost. Lower net worth
increases the cost of financial intermediation, which reduces credit supply and dampens the
pass-through of the policy rate to banks’ lending rates.
    The importance of profits for banks intermediation costs are parametrized by ι. In Table
3 we report the eﬀect on output and the borrowing rate for diﬀerent assumptions about ι. In
the case in which there is no feedback from bank profits to intermediation costs (ι = 0), the
output drop under negative rates corresponds to the output drop under the standard model.
The same holds for the borrowing rate. As ι increases, the reduction in the borrowing rate
is muted due to the increase in intermediation costs. As a result, output drops by more.
For ι suﬃciently high, the borrowing rate actually increases when negative policy rates are
introduced. This is consistent with the bank-level data on daily interest rates from Sweden,
where some banks in fact increased their lending rate following the introduction of negative
interest rates. Bech and Malkhozov (2016) report a similar increase in lending rates in
Switzerland.
  36
     This reaction is exaggerated by our assumption that the central bank literally follows the Taylor rule in
setting the interest rate on reserves, while in practice central banks only experimented with modestly negative
rates.
  37
     The fall in bank profits is large in our case, and profits become negative in the negative reserve rate
model. The reason is that the central bank follows the Taylor rule and sets the reserve rate equal to - 17 %
in an unsuccessful eﬀort to mitigate the shock. This is an extreme policy compared to the recent experience
with negative interest rates, in which interest rates are only modestly below zero.




                                                      30
  Model   Output, % deviation from SS Reduction in borrowing rate, percentage points
 Standard            4.5                                   3.5
   ι=0               4.5                                   3.5
  ι = 0.1            4.7                                   3.3
 ι = 0.15            4.8                                   3.1
  ι = 0.2            4.9                                   2.9
 ι = 0.25            5.0                                   2.7
  ι = 0.5            5.7                                   1.1
  ι = 0.7            6.9                                  -1.6

Table 3: The eﬀect of a preference shock on output and the borrowing rate (on impact) with
negative policy rates for diﬀerent values of ι.

   To summarize, negative interest rates are not expansionary relative to the standard case
in which the policy rate is not set below zero. In fact, when ι > 0 there is an additional
dampening eﬀect on aggregate demand, making negative interest rates contractionary.


4.3       Debt deleveraging shock
We next consider the debt deleveraging shock in Figure (7). Specifically, we consider a
permanent reduction in the debt limit lt 38 , a shock often referred to as a “Minsky Moment”
(Eggertsson and Krugman, 2012). This directly increases the interest rate spread, causing the
borrowing rate to increase. The initial increase in the borrowing rate is substantial, due to
the shock’s impact on bank profits and the feedback eﬀect via ι. In the frictionless case, the
central bank can perfectly counteract this by reducing the reserve rate below zero. Given the
bound on the deposit rate however, the central bank looses its ability to bring the economy
out of a recession. Any attempt at doing so, by reducing the reserve rate below zero, only
lowers bank profits and aggregate demand further.
    In some respects this shock – with the associated rise in the borrowing rate – resembles
more the onset of the financial crisis, when borrowing rates (in some countries) increased.
The preference shock is more consistent with the situation further into the crisis, when both
deposit and lending rates were at historical low levels (perhaps reflecting slower moving factors
such as those associated with secular stagnation, see Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014)). From
the point of view of this paper however, it makes no diﬀerence which shock is considered in
terms of the prediction it has for the eﬀect of negative central bank rates. In both cases, the
policy is neutral when there is no feedback from bank profits, and contractionary when there
is such a feedback.
 38
      A temporary shock to banks’ intermediation costs yield qualitatively similar results.




                                                      31
Figure 7: Impulse response functions following a debt deleveraging shock (a permanent re-
duction in lt ), under three diﬀerent models. Standard model refers to the case where there is
an eﬀective lower bound on both deposit rates and the central bank’s policy rate. No bound
refers to the case where there is no eﬀective lower bound on any interest-rate. Negative rates
refers to the model outlined above, where there is an eﬀective lower bound on the deposit
rate but no lower bound on the policy rate.


5    Discussion
Our main theoretical result is that negative central bank rates are not expansionary. This
result relies crucially on deposit rates being bounded, as observed in the data. The intuition is
straightforward. When deposit rates are kept from falling, banks’ funding costs are constant.
Hence, banks are unwilling to lower lending rates, as this would reduce the spread between
deposit rates and borrowing rates - thereby reducing bank profits. This link between the
deposit rate and the borrowing rate means that the bound on the deposit rate transmits into
a bound on the lending rate, consistent with the empirical evidence from Sweden. Note that
the result that negative interest rates are non-expansionary does not rely on the eﬀect of
bank profits on the real economy. That is, as long as the deposit rate is bounded, negative
interest rates are always non-expansionary in our model.
    The second result we want to highlight is the negative impact on bank profits. Charging

                                               32
banks to hold reserves at the central bank lowers their profits. The impact of lower bank prof-
its on aggregate demand depends on the model specifications. There is at least two ways in
which lower bank profits may reduce economic activity. First, as in the main model specifica-
tion, lower bank profits could increase banks financing costs, thereby reducing credit supply.
This reduces the consumption of borrower households, and thereby aggregate demand. Sec-
ond, we could distribute bank profits to all household types, thereby creating a negative
impact on output through the borrowers budget constraint. We prefer the former channel, as
this is the mechanism which has been extensively discussed in popular accounts, and seems
of more quantitative relevance. Under either one of these two assumptions, negative interest
rates are not only non-expansionary, but are contractionary.
    In our model exercise, the storage cost of money was held fix. However, one could allow
the storage cost of money - and therefore the lower bound on the deposit rate - to depend
on policy. One way of making negative negative rates be expansionary, which is consistent
with our account, is if the government takes actions to increase the cost of holding paper
money. There are several ways in which this can be done. The oldest example is a tax on
currency, as outlined by Gesell (1916). Gesell’s idea would show up as a direct reduction
in the bound on the deposit rate in our model, thus giving the central bank more room to
lower the interest rate on reserves - and the funding costs of banks. Another possibility is to
ban higher denomination bills, a proposal discussed in among others Rogoﬀ (2017c). To the
extent that this would increase the storage cost of money, this too, should reduce the bound
on the banks deposit rate. An even more radical idea, which would require some extensions
to our model, is to let the reserve currency and the paper currency trade at diﬀerent values.
This proposal would imply an exchange rate between electronic money and paper money, and
is discussed in Agarwal and Kimball (2015), Rogoﬀ (2017a) and Rogoﬀ (2017b). A key pillar
of the proposal – but perhaps also a challenge to implementability – is that it is the reserve
currency which is the economy wide unit of account by which taxes are paid, and accordingly
what matters for firm price setting. If such an institutional arrangement is achieved, then
there is nothing that prevents a negative interest rate on the reserve currency while cash
in circulation would be traded at a diﬀerent price, given by an arbitrage condition. We do
not attempt to incorporate this extension to our model, but note that it seems relatively
straightforward, and has the potential of solving the ZLB problem. Indeed, the take-away
from the paper should not be that negative nominal rate are always non-expansionary, simply
that they are predicted to be so under the current institutional arrangement. This gives all the
more reason to contemplate departures from the current framework, such as those mentioned
briefly here and discussed in detail by the given authors.
    We conclude this paper by discussing some arguments put forward by proponents of


                                              33
negative interest rates. Addressing all of these arguments formally would require expanding
our model substantially. Instead, we elaborate informally on whether we believe any of these
changes would alter our main conclusions

Lower Lending Rates While the lower bound on deposit rates generally seems to have
been accepted as an empirical fact, the lower bound on lending rates is not as widely rec-
ognized. Some proponents of negative interest rates argue that regardless of deposit rates,
negative policy rates should transmit into lending rates as usual. The deputy governor of
monetary policy at the Bank of England highlighted such a link between the reserve rate
and the lending rate: ”But any attempt by banks to substitute out of reserves into other as-
sets, including loans, would lead to downward pressure on the interest rates on those assets.
Eventually, the whole constellation of interest rates would shift down, such that banks were
content to hold the existing quantity of reserves. This is exactly the mechanism that operates
when the Bank Rate is reduced in normal times; there is nothing special about going into neg-
ative territory.” (Bean 2013). Similar explanations for the expansionary eﬀects of negative
interest rates have been provided by other central banks (The Riksbank 2016, Jordan 2016).
This argument is potentially problematic for two reasons. First, in our model, banks are
reluctant to cut lending rates when the deposit rate is stuck at its lower bound. Doing so
would reduce their profits, as their funding costs are not responding to the negative policy
rate. This connection between the deposit rate and the lending rate seems consistent with
data. Looking at aggregate data in Figure (2) suggested that the bound on deposit rates
was transmitting into a bound on lending rates as well. The bank level data from Sweden in
Figure (4) further confirmed the collapse in pass-through from policy rates to lending rates
once the policy rate turned negative. Another source of empirical evidence comes from the
ECBs lending survey. As illustrated in Figure (13) in the appendix, 80-90 percent of banks in
the Euro Area say that the negative policy rate has not contributed to increased lending vol-
umes. There have also been reports of some banks increasing their lending rates in response
to negative policy rates. This contractionary response seems particularly well documented
in the Swiss case (Jordan 2016, Bech and Malkhozov 2016). Second, even if lending rates
responded to negative policy rates as usual, this would imply a reduction in bank profits. The
reduction in lending rates would squeeze banks’ profit margins, potentially reducing credit
supply and thereby economic activity. This eﬀect would only be in place when the policy
rate was suﬃciently low to make the lower bound on deposit rates binding, implying that
negative interest rates are in fact special.




                                             34
Additional Funding Sources In our model deposits constitute the sole financing source
for banks. In reality banks have access to several funding sources, with potentially diﬀerent
sensitivity to negative policy rates. Figure (12) in the appendix illustrates some interest rates
relevant for banks’ financing costs in Sweden. In general, negative interest rates seem to have
passed through to interbank rates (although these are typically banks charging other banks
for transaction services, so the fact that interbank rates turn negative has no eﬀect on the
aggregate funding costs of the banking system). Also the interest rates on some short-term
asset backed securities considered “safe”, in some cases issued by banks, have gone negative.
This implies that the negative policy rate may be reducing banks financing costs somewhat,
even though deposit rates are bounded. Accordingly, we might expect the negative policy
rate to have some eﬀect on lending rates. In Sweden, deposits account for more than 40
percent of total liabilities (see Figure (10) in the appendix), and this share is typically even
higher in the Euro Area. Hence, the deposit rate is quantitatively the most important interest
rate for evaluating banks’ financing costs. If the policy rate no longer aﬀects the deposit rate,
the central banks’ ability to influence banks’ funding costs is substantially reduced. However,
one could imagine that banks respond to negative policy rates by shifting away from deposits
to alternative sources of financing, in response to negative policy rates. This could increase
the eﬀectiveness of the monetary policy transmission. As illustrated in Figure (10) in the
appendix, this does not seem to be the case. Swedish banks in aggregate actually increased
their deposit share after the central bank rate turned negative in early 2015.

Bank Fees While banks have been unwilling to lower their deposit rates below zero, there
has been some discussion surrounding their ability to make up for this by increasing fees and
commission income. In our model there are no fixed costs involved with opening a deposit
account, but allowing for this would imply that the interest rate on deposits could exceed
the eﬀective return on deposits. If banks respond to negative policy rates by increasing their
fees, this could in principle reduce the eﬀective deposit rate, and thereby lower banks’ funding
costs. However, as illustrated in Figure (11), the commission income of Swedish banks as a
share of total assets actually fell after the policy rate turned negative. Hence, the data does
not support the claim that the eﬀective deposit rate is in fact falling. Given that depositors
understand that higher fees reduce the eﬀective return on their savings, this is perhaps not
surprising. In any event, the ability to store money will ultimately put a bound on the banks
ability to impose fees.

Alternative Transmission Mechanisms Our focus is on the eﬀect of monetary policy
on bank interest rates. When the policy rate is positive, lowering it reduces the interest rates


                                               35
charged by banks, which increases credit supply and thereby economic activity. We have
shown that this mechanism is no longer active when the policy rate is negative. However,
it is still possible that negative interest rates stimulate aggregate demand through other
channels. Both the Swiss and Danish central banks motivated their decision to implement
negative central bank rates by a need to stabilize the exchange rate. This open economy
dimension of monetary policy is absent from our analysis. The point we want to make is that
the pass-through to bank interest rates - traditionally the most important channel of monetary
policy - is not robust to introducing negative policy rates. The impact on the exchange rate
would depend on which interest rates are most important for explaining movements in the
exchange rate, which in turn can depend on several institutional details.
    Even if lending volumes do not respond to negative policy rates, there could potentially
be an eﬀect on the composition of borrowers. It has been suggested that banks may respond
to negative interest rates by increasing risk taking. This could potentially increase lending
rates, resulting in upward pressure on the interest rate margin. Heider, Saidi, and Schepens
(2016) find support for increased risk taking in the Euro Area, using volatility in the return-
to-asset ratio as a proxy for risk taking. According to their results, banks in the Euro Area
responded to the negative policy rate by increasing return volatility. This is certainly not
the traditional transmission mechanism of monetary policy, and it is unclear whether such
an outcome is desirable.

Other policies Our model exercise focuses exclusively on the impact of negative policy
rates39 . Other monetary policy measures which occurred over the same time period are not
taken into account. This is perhaps especially important to note in the case of the ECB, which
implemented its targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs) simultaneously with
lowering the policy rate below zero. Under the TLTRO program, banks can borrow from
the ECB at attractive conditions. Both the loan amount and the interest rate are tied to
the banks’ loan provision to households and firms. The borrowing rate can potentially be
as low as the interest rate on the deposit facility, which is currently -0.40 percent40 . Such
a subsidy to bank lending is likely to aﬀect both bank interest rates and bank profits, and
could potentially explain why lending rates in the Euro Area have fallen more than in other
  39
     It is worth mentioning that in our model all reserves earn the same interest rate. In reality, most central
banks have implemented a tiered remuneration scheme, in which case the marginal and average reserve rates
diﬀer. For example, some amount of reserves may pay a zero interest rate, while reserves in excess of this
level earn a negative rate. We outline the policy schemes in the diﬀerent countries in appendix C. Allowing
for more than one interest rate on reserves would not qualitatively alter our results, but may be relevant for
a more detailed quantitative assessment.
  40
     In our model we only consider a negative interest rate on bank assets, as we impose R ≥ 0. The TLTRO
program implies a negative interest rate on a bank liability.



                                                      36
places once the policy rate turned negative.


6    Concluding remarks
Since 2014, several countries have experimented with negative nominal central bank interest
rates. In this paper, we have documented that negative central bank rates have not been
transmitted to aggregate deposit rates, which remain stuck at levels close to zero. As a result
of this, aggregate lending rates remain elevated as well. Using bank level data from Sweden,
we documented a disconnect between the policy rate and lending rates, once the policy
rate fell below zero. Motivated by our empirical findings, we developed a New Keynesian
framework with savers, borrowers, and a bank sector. By including money storage costs and
central bank reserves, we captured the disconnect between the policy rate and the deposit
rate at the lower bound. In this framework we showed that negative policy rates were at best
irrelevant, but could potentially be contractionary due to a negative eﬀect on bank profits.




                                               37
References
Agarwal, R., and M. Kimball (2015): Breaking through the zero lower bound. Interna-
 tional Monetary Fund.

Bean, C. (2013): “Note on Negative Interest Rates for Treasury Committee,” Discussion
 paper, Bank of England.

Bech, M. L., and A. Malkhozov (2016): “How have central banks implemented negative
 policy rates?,” Working paper.

Benigno, P., G. B. Eggertsson, and F. Romei (2014): “Dynamic debt deleveraging
 and optimal monetary policy,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Borio, C., and L. Gambacorta (2017): “Monetary policy and bank lending in a low
 interest rate environment: diminishing eﬀectiveness?,” Journal of Macroeconomics.

Brunnermeier, M. K., and Y. Koby (2016): “The Reversal Interest Rate: An Eﬀective
 Lower Bound on Monetary Policy,” Preparation). Print.

Buiter, W. H., and N. Panigirtzoglou (2003): “Overcoming the zero bound on nominal
 interest rates with negative interest on currency: Gesell’s solution,” The Economic Journal,
 113(490), 723–746.

Caballero, R. J., and E. Farhi (2017): “The safety trap,” The Review of Economic
 Studies, p. rdx013.

Carney, M. (2016): “Bank of England Inflation Report Q and A,” Bank of England Inflation
 Report.

Curdia, V., and M. Woodford (2011): “The central-bank balance sheet as an instrument
 of monetary policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 54–79.

Eggertsson, G. B., and P. Krugman (2012): “Debt, deleveraging, and the liquidity trap:
 A Fisher-Minsky-Koo approach,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1469–1513.

Eggertsson, G. B., and N. R. Mehrotra (2014): “A model of secular stagnation,”
 Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eggertsson, G. B., and M. Woodford (2003): “The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and
 Optimal Monetary Policy,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.



                                             38
         (2006): “Optimal monetary and fiscal policy in a liquidity trap,” in NBER Interna-
  tional Seminar on Macroeconomics 2004, pp. 75–144. The MIT Press.

Gali, J. (2008): “Monetary Policy, Inflation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to
 the New Keynesian Framework,” .

Gerali, A., S. Neri, L. Sessa, and F. M. Signoretti (2010): “Credit and Banking in a
 DSGE Model of the Euro Area,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 42(s1), 107–141.

Gertler, M., and N. Kiyotaki (2010): “Financial intermediation and credit policy in
 business cycle analysis,” Handbook of monetary economics, 3(3), 547–599.

Gesell, S. (1916): “The Natural Economic Order, translated by Philip Pye, 2002,” .

Goodfriend, M. (2000): “Overcoming the zero bound on interest rate policy,” Journal of
 Money, Credit and Banking, pp. 1007–1035.

Guerrieri, L., and M. Iacoviello (2015): “OccBin: A toolkit for solving dynamic models
 with occasionally binding constraints easily,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 70, 22–38.

Heider, F., F. Saidi, and G. Schepens (2016): “Life Below Zero: Bank Lending Under
 Negative Policy Rates,” Working paper.

Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole (1997): “Financial intermediation, loanable funds, and
 the real sector,” the Quarterly Journal of economics, 112(3), 663–691.

Jackson, H. (2015): “The international experience with negative policy rates,” Discussion
  paper, Bank of Canada Staﬀ Discussion Paper.

Jiménez, G., and S. Ongena (2012): “Credit supply and monetary policy: Identifying
  the bank balance-sheet channel with loan applications,” The American Economic Review,
  102(5), 2301–2326.

Jordan, T. (2016): “Monetary policy using negative interest rates: a status report,” Dis-
  cussion paper, Swiss National Bank.

Justiniano, A., G. E. Primiceri, and A. Tambalotti (2015): “Household leveraging
  and deleveraging,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 18(1), 3–20.

Kashyap, A. K., and J. C. Stein (2000): “What do a million observations on banks say
 about the transmission of monetary policy?,” American Economic Review, pp. 407–428.



                                            39
Kerbl, S., and M. Sigmund (2017): “Negative Interest Rates: Forecasting Banks Prof-
 itability in a New Environment,” Working Paper.

Kiley, M. T., and J. M. Roberts (2017): “Monetary policy in a low interest rate world,”
 Brookings Paper on Economic Activity.

Krugman, P. R. (1998): “It’s Baaack: Japan’s Slump and the Return of the Liquidity
 Trap,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1998(2), 137–205.

McAndrews, J. (2015): “Negative nominal central bank policy rates: where is the lower
 bound?,” Discussion paper, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

Rognlie, M. (2015): “What lower bound? Monetary policy with negative interest rates,”
 Unpublished manuscript, Department of Economics, Harvard University (November 23).

Rogoff, K. (2017a): “Dealing with Monetary Paralysis at the Zero Bound,” The Journal
 of Economic Perspectives, 31(3), 47–66.

           (2017b): “Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World,” Journal of Policy Mod-
  eling.

Rogoff, K. S. (2017c): The Curse of Cash: How Large-Denomination Bills Aid Crime and
 Tax Evasion and Constrain Monetary Policy. Princeton University Press.

Rotemberg, J. J., and M. Woodford (1997): “An optimization-based econometric
 framework for the evaluation of monetary policy,” NBER macroeconomics annual, 12,
 297–346.

Stiglitz, J. (2016): “The problem with negative interest rates,” The Guardian.

Summers, L. H. (2014): “US economic prospects: Secular stagnation, hysteresis, and the
  zero lower bound,” Business Economics, 49(2), 65–73.

The Riksbank (2015): “Monetary Policy Report February 2015,” Discussion paper, Sveriges
 Riksbank.

           (2016): “Perspectives on the negative repo rate,” Discussion paper.

Waller, C. (2016): “Negative interest rates: a tax in sheep’s clothing,” Discussion paper.

Woodford, M. (2003): “Interest and prices,” .




                                              40
Appendix A: Additional Figures

                              Swedish Bank Lending Rates (1y)                                             Dispersion in Lending Rates (1y)




              3




                                                                                     .2
                                                                                     .15
              2.5




                                                                                     .1
              2




                                                                                     .05
              1.5




                                                                                     0
               1/1/2014                    2/18/2015          1/1/2016                1/1/2014                         2/18/2015          1/1/2016




                              Swedish Bank Lending Rates (3y)                                             Dispersion in Lending Rates (3y)




                                                                                     .15
              3




                                                                                     .1
              2.5




                                                                                     .05
              2
              1.5




                                                                                     0


               1/1/2014                    2/18/2015          1/1/2016                1/1/2014                         2/18/2015          1/1/2016




Figure 8: Bank Level Lending Rates Sweden. Interest rate on one-year and three-year mort-
gages.


                             Real GDP in Local Currency , Indexed                                 Real GDP in Local Currency, Indexed - Detrended
                110




                                                                                     5
                100




                                                                                     0
                90




                                                                                     -5
                80




                                                                                     -10
                70




                                                                                     -15




                      1995      2000            2005      2010           2015              1995            2000            2005       2010           2015


                                       Denmark         Sweden                                                     Denmark          Sweden
                                       Switzerland     Euro Area                                                  Switzerland      Euro Area




Figure 9: Gross Domestic Product in Constant Prices. Local Currency. Indexed so that
GDP2008 =100. The right panel shows the detrended series using a linear time trend based
on the 1995-2007 period.




                                                                                41
                                        Liabilities                                                                            Deposit Share (%)




                                                                                                   60
                                      13%
                                                           23%




                                                                                                   40
                           22%




                                                     41%




                                                                                                   20
                                                                                                        1995          2000             2005          2010                  2015

                    Liabilities to credit institutions                  Deposits
                                                                                                                       Deposit-to-Assets         Deposits-to-Liabilities
                    Securities                                          Other Liabilities




Figure 10: Decomposition of Liabilities (average 1996-2016) and Deposit Share for Swedish
Banks.


                                                                    Net Commission Income as a Share of Assets (%)
                                                           1.2
                                                           1
                                                           .8
                                                           .6
                                                           .4




                                                                 1995              2000     2005               2010           2015




Figure 11: Net Commission Income as a Share of Total Assets for Swedish Banks. Source:
Statistics Sweden.


                          3




                          2




                          1




                          0                                                                                                     Policy-rate
                                                                                                                                A-rated corporate bond
                                                                                                                                10Y Government bond
                                                                                                                                3m Interbank-loan
                                                                                                                                2Y MBS
                         -1
                          01jul2012                01jul2013                   01jul2014    01jul2015             01jul2016
                                                                                  date




          Figure 12: Other interest rates in Sweden. Source: Statistics Sweden.




                                                                                            42
Figure 13: Share of banks answering that the negative ECB deposit rate has has a negative,
neutral or positive eﬀect on their lending volume. Source: Deutsche Bank.


Appendix C: Marginal and Average Rate on Reserves
In our model, central bank reserves earn a single interest rate ir . In reality, central banks can
adopt exemption thresholds and tiered remuneration schemes so that not all reserves earn the
same interest rate. Hence, even though the key policy rate is negative, not all central bank
reserves necessarily earn a negative interest rate. Here we provide a short overview of the
diﬀerent remuneration schedules implemented in the Euro Area, Denmark, Japan, Sweden
and Switzerland. For a more detailed analysis see Bech and Malkhozov (2016).
    In the Euro Area, required reserves earn the main financing operations rate - currently
set at 0.00 percent. Excess reserves on the other hand, earn the central bank deposit rate
- currently set at -0.40 percent. Hence, only reserves in excess of the required level earn
a negative interest rate. A similar remuneration scheme is in place in Denmark. Banks
can deposit funds at the Danish central bank at the current account rate of 0.00 percent.
However, there are (bank-specific) limits on the amount of funds that banks can deposit at
the current account rate. Funds in excess of these limits earn the interest rate on one-week
certificates of deposits - currently set at -0.65 percent.
    The Riksbank issues one-week debt certificates, which currently earn an interest rate of
-0.50 percent. While there is no reserve requirement, the Swedish central bank undertakes
fine-tuning operations to drain the bank sector of remaining reserves each day. These fine-
tuning operations earn an interest rate of -0.60 percent41 . The Swiss central bank has the
lowest key policy rate at -0.75 percent. However, due to high exemption thresholds the
majority of reserves earn a zero interest rate. The Bank of Japan adopted a three-tiered
remuneration schedule when the key policy rate turned negative. As a result, central bank
reserves earn an interest rate of either 0.10, 0.00 or -0.10 percent.
 41
      Any residual reserves earn the deposit rate of -1.25 percent.


                                                       43
    Due to the tiered remuneration system, there is a gap between the average and the
marginal reserve rate. Bech and Malkhozov (2016) calculate this gap as of February 2016, as
illustrated in figure (14).




                 Figure 14: Reserve Rates - Source: Bech and Malkhozov (2016).


Appendix D: Firm Problem
A firm that is allowed to reset their price in period t sets the price to maximize the present
value of discounted profits in the event that the price remains fixed. That is, each firm i
choose Pt (i) to maximize

                                ∑
                                ∞                      [                                 ]
                                              T −t        T −t Pt (i)          WT
                           Et          (αβ)          λT Π             YT (i) −    YT (i)                   (31)
                                T =t
                                                                PT             PT
                   (     {      }                         )
    where λT ≡ q χ exp −qCTb + (1 − χ) exp {−qCTs } , which is the weighted marginal
utility of consumption and β ≡ χβ b + (1 − χ) β s42 .
                                   θ
    Denoting the markup as µ ≡         , firms set the price as a markup over the average of
                                 θ−1
expected marginal costs during the periods the price is expected to remain in place. That is,
 42
      Recall that the firm is owned by both types of households according to their respective population shares.

                                                              44
the first-order condition for the optimal price P (i)∗t for firm i is
                                  {                               )θ  (     }
                                      ∑∞    T −t      P  T   1       W T
                        ∗
                             Et   T =t (αβ)      λT          T −t
                                                                         YT
                   P (i)t                             P  t Π         P T
                          =µ {                     (            )θ−1          }                       (32)
                    Pt          ∑∞         T −t      P T   1         W   T
                            Et   T =t (αβ)      λT                         YT
                                                     Pt ΠT −t         PT

   This implies a law of motion for the aggregate price level

                              Pt1−θ = (1 − α) Pt∗1−θ + αPt−1
                                                          1−θ 1−θ
                                                             Π                                        (33)

    where Pt∗ is the optimal price from equation (32), taking into account that in equilibrium
Pt∗ (i) is identical for all i. We denote this price Pt∗ .
    Since prices are sticky, there exists price dispersion which we denote by
                                             ∫       1   (            )−θ
                                                             Pt (i)
                                      ∆t ≡                                  di                        (34)
                                                 0            Pt
   with the law of motion

                                                                                (     )θ−1  θ−1
                                                                                               θ
                                                      Πt
                           ( )θ                 1−α                                          
                            Πt                       Π                                       
                    ∆t = α      ∆t−1 + (1 − α)                                                      (35)
                            Π                      1−α                                       

                                                                                              j 1+η
    We assume that the disutility of labor takes the form V (Ntj ) = (N1+η
                                                                        )
                                                                           . We can then com-
bine equations (32) - (35), together with the aggregate labor-consumption trade-oﬀ (equation
(8)) to get an aggregate Phillips curve of the following form:
                                            (           )θ−1  θ−1
                                                                 1
                                         Πt
                                 1 − α Π                       
                                                                               Ft
                                                                          =                         (36)
                                      1−α                                      Kt


   where
                                                         {            (          )θ−1 }
                                                                          Πt+1
                             Ft = λt Yt + αβEt                Ft+1                                    (37)
                                                                           Π

   and                                                                {          (          )θ }
                                 λt ∆ηt Yt1+η                                        Πt+1
                        Kt = µ                + αβEt                      Kt+1                        (38)
                               z exp {−zYt }                                          Π

                                                         45
    and

                              (     {      }                         )
                        λT ≡ z χ exp −qCTb + (1 − χ) exp {−qCTs }                         (39)
                                         (        )−θ
                                           Pt (i)
   Since every firm faces demand Y (i) =              Yt and Yt (i) = Nt (i), we can integrate
                                            Pt
over all firms to get that

                                                   Nt = ∆ t Y t                                                (40)


Appendix E: Equilibrium
Non-linear Equilibrium Conditions
                                                                                            {    }∞
For given initial conditions ∆0 , bb0 and a sequence of shocks ζt , lt t=0 , an equilibrium
                                                                            {          }∞
in our model is a sequence of endogenous prices ist , ibt , irt t=0 and endogenous variables
{Ctb , Cts , bbt , mbt , mst , τts , st , Yt , Πt , Ft , Kt , ∆t , λt , lt , Rt , mt , zt }∞
                                                                                           t=0 such that the 20 equa-
tions listed below are satisfied.




                                                         46
               {      }           (        ) (            {        })
           exp −qCtb ζt = β b 1 + ibt Et Π−1      t+1 exp  −qC b
                                                               t+1    ζt+1                                             (41)
                                               (        {        })
            exp {−qCts } ζt = β s (1 + ist ) Et Π−1
                                                 t+1 exp −qCt+1
                                                             s
                                                                    ζt+1                                               (42)
                                    1 + ibt−1 b             1−γ b
                  Ctb + mbt +                bt−1 = χYt +         mt−1          + bbt                                  (43)
                                        Πt                     Πt
                      ( )
                  Ω′ mbt            ibt + γ
                      ( )=                                                                                             (44)
                  U ′ Ctb           1 + ibt
                  Ω′ (mst )         ist + γ
                             =                                                                                         (45)
                  U ′ (Cts )        1 + ist
                       Πt st =      st−1 + irt−1 Rt−1 − Πt τts                                                         (46)
                           st = Rt + mt + mst + mbt                                                                    (47)
                           Yt = χCtb + (1 − χ) Cts                                                                     (48)
         (     )θ−1      1
                          θ−1
       Πt
1 − α Π              
                                  Ft
                              =                                                                                      (49)
     1−α                          Kt

                                                     {         (          )θ−1 }
                                                                   Πt+1
                          Ft = λt Yt + αβEt             Ft+1                                                           (50)
                                                                    Π
                                                           (     ) }{
                                  λt ∆ηt Yt1+η               Πt+1 θ
                          Kt = µ               + αβEt Kt+1                                                             (51)
                                 q exp {−qYt }                Π
                                 (        {    }                   )
                          λt = q χ exp −qCtb + (1 − χ) exp {−qCts }                                                    (52)
                                                                                (       )θ−1  θ−1
                                                                                                 θ
                                                           Πt
                                 ( )θ                 1−α                                         
                                  Πt                       Π                                      
                          ∆t = α      ∆t−1 + (1 − α)                                                                 (53)
                                  Π                      1−α                                      

                                                                                         (                         )
                                    ibt − ist        ist − irt          ist + γ              lt
                           zt =               l t  −             R  t −         mt − Γ          , Rt , m t , z t       (54)
                                    1 + ist           1 + ist           1 + ist              lt
                                          (                        )
                    itb − ist       1         lt
                               =       Γl         , Rt , m t , z t                                                     (55)
                     1 + ist        lt        lt
        (                    )
          lt                        ist − irt
    −ΓR      , Rt , m t , z t =                                                                                        (56)
          lt                        1 + ist
        (                    )
          lt                        ist + γ
    −Γm      , Rt , m t , z t =                                                                                        (57)
          lt                        1 + ist
                           irt = rtn Πϕt π YtϕY                                                                        (58)
                           ist = max {−γ, irt }                                                                        (59)
                           lt = χbbt                                                                                   (60)



                                                   47
Steady state
We denote the steady-state value of a variable Xt as X.
    First, observe that in steady-state inflation is at the inflation target Π . As a result, there
is no price dispersion (∆ = 1).
    Combining this with the Phillips curve, we have that steady-state output is pinned down
by the following equation

                                                 Yη
                                          µ              =1                                   (61)
                                            q exp {−qY }
   From the Euler equation of a household of type j we have that

                                                        Π
                                             1 + ij =                                         (62)
                                                        βj
    Using the steady-state interest rates, we can jointly solve for all bank-variables. Notice
that in steady-state banks are satiated in reserves, and so R = R by assumption. Further-
more, if the intermediation cost function is additive between money and the other arguments
(which we assume, see below), the steady-state level of money holdings for banks is inde-
pendent of other bank variables. Therefore, only bank profits and bank lending have to be
solved jointly.
    Given total debt and interest rates, the borrowers budget constraint and money demand
can be solved for steady state consumption and money holdings:

                                           Π − 1 − ib b Π − 1 + γ b
                           C b = χY +                b −         m                            (63)
                                              Π            Π

                                      ′    ib + γ ′ ( b )
                                    Ω (mb ) =     U C                                         (64)
                                           1 + ib
   Then, using the aggregate resource constraint we have that
                                              (                              )
                       1 − χ2      χ              Π − 1 − ib b Π − 1 + γ b
                     s
                   C =        Y +                           b −         m                     (65)
                       1−χ        1−χ                Π            Π
   The savers money demand follows from

                                      ′           is + γ ′ s
                                    Ω (ms ) =            U (C )                               (66)
                                                  1 + is

    Finally, given the steady-state holdings of reserves and real money balances we can use
the total money supply equation and the consolidated government budget constraint to solve
for the remaining variables.


                                                  48
Log-linearized equilibrium conditions
We log linearize the non-linear equilibrium conditions around steady state, and define X̂ ≡
Xt −X
  X
      . For the intermediation cost function we assume the following functional form

                                  ( )ν
     (                       )    
                                    lt              1(       )2 1
                                          (zt )−ι +    Rt − R + (mt − m)2                       if Rt < R and mt < m
         lt                                          2           2
 Γ          , Rt , mt , zt       = ( lt )ν
         lt                       
                                    l
                                           (zt )−ι
                                      t
                                                                                                if Rt ≥ R and mt ≥ m
                                     lt
                                                                                                                                (67)
    By combining the two Euler equations and the aggregate demand equation we derive the IS
curve in equation (68), in which we define σ = qY1 . By combining the five supply side equations
we derive the Phillips curve in equation (77). We define the real interest rate r̂tn in equation
(69), and the interest rate spread in equation (78). We also use the market clearing condition
to substitute ˆlt for b̂bt . Hence,
                              {      an equilibrium of the log-linearized model is a process                               }∞for the
                                b   s   b   b     s           n           s                                  b s r
17 endogenous variables ĉt , ĉt , b̂t , m̂t , m̂t , ŷt , r̂t , π̂t , τ̂ , ŝt , m̂t , R̂t , ẑt , ω̂t , ît , ît , ît      such
                                                                                                                         t=0
that the 17 equations listed below are satisfied. Note that the expressions for R̂t and m̂t , in
equations (81) and (82) respectively, only hold when the bank is not satiated.




                                                                49
                                (                      )
              ŷt = Et ŷt+1 − σ îst − Et πt+1 − r̂tn                                            (68)

                 r̂tn = ζ̂t − Et ζ̂t+1 − χω̂t                                                     (69)
                                       1 (b                               )
                  ĉt = ĉt+1 − b ît − Et π̂t+1 − ζ̂ + Et ζt+1
                     b      b
                                                                                                  (70)
                                      qc
                                       1 (                                )
                  ĉst = ĉst+1 − s îst − Et π̂t+1 − ζ̂ + Et ζt+1                                (71)
                                      qc
                              (            )                      bb b      (     ) b
                                                                                 b b b
    c π̂t + c ĉt = π̂t χy + b + χy ŷt + b b̂t − ît−1 − 1 + i
      b         b b                      b                  b b
                                                                                      b̂          (72)
                                                                  π                π t−1
                                                           mb
                       − mb (m̂bt + π̂t ) + (1 − γ) m̂bt−1
                                                            π
 ′′     b
Ω (m )m b     b
                                         i +γ−1 b
                                          b
    ′           m̂t = −qcb ĉbt −                      î                                         (73)
 Ω (m )   b                                 ib + γ t
 ′′
Ω (ms )ms s                              is + γ − 1 s
                m̂     = −qc    s s
                                 ĉ   −                î                                         (74)
 Ω′ (ms )           t               t
                                            is + γ t
                         R             m           mb b ms s
                  ŝt = R̂t + m̂t +                   m̂ +      m̂                                (75)
                          s            s            s t        s t
                          1              R r (               )   τ s ( ˆs      )
          π̂t + ŝt = ŝt−1 +                  ît−1 + ir R̂t −       τt + π̂t                    (76)
                         π              sπ                        s
                 π̂t = κŷt + βEt π̂t+1                                                           (77)
               îbt = îst + ω̂t                                                                  (78)
                     ib − is (                       ¯ˆbt − ιẑt
                                                                 )
              ω̂t =            (ν  −    1)b̂ b
                                             t  −  ν                                              (79)
                      1 + ib
                         χbb     (             s    (b          ) b)          R     (         )
           s
         ît + ẑt =                î − it + i − i b̂t −
                                      b    ˆ                  s
                                                                                     î − ît
                                                                                       s    r
                                                                                                  (80)
                     (1 + is ) z t                                       (1 + is ) z t
                         m       (                          )           Γ
                   −        s
                                   ît + (i + γ) m̂t −
                                     s         s
                                                                          s
                                                                               îst
                     (1 + i ) z                                     (1 + i ) z
                     Γz (    (          )          )       m (m − m)
                   −      ν b̂bt − ˆbt + ιẑt −                           m̂t
                      ι                                            z
                          1       (                        )
              R̂t =         s
                                     (R − 1)îst + îrt − îst                                    (81)
                     (1 + i )R
                     m − m̄ 1 − is − γ s
              m̂t =                             î                                                (82)
                        m        is + γ t
               îrt = r̂tn + ϕΠ π̂t + ϕY ŷt                                                      (83)
                            {                      }
               îst = max −γβ s − (1 − β s ), îrt                                                (84)




                                             50
