NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EFFECT OF AIR POLLUTION ON MIGRATION:
EVIDENCE FROM CHINA
Shuai Chen
Paulina Oliva
Peng Zhang
Working Paper 24036
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24036

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank Jianghao Wang for providing excellent research assistance. Any remaining errors are
our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Shuai Chen, Paulina Oliva, and Peng Zhang. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Effect of Air Pollution on Migration: Evidence from China
Shuai Chen, Paulina Oliva, and Peng Zhang
NBER Working Paper No. 24036
November 2017
JEL No. O15,Q53,Q56
ABSTRACT
This paper looks at the effects of air pollution on migration in China using changes in the average
strength of thermal inversions over five-year periods as a source of exogenous variation for
medium-run air pollution levels. Our findings suggest that air pollution is responsible for large
changes in inflows and outflows of migration in China. More specifically, we find that
independent changes in air pollution of the magnitude that occurred in China in the course of our
study (between 1996 and 2010) are capable of reducing floating migration inflows by 50 percent
and of reducing population through net outmigration by 5 percent in a given county. We find that
these inflows are primarily driven by well educated people at the beginning of their professional
careers, leading to substantial changes in the sociodemographic composition of the population
and labor force of Chinese counties. Our results are robust to different specifications, including
simple counts of inversions as instruments, different weather controls, and different forms of
error variance.
Shuai Chen
China Academy of Rural Development (CARD)
Zhejiang University
shuaichenyz@gmail.com
Paulina Oliva
Department of Economics
3151 Social Science Plaza A
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
bolivava@uci.edu

Peng Zhang
School of Accounting and Finance
M507C Li Ka Shing Tower
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
Hung Hom Kowloon, Hong Kong
peng.af.zhang@polyu.edu.hk

1

Introduction

Air pollution has been shown to have causal impacts along an array of health and economic dimensions. A recent boom in the literature of air pollution has spurred a number
of studies in economics that have used quasi-experimental methods to measure how shortrun exposure to air pollution can impact infant mortality, adult mortality, hospitalization
rates, health expenditures, hours worked, labor productivity, labor market decisions and test
scores (Chay and Greenstone, 2003; Currie et al., 2009; Deschenes, Greenstone, and Shapiro,
2012; Gra↵ Zivin and Neidell, 2012; Hanna and Oliva, 2015; Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva, 2016;
Borgschulte and Molitor, 2016; Deryugina et al., 2016; Schlenker and Walker, 2016). A few
studies have also shed light on the e↵ect of medium and long run exposure to air pollution
(Chen et al., 2013; Anderson, 2015) as well as long-run impacts of in-utero exposure (Adhvaryu et al., 2016; Molina, 2016). Many of these studies have been done in middle-income
countries, in some of which air pollution is now considered the biggest environmental risk to
human health.
Taken together, these results suggest that the total cost of air pollution is quite large
as a share of income per-capita, although a formal aggregation exercise is difficult due to
di↵erences in context, methodologies and pollutant measures across studies.1 Some studies
have estimated the marginal willingness to pay (MWTP) to avoid air pollution for the US
through hedonic methods (Chay and Greenstone, 2005). Provided that individuals are free
to move across locations, and therefore house values capitalize local amenities, this measure
is likely to reflect all costs of air pollution that are known to individuals (Roback, 1982;
Sanders et al., 2011). Costs associated with re-location might cause hedonic estimates to
deviate from the willingness to pay for air pollution (Bayer, Keohane, and Timmins, 2009).
In addition, housing markets and location decisions in the developing world are often heavily regulated, causing further departures from the assumptions underlying hedonic methods.
1

An aggregation of impacts across studies has been done for the economic cost of carbon emissions (Hsiang
et al., 2017).

1

This is especially salient in China, where migration decisions have been heavily constrained
by the hukou system (Kinnan, Wang, and Wang, 2016). However, the perception of air
pollution costs is still likely to be reflected in the key economic decisions behind hedonic
methods: re-location and migration. Studying how migration decisions are a↵ected by pollution in the developing world o↵ers us a window to the scope of the air-pollution costs that
are internalized by the population. Second, studying the heterogeneity in migration flows
across socioeconomic groups can help us better understand how the willingness to pay for
air pollution might di↵er by education and income; but also how pollution-related migration
might change the composition of the labor force across cities (Hanlon, 2016; Heblich, Trew,
and Yanos, 2016). Third, a sizable literature has been devoted to the factors that determine
migration decisions (Borjas, 1999, 2015). In this literature, the emphasis has been placed
on traditional economic factors, such as income, wages, and networks (Clark, Hatton, and
Williamson, 2007; Pedersen, Pytlikova, and Smith, 2008; Kinnan, Wang, and Wang, 2016).
Although recent literature has paid more attention to environmental factors, most of these
studies focus on weather (Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer, 2010; Feng, Oppenheimer, and
Schlenker, 2015; Cai et al., 2016; Jessoe, Manning, and Taylor, 2016).
Our main contribution to this literature is the estimation of causal e↵ects of air pollution
on migration flows in China. The empirical challenges associated with studying migration
responses to air pollution are two. First, as migration is a complicated and costly process, it
is likely to respond slowly (over a number of months or even years) to air pollution exposure.
Thus, the empirical challenges of estimating the causal e↵ects of air pollution on migration
are similar to the challenges of estimating any mid to long-run impact of air pollution:
exogenous cross-sectional or mid-run variation in air pollution is hard to come by. In its
absence, estimates are prone to be confounded by unmeasured joint determinants of air
pollution and migration. For example, economic activity, which has been shown to attract
immigrants (Borjas, 1999; Clark, Hatton, and Williamson, 2007), is also highly correlated
with air pollution. Thus, as we demonstrate in this paper, an OLS regression of migration on

2

air pollution yields a coefficient that could be (wrongly) interpreted as pollution attracting
immigrants. The second challenge has to do with data constraints when studying migration
decisions. Data that can track individual’s locations over time is hard to come by at the
scale that would be required to pick-up responses of migration to air-pollution.
Our approach to overcome the first empirical challenge is to use five-year variation in
the average strength of thermal inversions within counties. Thermal inversions have been
previously used to study short-run e↵ects of air pollution on infant and adult mortality (Jans,
Johansson, and Nilsson, 2014; Hicks, Marsh, and Oliva, 2015; Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva,
2016) and labor productivity (Fu, Viard, and Zhang, 2017). In relatively short periods of
time and over small regions, thermal inversions cannot be used to study mid-run impacts of
air pollution as the patterns within valleys are relatively stable (Hicks, Marsh, and Oliva,
2015). However, thermal inversion patterns do change slowly over a number of years and
these changes can be di↵erent across regions of a large country such as China. For example,
we find that many provinces in China experience di↵erences of up to 150 thermal inversions
across the three di↵erent five-year periods that we observe. Importantly, some regions may
see thermal inversions increasing over time, both in terms of its frequency and average
strength, while others may see reductions in the counts and average strength of thermal
inversions over five year periods. Thus, the sheer size and regional diversity in China allows
us to use longitudinal variation in the strength and frequency of thermal inversions as an
instrument for air pollution to explore responses of mid-term outcomes such as migration.
Although this source of variation in air pollution is certainly not permanent, decomposing
the rapid changes in air pollution into permanent and transitory is impossible without a
weather model. Thus, for the casual observer, medium-run changes in air pollution are
likely used to update beliefs about the air pollution in the area going forward regardless of
their source. We overcome the second challenge by integrating aggregated and individuallevel information from the Population Census in China in order to construct five-year flows
of migration at the county level between 1995 and 2010.

3

Another innovation of our paper is the use of satellite-based particulate matter with a
diameter of less than 2.5 µm (PM2.5 ) and sulfur dioxide (SO2 ) data in economics. Although
satellite-based proxies for air pollution have been used in the past (Kumar et al., 2011), it
is not until recently that PM2.5 and SO2 model-based measures that incorporate Aerosol
Optical Depth (AOD) measures but also historical analysis of the hydrological cycle as
inputs, have been successfully validated vs. ground monitors in the atmospheric literature
(Buchard et al., 2016). This allows us to fully exploit the wide availability of thermal
inversions data (also from re-analysis models) for remote as well as urban areas in China
without compromising the interpretability of our results.
Our findings suggest that air pollution is responsible for large changes in inflows and
outflows of migration in China. More specifically, we find that independent changes in air
pollution of the magnitude that occurred in China in the course of our study (between 1996
and 2010) are capable of reducing floating migration inflows by 50 percent and of reducing
population through net outmigration by 5.3 percent in a given county. We find that these
inflows are primarily driven by well educated people at the beginning of their professional
careers, leading to substantial changes in the sociodemographic composition of the population
and labor force of Chinese counties. We also find that females are more likely to migrate in
response to air pollution, which is consistent with families living apart in order to protect
young children. Our results are robust to di↵erent specifications, including simple counts of
inversions as instruments, di↵erent weather controls, and di↵erent forms of error variance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 is a background section that
describes migration regulations in China as well as the literature on pollution and decision
making around pollution in the context of China. Section 3 discusses our empirical strategy
as well as our data. Section 4 presents our results and Section 5 discusses the significance of
our findings as well as future work.

4

2

Empirical Background

2.1

Migration and Household Registration System in China

Migration typically refers to the permanent or long-term changes of the place of residence.
Unlike other countries in which people can usually migrate freely, China implements the
Household Registration System (HRS), the so called hukou system. The hukou system keeps
a record of legal address and family relations for every citizen from birth to death. Furthermore, it divides people into rural and urban citizens according to their parents or the place of
birth, and those in the cities usually enjoy privileges of local employment, education, health
care and social welfare. There are certain requirements for changing registered residence,
such as owning a permanent house in the area where a person has migrated to, having a
stable occupation and stable income, and having good education and talents.2
Therefore, there are two types of migrants in China. The first type is the floating population, which indicates migrants who move to the destination but with their hukou at the
origin. The second type is the registered migrants who move the destination along with
their hukou. In this paper, we have two measurements of migration. The first is an approximate net outmigration ratio over 5 years. Typically, the net outmigration ratio is defined as
the percent of population leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths within a given
period (Passel, Van Hook, and Bean, 2004; Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer, 2010; Feng,
Oppenheimer, and Schlenker, 2015). However, reliable data on deaths at the county level
are not available for every year in China. Thus, we calculate outmigration ratios without
subtracting deaths and subtracting approximate deaths.3 The population in this measure
is based on the physical presence of each individual in that county, and thus this measure
has the advantage of including both floating and official migrants. The second measurement
of migration flows we use is the destination-based floating immigration; or those who are
2

See http://www.gov.cn/xinwen/2014-07/30/content_2727331.htm (in Chinese).
Note that deaths may themselves be a↵ected by air pollution. Thus, it is important to document the
extent of this e↵ect for the population we study in order to ensure that our estimates are not a↵ected by
this necessary omission. We discuss this at length in Section 3.2.
3

5

surveyed away from their hukou. Studying this measure of migration has multiple purposes:
It allows us to check for the pull e↵ect of air quality, i.e. whether individuals pay attention
to recent pollution levels at their destination, which is informative about the level of sophistication in individual’s moving decisions. Second, it serves as a one of the checks we perform
on our net outmigration specification given that we can only net out approximate deaths.
And third, it helps understand whether migration flows that respond to air pollution are
solely driven by official migrants (i.e. those that officially change their hukou) or are also
driven by floating migrants.
Figure 1 depicts the migration patterns for each county in China over the period 19962010. In Panel A, migration is measured by net outmigration ratio, which is defined as
the percent of population leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. Positive net
outmigration ratio, labelled in yellow, means that on net people leave that county. On the
contrary, negative net outmigration ratio, labelled in blue, means that on net people move to
that county. In general, the metropolitan areas especially three economic regions in Chinathe Yangtze River Delta (Shanghai, Jiangsu, Zhejiang), the Pearl River Delta (Guangdong),
and the Jing-Jin-Ji Area (Beijing, Tianjin, Hebei) and other coastal areas –attract a large
share of migrants. There are a few exceptions to this pattern in the northwest (the Xinjiang
Uyghur Autonomous Region, Qinghai, Gansu, and the Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region)
and the Tibet Autonomous Region, where income is lower but migrants are still drawn in
potentially due to abundant natural resources and the China Western Development policy.
Panel B shows the destination-based immigration ratio, which is defined as the percent of
population entering the county with their hukou in the origin, in the same period. Light
blue means low immigration ratio while dark blue means high immigration ratio. In general,
one can observe a similar pattern as shown in Panel A: economic developed regions attract
a significant share of the migrants.

6

2.2

Air Pollution in China and Avoidance Behavior

Over the past decades, air quality has increasingly deteriorated in China, causing increasing
concern on China’s public health and economic development (Ebenstein et al., 2015). Figure
2 plots the average concentration measured in microgram per cubic meter (µg/m3 ) of the
two primary air pollutants –PM2.5 (in red in Panel A) and SO2 (in blue in Panel B) –in
China in each year over the period 1980-2015. Two red vertical lines highlight our study
period: 1996-2010. The blue vertical line indicates the year of 2001, when China joined the
World Trade Organization (WTO).
In general, the concentrations of both air pollutants have significantly increased over the
period, in particular after 2001, when China became the world’s factory. The concentration of
PM2.5 has increased from 30.98 µg/m3 in 1980 to 66.90 µg/m3 in 2015, which is almost 6 times
than the National Ambient Air Quality Standard (NAAQS) made by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) in the US.4 A similar pattern can be found for SO2 .
Figure 2 also plots the average strength of thermal inversions in Celsius degrees in China
over the period 1980-2015.5 In contrast to air pollutants, there is no a clear time trend of
thermal inversion strength. This is especially important after 2001, when the steep increase in
PM2.5 and SO2 was tied to rapid economic growth. This figure thus backs up the exogeneity
assumption of our instrumental variable.
China has implemented several policies to reduce air pollution. For example, the State
Council had implemented the Two Control Zone (TCZ) policy in January 1998 to reduce acid
rain and SO2 pollution. The legislation required prefectures exceeding national thresholds in
either acid rain or SO2 to take actions such as using clean coal for power plant to improve air
quality. Overall, 175 out of 333 prefectures were mandated to reduce those two air pollutants.
The drop in SO2 after 1998, which is mainly due to the TCZ policy designated to reduce
acid rain and SO2 in 1998 (Hao et al., 2001). Studies show that this policy is e↵ective in
4
5

https://www.epa.gov/criteria-air-pollutants/naaqs-table.
See Section 3.1 for a definition of thermal inversion strength.

7

reducing SO2 emissions (Hao et al., 2001) and further reducing infant mortality (Tanaka,
2015).
In recent years, the particular matter (PM) has become a major environmental concern in
China. On September 10th , 2013, the State Council has issued the “Air Pollution Prevention
and Control Action Plan”, which is regarded as the most aggressive and ambitious air quality
management action plan in the history of China.6 The plan aims at reducing air pollution.
Specifically, by 2017 the urban concentration of particulate matter with a diameter of less
than 10 µm (PM10 ) shall decrease by 10% compared with 2012. Concentration of PM2.5 in
the Jing-Jin-Ji Area, Yangtze River Delta, and Pearl River Delta region shall respectively
fall by around 25%, 20%, and 15%.
Even though most regions in China experienced increases in pollution between 1996 and
2010, regional policy di↵erences as well as di↵erences in meteorological conditions led to
substantial heterogeneity in pollution changes over time. Figure 3 shows a map of local
changes in pollution. As in our estimation we will be controlling for nation-wide changes
as well as county fixed e↵ects, this map is helpful to illustrate that there is a considerable
amount of remaining variation in pollution. Out of this remaining variation, our IV strategy
will ensure that we only use the one due to local variation in thermal inversion strength.
A large literature in both epidemiology and economics has documented important e↵ects
of air pollution on human health (see a review in Gra↵ Zivin and Neidell (2013)). PM2.5
can penetrate the thoracic region of the respiratory system, and cause the respiratory and
cardiovascular diseases in the short term (hours and days). The long-term (months and
years) exposure can increase mortality from both cardiovascular and respiratory diseases as
well as from lung cancer (WHO, 2013). The short-run and long-run e↵ects of PM2.5 on human
health have been well documented in various literatures (Dockery et al., 1993; Pope III and
Dockery, 2006; EPA, 2009; Deryugina et al., 2016). SO2 , another major air pollutant in
China, is also harmful for human health. When SO2 is breathed in, the nose, throat, and
6

http://english.mep.gov.cn/News_service/infocus/201309/t20130924_260707.htm

8

airways will be irritated and cause a variety of respiratory symptoms and decreased lung
functioning (Linn et al., 1983, 1987; EPA, 2008).
Concerns about air pollution in China and elsewhere have been shown to motivate changes
in behavior. Several studies have demonstrated that people engage in short-run avoidance
behaviors such as staying indoors (Neidell, 2009) or purchasing particulate-filtering facemasks (Zhang and Mu, 2016) in a highly polluted day. Recent research has also shown that
pollution concentrations can motivate medium-run investments such as home air purifiers
(Ito and Zhang, 2016). Importantly, theory suggests that utility maximizing households will
choose their avoidance behavior portfolio optimally such that marginal cost across all costly
protective strategies is equalized across them and, in equilibrium, it is equal to their marginal
benefit. Thus, migration decisions should be reflective of the cost families are willing to exert
to avoid air pollution, and thus the marginal benefit of reducing it.

3

Empirical Strategy and Data

The goal of our empirical estimation is to capture the causal e↵ect of mid-term pollution
on migration. There are two important challenges in doing this. First, air pollution and
economic activity are highly correlated. Thus, it is likely the case that those cities with
high economic activity that attract immigrants by o↵ering highly paid jobs are also those
which experience high levels of air pollution. In fact, as we discuss in the results section,
if one looks at the simple correlation between air pollution and immigration they appear
positively correlated over time even when controlling for county fixed e↵ects. These results
should not be interpreted as air pollution attracting immigrants, as time-varying confounding
factors (including economic activity) could be driving the correlation. Second, overcoming
the first challenge requires finding a random source of variation for air pollution. However,
most reliably exogenous determinants of air pollution in the literature provide short-run
variation in air pollution (over the course of days, weeks or months). Migration, however,

9

is an outcome that is likely to respond slowly to air pollution as it is akin to an investment
decision in that is difficult to reverse and very costly. Thus, we expect individuals to react
slowly to perceived permanent changes in air pollution, and importantly, to react to changes
that are observable over long periods of time. Most sources of long-run variation in air
pollution, such as changes in local policy or economic fluctuations in neighboring regions,
are likely to have independent e↵ects on migration as they may shift labor market conditions.
The combination of these two issues pose an important challenge for identification as sources
of permanent variation in air pollution that is not correlated with other sociodemographic
or economic patterns are hard to find.
Our approach to overcoming this challenge is to use medium-run random variation in
air pollution stemming from 5-year fluctuations in the strength of thermal inversions in a
given county. Although this source of variation in air pollution is certainly not permanent,
decomposing the rapid changes in air pollution into permanent and transitory is impossible
without a weather model. Thus, for the casual observer, medium-run changes in air pollution
are likely used to update beliefs about the air pollution in the area going forward regardless
of their source.

3.1

Econometric Model

To estimate the causal e↵ect of air pollution on migration, we propose to estimate the
following 2SLS model

Mct =

+ f (Wct ) +

c

+

t

+ "ct

(1)

Pct = ↵0 + ↵1 T Ict + f (Wct ) +

c

+

t

+ µct ,

(2)

0

+

1 Pct

where Mct denotes the net outmigration ratio, which is the fraction of people leaving a county
minus new arrivals and deaths, in county c and period t. We define each period as a 5-year
interval. Thus, we have 3 periods in our study: 1996-2000 (period 1), 2001-2005 (period 2),
10

and 2006-2010 (period 3).
The right-hand-side variable of interest in equation (1), Pct , measures the 5-year average
concentration of the two primary air pollutants: PM2.5 and SO2 . We instrument air pollution
with the strength of thermal inversions in the five year period, T Ict , conditional on flexible
functions of weather variables (Wct ), county fixed e↵ects ( c ), and period fixed e↵ects ( t ).
T Ict corresponds to the thermal inversion strength of six-hour periods in each county and
period. The thermal inversion strength is defined using above-ground temperature minus
ground temperature. A positive di↵erence indicates the existence of a thermal inversion and
the magnitude measures the inversion strength. A negative di↵erence indicates the nonexistence of a thermal inversion. We keep the positive di↵erence and truncate the negative
di↵erence to zero within each six-hour period. The strength of inversions are then aggregated
from each 6 hours to each year, and further averaged during each 5-year period. In Section
3.2 below we provide a detailed description of the source of information for thermal inversion
as well as migration and pollution measures.
The idea to use thermal inversion as an instrumental variable for air pollution was first
proposed by Arceo, Hanna, and Oliva (2016), to estimate the e↵ect of air pollution on infant
mortality in Mexico City. This identification strategy has been subsequently used to explore
the short-run e↵ects of air pollution on children’s health in Sweden (Jans, Johansson, and
Nilsson, 2014) and on adult mortality in the United States (Hicks, Marsh, and Oliva, 2015)
and on manufacturing labor productivity in China (Fu, Viard, and Zhang, 2017). Thermal
inversions are a common meteorological phenomenon that leads to higher concentrations of
pollutants near the ground. The mechanism through which this occurs is the following: under
normal conditions temperature decreases as altitude increases. Since air moves from hot to
cool regions, air pollutants can circulate vertically decreasing air pollution concentrations
near the ground. However, under certain meteorological circumstances (see Arceo, Hanna,
and Oliva (2016)), the temperature of a layer of air above ground could be higher than that
at lower altitudes, which leads to an inversion in the temperature/height gradient or thermal

11

inversion. When this occurs, air pollutants are trapped near the ground leading to higher
air pollution concentrations.
There are several facts about thermal inversions that are relevant for identification. First,
although there is no plausible direct mechanism through which temperature above ground
level could a↵ect human health or human behavior, thermal inversions often coincide with
weather patterns on ground level, and weather may have direct impacts on our outcome of interest (Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer, 2010; Feng, Oppenheimer, and Schlenker, 2015; Cai
et al., 2016). To illustrate the relationship between thermal inversions and weather, Panel
A of Appendix Figure A.7 shows that the national average of thermal inversion strength
(solid line) is highest during very cold days. However, mild and very hot temperatures are
also associated with strong thermal inversions. This national pattern, however, masks large
variation in the relationship between thermal inversions and temperature across regions. To
show this variation, Panels B, C and D of the same figure show the nonlinear relationship
between temperature and inversion strength for Beijing, Shanghai and Guangzhou, respectively. The regional variation in the thermal inversion-temperature relationship stems from
di↵erences in the underlying nature of thermal inversions across regions. Strong thermal
inversions during cold months are common in regions where inversions are predominantly
radiative. Radiative inversions emerge when the e↵ect of earth’s warmth radiation on air
near the ground causes large di↵erences with air at higher altitudes. Other sources of thermal
inversions (subsidence and advection) can cause thermal inversions in warmer months.
To address confounding issues stemming from the relationship between thermal inversions
and weather, we control for very flexible functions of an array of weather measures at the
ground level such as 1- Celsius degree daily temperature bins, and second degree polynomials
in precipitation, sunshine duration, relative humidity, and wind speed.7 Our identification
strategy thus relies on the variation in the five-year average strength of thermal inversions
net of weather variation at ground level.
7

We also explore the sensitivity of our results to variations in the functional forms of weather variables
such as region-specific temperature e↵ects.

12

Second, there are some regions that are more prone to thermal inversions than others,
which causes permanent di↵erences in air pollution concentrations across regions. Figure 5
depicts the annual average concentration of PM2.5 (in red) and SO2 (in blue) over 1980-2015
for three categories of counties: counties with inversion strength less than 0.08 C (in circle),
between 0.08 and 0.24 C (in rhombus), and above 0.24 C (in triangle). These thresholds
were defined based on the 33rd and 66th percentile respectively. In general, air pollution is
higher in counties with higher strength of thermal inversions. The average concentration
of PM2.5 for counties with less than 0.08 C is 38.2 µg/m3 , while is 50.0 µg/m3 and 56.9
µg/m3 for counties with 0.08-0.24 C and above 0.24 C strength, respectively. A similar
pattern can be found for SO2 . These permanent di↵erences in air pollution may induce
self-selection patterns across regions that could potentially result in di↵erences in migration
rates. For example, if only healthy young adults are willing to live in highly polluted areas
and young adults are more prone to relocating in response to good job opportunities, we
could potentially observe that areas with a high average strength of thermal inversions have
high migration rates. Thus, it is important for us to control for time-fixed di↵erences in
air pollution through county fixed e↵ects. By doing so, we constrain the thermal inversionrelated variation in air pollution we use to deviations from the within-county average strength
of thermal inversions over the course of fifteen years. Figure 6 illustrates the variation that we
are using. Each set of vertically aligned dots represents a province, while each dot represents
the average inversion strength per year within each five year period for a particular province.
The vertical distance between the dots of each set is similar to the variation that we use for
this study (the variation we used is within counties, rather than within regions, and it is
also net of period fixed e↵ects and weather e↵ects). Although there are large cross-sectional
di↵erences in the average strength of inversions, there is a considerable amount of variation
over time within each region.
Finally, to guard against long-run trends in thermal inversions to coincide with macroeconomic trends, we include period fixed e↵ects,

13

t.

Figure 2 plots the average strength of

thermal inversions (in black), concentrations of PM2.5 (in red) and SO2 (in blue) in each
year from 1980 to 2015. Although it is clear from this figure that there is no consistent
trend of thermal inversions over time, there appears to be a slight upward trend during the
period of our study (1996-2010). As stated before, the level of air pollution has dramatically
increased in the study period, especially after 2001 when China joined the WTO. Thus, it
is important to control for overall trends that could pick-up some of the large changes in
economic variables during this period.
Note several econometric specification details. First, we run regressions separately for
PM2.5 and SO2 since we only have one IV. We discuss the multiple pollutant models in detail
in Section 4.4. Second, standard errors are clustered at county level, to adjust for autocorrelation within each county over time periods. In the robustness check, we cluster standard
errors at prefecture level, to account for potential within-prefecture correlation across counties and over periods.8 Our results are still robust at 5% level. Lastly, all regression models
are weighted by population to correct for heteroscedasticity, as large population di↵erences
across counties will lead to di↵erences in the precision of calculated migration rates. Again,
our results are robust without weighting.

3.2
3.2.1

Data Sources and Summary Statistics
Migration

As discussed in Section 2.1, there are two types of migrants in China: those who migrate
to a new county but do not possess the local household registration, and those who migrate
and possess the local household registration. The first type is referred as floating population
or floating migration, while the second is regarded as registered migrants.
We use population and death counts from the Population Census in China to calculate two
measures of migration: net outmigration flows of all types of migration and immigration flows
8

Prefecture is the administrative level between province and county in China. In our sample, we have 31
provinces, 335 prefectures, and 2,649 counties.

14

of floating migrants. Since 1990, China has conducted decennial population census (Macro
Census) in 1990, 2000, and 2010, and the 1% population sample survey (Micro Census) in
1995, 2005, and 2015. For our study, we use 1% and 20% individual-level data randomly
drawn from the 2000 Macro Census and the 2005 Micro Census, and county-aggregated data
in 1995 and 2010 from National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) of China.9
The first migration measure, the net outmigration ratio, is the percent of population
leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. Since the population herein is based on
individual’s physical presence in that county, the net outmigration ratio essentially measures
the migration of both floating and registered migrants. We use the residual approach to
calculate net outmigration. The residual approach has been widely used in the previous
literature (e.g., see Passel, Van Hook, and Bean (2004); Feng, Krueger, and Oppenheimer
(2010); Feng, Oppenheimer, and Schlenker (2015)). In particular, we calculate the net
outmigration ratio for people aged between 15 to 60, the bulk of the working force, during
each 5-year interval using the following equation:

N etOutmig[15, 60]c,t =

P op[15, 60]c,t

P op[20, 65]c,t+5
P op[15, 60]c,t

ˆ 60]
D[15,

⇥ 100%,

(3)

where N etOutmigc,t is the net outmigration ratio for those aged [15, 60] during the 5-year
interval starting from year t in county c; P op[15, 60]c,t indicates the total population aged
[15, 60] in county c at the beginning of the five-year interval that started in year t, while
ˆ 60]
P op[20, 65]c,t+5 denotes the population of the same cohort five years later, and D[15,
represents an approximate measure of deaths for this same population during the 5-year
interval. Below we explain the data constraints on deaths and our approach to ensure that
these constraints do not a↵ect our results.
Because NBS only surveys deaths during the survey year, we are not able to obtain
the death counts in the whole five-year period. Thus, we compute an approximate net
9

To the best of our knowledge, no individual-level census data in 1995 and 2010 has been made publicly
available.

15

outmigration ratios in one of two ways. The first way omits deaths from calculation in
equation (3). The second way approximates deaths in the five year period by multiplying
deaths in the last year by five. Either option, omitting or only partially accounting for
deaths in the five year period, creates measurement error of net outmigration ratio and will
bias our estimates upwards if pollution is positively correlated with death counts. In order
to evaluate the potential bias, we estimate the e↵ect of air pollution on deaths for di↵erent
age groups using the years for which deaths data are available (2000, 2005 and 2010). In
order to do so, we estimate model in equations (1) and (2), with deaths in each of these
years as the dependent variable and pollution in current year, past two years, past three
years, past four years and past five years as the right hand side variable of interest. Results
of this specification are shown in Tables A.10 and A.11. Each column reports results on a
di↵erent age group. We find that air pollution exposure within the last four and five years
has a positive and significant e↵ect on current year deaths of total population (all ages),
population under 15 years of age, and population above 60 years of age. However, we find
that deaths among our population of interest, those between 15 and 60 years of age, show
a small and not statistically significant response to air pollution. These findings across age
groups are consistent with prior literature that has studied the e↵ects of air pollution by
age groups (Chen et al. (2013); Deryugina et al. (2016)). These results suggest that the
bias caused by the measurement error in our imperfect net outmigration measures should be
minimal and statistically undetectable.
Table 1 reports mean and standard deviation of our two net outmigration ratio measures. The di↵erence between the adjusted and unadjusted measures coincides with our
approximate measure of deaths. The mean five-year death rate in our period is 1.28 percent,
also reported in Table 1. On average, the net outmigration ratio is negative (both adjusted
and unadjusted). As this ratio is expressed as an average of unweighted percentages at the
county level, the mean net outmigration can be either positive or negative. The negative sign
likely means that less populated counties, which are also more numerous, are predominantly

16

experiencing net inflows. This could be due to the urbanization policy and the economic
development of several economic zones such as the Yangtze River and Pearl River Deltas.
The large standard deviation of the net outmigration ratio shows that there is substantial
heterogeneity in migration flows across counties. This is also clear from Panel A of Figure 4,
which depicts the histogram of the net outmigration ratio with death adjustment. Although
average net changes in population are modest, five percent of counties may experience increases of 40 percent in population stemming from migration flows (negative tail of the net
outmigration ratio histogram). Large reductions in population due to migration are more
rare.
Our second measurement on migration is destination-based immigrants whose hukou are
in their origins, or floating migration. This excludes those immigrants who also transfer their
hukou to the destination (registered migration). From previous work on Chinese migration
(Ebenstein and Zhao, 2015) and from our calculations, we know that about 70 percent of
migrants constitute floating migrants.10 Since the majority of migrants do not transfer their
hukou, our destination based immigration captures the bulk of the response to air pollution.
Our destination-based immigration measure is calculated from individual-level census in 2000
and 2005, and county-level aggregated census in 2010. The details are available in the online
appendix. We cannot calculate origin-based outmigrants because the aggregated data in
2010 only report the destination-based immigrants. As we can see from Table 1, we can also
observe an increasing trend in destination-based floating immigration during the period of
our study.
3.2.2

Air Pollution

The data on air pollution are derived from the satellite-based AOD retrievals. This technique
is particularly popular for estimating air pollutants in areas lacking ground-level measurements (Van Donkelaar et al., 2010). AOD essentially measures the amount of sunshine
10

Our calculation comes from the 2000 Census, which has information on both floating and registered
migration.

17

duration that are absorbed, reflected, and scattered by the particulates suspended in the
air, and can be used to estimate particular matter concentrations. The AOD-based pollution data closely match the ground-based monitoring station measures (Gupta et al., 2006;
Kumar et al., 2011).
We obtain the AOD data from the product M2TMNXAER version 5.12.4 from the
Modern-Era Retrospective analysis for Research and Applications version 2 (MERRA-2)
released by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) of the U.S.11 The
data are reported at each 0.5 degree ×0.625 degree (around 50 km×60 km) latitude by longitude grid in each month since 1980. The concentration of SO2 is reported in the data,
while the concentration of PM2.5 is calculated following Buchard et al. (2016). The monthly
pollution data are then aggregated from grid to county. We then average to annual level
across all months and further average to each 5-year period for each county.
We do not use the air pollution data from ground-based monitoring stations for four
reasons. First, the publicly available data which are provided by the China National Environmental Monitoring Center (CNEMC) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection of
China were only reported starting from June of 2000, while our study period starts from
1996. Second, the spatial coverage is quite sparse. It only covers 42 cities in 2000 and 113
cities in 2010, while AOD-based data cover the whole country and we convert to 2,816 counties. Third, the ground-based pollution data only report Air Pollution Index (API), which is
a piece-wise linear transformations of three air pollutants (PM10 , SO2 , and NO2 ), and thus
we cannot explore the e↵ect of specific air pollutant, especially PM2.5 . Lastly, it is found
that ground-based air pollution data have been manipulated (Ghanem and Zhang, 2014).
Though previous studies have shown that AOD-based pollution data can predict air
quality (Gupta et al., 2006; Kumar et al., 2011), we still compare our AOD-based data with
ground-based data during the period 2013-2015, when CNEMC and US Embassy started to
report hourly concentration for the six major air pollutants: PM2.5 , PM10 , SO2 , O3 , NO2
11

The data can be downloaded at https://disc.gsfc.nasa.gov/uui/datasets/M2TMNXAER_V5.12.4/
summary?keywords=Aerosols#.

18

and CO.12 We find no statistical di↵erence between them. The details are discussed in the
online appendix.
Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for PM2.5 and SO2 . The average concentration of
PM2.5 during 1996-2010 is 53.27 µg/m3 , which is 6 times than the U.S. EPA’s standard.
The average concentration of SO2 during the same period is 15.50 µg/m3 , which is also
significantly higher than most countries.
3.2.3

Thermal Inversions

The data on thermal inversions are also from the MERRA-2. In particular, we utilize the
product M2I6NPANA version 5.12.4, which divides the earth by 0.5 degree×0.625 degree
(around 50 km×60 km) grid, and records the 6-hour air temperature at 42 layers, ranging
from surface to 36,000 meters.13 We aggregate all data from grid to county. Within each
6-hour period, we calculate the temperature di↵erence using temperature in the second layer
(320 meters) minus temperature in the first layers (110 meters). If the di↵erence is positive,
there exists an thermal inversion and the di↵erence measures the inversion strength. If the
di↵erence is negative, it is normal condition and we truncate the di↵erence to zero. We then
average the inversion strength across all 6-hour lapses within each 5-year period. We also
check the robustness using temperatures in the first and third layers (540 meters) and the
results are robust.
Table 1 shows the means and standard deviations for thermal inversion strength as well
as the frequency of thermal inversions any 6-hour interval over each of our 5-year periods.
The average strength of it during our whole period of study is 0.22 C. During 1996-2010,
average thermal inversion strength appears to be increasing at a very slow pace in average.
The frequency of thermal inversions also appears to have a very slight increase over the 15
12
For real-time air pollution and the geographic locations of the eight monitoring stations, please see
http://www.cnemc.cn/ from CNEMC and http://www.stateair.net/web/historical/1/1.html from
US Embassy.
13
The data can be downloaded at https://disc.sci.gsfc.nasa.gov/uui/datasets/M2I6NPANA_V5.12.
4/summary?keywords=%22MERRA-2%22%20M2I6NPANA&start=1920-01-01&end=2017-01-16.

19

year period of our study.
3.2.4

Weather

The weather data are obtained from the China Meteorological Data Sharing Service System
(CMDSSS), which records daily minimum, maximum, and average temperatures, precipitation, sunshine duration, relative humidity, and wind speed for 820 weather stations in
China.14 We then average temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed, and aggregate
precipitation and sunshine duration across days within each year and further average to each
5-year period. We also construct the number of days within each 1 C temperature bin and
aggregate over five-year periods.

4

Results

4.1

First-stage Results: The E↵ect of Thermal Inversion on Air
Pollution

Table 2 presents the first-stage estimates of the e↵ect of thermal inversions on air pollution
conditional on county and period fixed e↵ects. Dependent variables are concentrations of
PM2.5 in Panel A and SO2 in Panel B. All regressions control for county and period fixed
e↵ects as well as weather controls, including temperature bins within 1 C, second-order
polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine duration. Column (2)
shows the results without population weights, while column (3) uses population aged 15 to
60 in 1995 in column (3).
We find significant and robust e↵ects of thermal inversions on both air pollutants. As
the measure of thermal inversion strength is somewhat difficult to interpret in terms of
magnitude, one can multiply the point estimates in Panel A by 0.004 (0.22/53.08) and by
14

CMDSSS was developed and is currently managed by the Climatic Data Center, National Meteorological
Information Center, China Meteorological Administration. See http://data.cma.cn/ for details.

20

0.014 (0.22/15.39) in Panel B in order to convert to elasticities. The point estimates in
column (1) suggest that a 1 percent increase in average thermal inversion strength leads to a
0.3 percent increase in PM2.5 concentrations. We find a similar elasticity in the case of SO2 .
Weighting by population, shown in column (2), yields similar results. Table 2 also reports
the Kleibergen-Paap (KP) F -statistics, and all of them are well above Stock and Yogo’s 10%
maximal bias threshold.15

4.2

Second-stage Results: The E↵ect of Air Pollution on Migration

Table 3 reports the estimates of air pollution on the net outmigration ratio with and without
adjusting for approximate deaths. Recall that Section 3.2 and Appendix Tables A.10 and
A.11 show that among the population we focus on, those between 15 and 60 years of age, there
are no e↵ects of pollution on deaths. Thus, failing to subtract deaths from the outmigration
ratio should not a↵ect our estimates. Nevertheless, in columns (4) to (6) we show results
that adjust for approximate deaths, which are calculated based on deaths in the last year of
each period.
Columns (1) and (4) report the OLS estimates of equation (1), while columns (2)-(3)
and (5)-(6) report the IV estimates with and without population weights. All regressions
include county and period fixed e↵ects. Panels A and B show the e↵ects of PM2.5 and SO2
respectively. Note that these e↵ects come from separate regressions. Thus, adding them
would result in double-counting, as the concentrations of these two pollutants are correlated.
Instead, the right way to interpret them is as the e↵ects on net outmigration stemming from
two di↵erent ways of measuring air pollution.16
We first discuss the results of air pollution on net-outmigration ratios without adjusting
15

We have also tried using the yearly count of thermal inversions as an instrument as well as the number
of extreme thermal inversions. However, the average strength measure yields the highest KP F -statistics.
16
To address double counting, we look at two pollutant and pollution index models in Table 8, which we
discuss below.

21

for deaths. The OLS estimates in column (1) in both Panels suggest a positive and significant correlation between air pollution and net outmigration after controlling for weather
variables as well as county and period fixed e↵ects. Note that pollution is endogenous in
this specification and may be correlated with other determinants of migration that vary over
time within counties —such as wage, GDP, job opportunities, and infrastructure —which
would result in omitted-variable bias. As many of these potentially omitted factors are likely
to attract migrants, the omitted-variable bias is likely negative. The OLS estimates may
also be biased downwards due to reverse causality, as positive net-outmigration flows may
bring down pollution.
Consistent with the expected bias discussed above, IV estimates of the e↵ect of air
pollution on net outmigration ratios are larger in magnitude. Columns (2) and (3) show
IV estimates of equation (1), in which pollution is instrumented with the average strength
of thermal inversions. Our preferred specification is equation (3), which controls includes
population weighting. Column (3) shows an e↵ect of pollution on outmigration flows that is
nearly twice the size of the OLS e↵ect.
The magnitude of the e↵ect of air pollution, whether it is measured by PM2.5 and SO2 ,
on net outmigration flows is large and economically significant. First, we note that the semielasticity is similar across the two pollutants: PM2.5 and SO2 . A ten percent increase in PM2.5
induces a reduction in population of 2.7 per 100 inhabitants due to migration. Similarly,
when we measure pollution using SO2 concentrations, we find that a ten percent increase in
SO2 induces a reduction in population of 2.3 per 100 inhabitants due to migration. Second,
we note that this e↵ect is economically meaningful when we consider the magnitude of the
changes in air pollution that China has experienced in the last 15 years. In order to apply
our estimates to observed changes in air pollution in China, is important to understand that
the type of variation we use for identification corresponds to relative changes in air pollution
as we control for period fixed e↵ects. Hence, although Figure 2 shows that air pollution levels
increased by more than 60 percent average (27 µg/m3 ), the variation in air pollution that

22

our estimates can be applied to is closest to what is presented in Figure 3. Here we can see
that there was wide heterogeneity in air pollution changes over our period of study, and that
over this period there are several counties that experienced changes larger than 40 µg/m3 (a
48 percent increase relative to the national average) and smaller than 10 µg/m3 (a 63 percent
reduction relative to the national average). Thus, assuming linearity, our estimates imply
that these counties experienced changes in population between 11.04 (0.23 ⇥ 48) and 17.01
(0.27 ⇥ 63) per 100 inhabitants due to pollution-spurred migration. These e↵ects are large,
but in line with observed changes in population due to migration: the standard deviation of
net outmigration flows is 16.15 per 100 (shown in Table 1).
Column (2) of Table 3 shows the same specification without population weighting. Weighting is potentially important in our setting for two reasons. First, when we weight by population, we account for the fact that our dependent variable is more precisely estimated in
counties where population is large. Second, they provide a di↵erent weighted average of local
e↵ects that better reflects the flows faced by a representative individual rather than a representative county. Responses could be di↵erent in more populated areas if these areas tend to
be wealthier, more educated and/or there are non-linearities in the dose-response function
(as these areas tend to be more polluted). Two observations emerge from these comparing
our unweighted results to column (3). The first one is that the size of the standard error is
not very di↵erent, suggesting that inference in unweighed regressions is not misleading. The
second one is that the e↵ect of PM2.5 and SO2 on net outmigration are similar whether or
not we weigh by population. The similarity of point estimates in between columns (2) and
(3) suggest that underlying heterogeneity across regions in terms of population is not very
important. Nevertheless, we explore other dimensions of heterogeneity in our estimates in
Table 5.
Finally, Columns (4)-(6) show our estimates when we adjust the dependent variable for
deaths by using deaths observed in the last year of each period multiplied by five. Results
change very little compared to columns (1)-(3).

23

Next, we discuss the results concerning our destination based immigration measure.
There are two important di↵erences in the interpretation of these results with respect to
the previous discussion. First, destination based immigration corresponds to floating immigration only. This means that formal immigration, which is more costly (Kinnan, Wang,
and Wang, 2016), is excluded from this measure (see Section 3.2.1). Second, our dependent
variable is a measure of immigration as opposed to (net) outmigration. This has a couple
of important implications. First, if individuals value air quality, then we will expect air
pollution to have a negative e↵ect on immigration flows (the opposite sign to the e↵ect of
pollution in Table 3). Second, finding a response of immigration flows to air pollution relies on more demanding assumptions about people’s economic behavior. In contrast with
measures of outmigration which capture the e↵ect of changes in the amenity where people
live, immigration measures capture the e↵ect of changes in the amenity where people move
to. Thus, for us to capture the e↵ects of air pollution using this measure, individuals need
to be aware of pollution changes in the where they are planning to move to as opposed
to pollution changes in the county where they live. Nevertheless, we find results that are
consistent with people moving to counties whose pollution has improved due to fluctuations
in thermal inversions.
Table 4 reports the estimates of pollution on destination based immigration. The structure of the table is the same as that of Table 3, columns (1)-(3). The OLS estimates in
column (1) suggest a significantly positive relationship between air pollution and immigration (the opposite sign to what one would expect from the causal relationship). As in column
(1) of Table 3, pollution is endogenous in this specification. The omitted variable bias in
this case is likely to bias our coefficient of interest upwards, as pollution is correlated with
economic activity. In the case of immigration, the bias seems to be large enough to flip the
sign of the expected causal relationship. When we instrument air pollution using strength of
thermal inversions, we find significantly negative e↵ects of air pollution on immigration. Our
preferred estimates in column (3) imply that a 10 percent reduction in PM2.5 brings in 1.7

24

people per 100 inhabitants, while a reduction of 10 in SO2 results in a gain of 1.4 immigrants.
The smaller magnitude of the e↵ects compared to net-outmigration ratios is to be expected
as net-outmigration would capture the e↵ect of air pollution on both inflows and outflows;
while immigration only captures the e↵ect on inflows. In addition, official migration (which
is not captured by this measure) is less than one third of overall migration according to our
calculations from the 2000 census (see Section 3.2.1 and Ebenstein and Zhao (2015)).
Column (2) of Table 4 omits the population weights from the estimation. In the case of
destination based immigration, population weights seem to matter more for the magnitude
of the e↵ect: the immigration e↵ects faced by the average person in China seem to be slightly
larger than those faced by the average county.

4.3

Additional Evidence

In the previous section, we find a robust and significant e↵ect of air pollution on migration
for adult population. In particular, high pollution induces people to leave, and low pollution
induces people to arrive. Below we further explore the heterogeneity of these impacts.
4.3.1

By Education

Our first focus is education, since education is an important determinant of income and is
likely fixed for most of the adults in our sample. In addition, highly educated population
may be more sensitive to air pollution because, on the one hand, they have better knowledge
in understanding the harmful e↵ects of air pollution on human body, and on the other hand,
they have the ability to change their registration. If this is the case, we should expect a
larger e↵ect of air pollution on net outmigration for highly educated population.
Table 5 presents the IV estimates of air pollution on net outmigration ratio for three
categories of education level in columns (1)-(3): junior high school or below, high school,
and college or above.17 All models include county and period fixed e↵ects, flexible weather
17

The data on destination based immigration by education level are not available.

25

controls and are weighted by population. We use inversion strength to instrument PM2.5 in
Panel A and SO2 in Panel B.
We find positive and significant e↵ects of PM2.5 on net outmigration for all educational
categories. In addition, the marginal e↵ects are monotonically increasing in the level of
education. For example, the estimated coefficient of PM2.5 for adults with college degree or
above is twice the size of the e↵ect for population with junior high school education or below.
The e↵ects are qualitatively similar if we use SO2 as our endogenous measure of air pollution.
These findings confirm our hypothesis that highly educated population are more likely to
migrate to other counties in response to increased air pollution. Importantly, these findings
suggest that air pollution may have important e↵ects on labor force and socioeconomic
composition. Air pollution may impose significant economic costs on local regions and cause
the so called “brain drain e↵ect” (Fischer, 2003). In addition, our findings support other
recent literature that has found e↵ects of air pollution on the socioeconomic composition of
neighborhoods (Hanlon, 2016; Heblich, Trew, and Yanos, 2016).
4.3.2

By Gender and Age Cohort

We next focus on heterogeneity by gender and age cohort. Table 6 presents the IV estimates
of air pollution on net outmigration ratio for males in column (1) and females in column (2).
In column (3), we focus on population aged 15-30, while in columns (4) and (5), we focus on
population aged 30-45 and 45-60, respectively. All models include county and period fixed
e↵ects and weather controls. Average strength of thermal inversions is used as IV.
We find positive e↵ects of pollution on net outmigration for both genders, although
the e↵ect for males is marginally significant. The e↵ects for females are almost twice as
high as for males, which suggests that a potential pattern of migration where the head of
the household may stay behind while the rest of the family migrates to a cleaner location.
In terms of age cohort, we find that the e↵ects are the largest for younger cohorts and
monotonically decreases with age, indicating that this group might be more sensitive to air

26

pollution (perhaps because they have young children) and/or have higher ability to move.
One additional thing to note is that the potential upwards bias induced by our inability
to properly controlling for death counts would be strongest for the oldest group (column
(5)). The fact that this group shows the smallest e↵ect reinforces our assessment that the
response of deaths to air pollution is not significantly biasing our estimates.
4.3.3

By Origins of Immigration

The data on destination based immigration not only report the number of immigrants,
but also report the origins of those immigrants in three categories: from other counties
within the same province, from other provinces, and within counties. As the source of air
pollution variation is unlikely to induce within-county di↵erences in air pollution, we should
not expect migration flows within counties unless our instrument is capturing some other
determinant of migration. Thus, this detail of the data allow us to (a) inquire whether
most of the floating migration flows occur within provinces or outside provinces and (b)
conduct a robustness check on our research design and instrument validity. Table 7 reports
our results on destination based immigration by each type of flow. We find significantly
negative e↵ects of pollution on destination based immigration for both movements across
counties within a province and movements across provinces (Columns (2) and (3)). However,
migration within a province appears to be twice as large as migration across provinces. This
is unsurprising given our earlier observation on the gender imbalance, which suggests that
heads of household may be staying behind. If this were the case, remaining within the same
province might be less costly for the family. It is also possible that families may be able to
change their residence without changing their job when remaining within the same province.
These results suggest that immigrants might be trying to minimize pollution exposure, while
at the same time remaining within the same region where costs of migrating are smaller.
Column (4) shows the response of destination-based immigration within counties to air
pollution. The e↵ect is very close to zero in magnitude and non significant, lending support to

27

the notion that our instrument is unlikely to have e↵ects on other determinants of migration.

4.4

Multiple pollutant models

In all the IV specifications above, we run regressions models separately for PM2.5 and SO2 .
Therefore, the estimated coefficient captures the e↵ect the specified pollutant along with the
e↵ect of any other pollutants that are correlated with it and respond to thermal inversions.
To explore the separate e↵ects of the two pollutants we have data for, we use two approaches.
The first approach is to regress two air pollutants simultaneously in one regression model,
and use two IVs: thermal inversion strength and counts. The second approach is to construct
a single pollution index, the air quality index (AQI), which is essentially a piece-wise linear
transformation of two pollutants.18 The AQI is particularly interesting, as it would be similar
to the pollution measure that is reported by the government, and thus the measure that
individuals are likely to respond to. The pollution index is then instrumented by thermal
inversion strength.
The results are presented in Table 8, in which migration is measured by net outmigration
ratio in columns (1) and (2), and by destination-based immigration in columns (3) and
(4). In columns (1) and (3), we include both air pollutants in one regression model. We
also report the Sanderson-Windmeijer F -statistics for test of weak instruments for each
endogenous variable conditional on the other, as well as the test statistic and p-value for
joint significance. In columns (2) and (4), we only include the single pollution index, or the
AQI.
When we include both air pollutants in the model, we find non-significant individual
e↵ects of pollution on net-outmigration; but a highly significant joint e↵ect of both pollutants (column (1)). Because of the imprecision of the individual coefficients, it is difficult to
assess which pollutant is playing the more important role. When we use destination-based
immigration as our outcome variable, we find that PM2.5 slightly dominates as a one percent
18

See detailed calculation method in http://kjs.mep.gov.cn/hjbhbz/bzwb/dqhjbh/jcgfffbz/201203/
t20120302_224166.htm.

28

increase in this pollutant results in 0.29 percent increase in population due to floating immigration, while a one percent increase in SO2 results in a 0.14 increase in population. The
joint e↵ect is similarly significant at the 1% level.
When we use AQI to incorporate two pollutants into one single index, we also find
statistically significant and comparable e↵ects. During the period 1996-2010, the average
five-year AQI increase has been of 11.69 points. This suggests that counties that experienced
a five-year change in pollution similar to the country’s average saw a 5 percent (0.4269% ×
11.69) drop in the adult population through migration in response to this increase (under the
linearity and independence assumptions discussed above). Of this, 3.05 percentage points
(-0.2611% × 11.69) appear to be driven by a slowdown of floating immigration flows (column
(4)), assuming symmetry in the e↵ects of air pollution. Note that our e↵ects aim at isolating
the causal e↵ect of pollution forces on migration. Total observed migration flows over this
period that are substantially di↵erent to these calculations are perfectly consistent with these
estimates, as migration flows are a function of many other variables besides air pollution.
Nevertheless, note that large five-year changes in population due to migration are not rare
(see Figure 4).

4.5

Robustness Checks

Here we discuss the results of several robustness checks to the main results in Tables 3 and
4. The results of these robustness checks are presented in Table 9. We start by clustering
standard errors at di↵erent levels. In the baseline, standard errors are clustered at county
level, which accounts for autocorrelation of the error terms over periods within each county.
In column (2), we cluster standard errors at prefecture level, an administrative level in
China which usually includes 10-20 counties, to account for both autocorrelation and spatial
correlation across counties within each prefecture. Though standard errors are about twice
as large, the e↵ects are still statistically significant at the 5% level for both pollutants. The
KP F -statistic for weak instruments is quite lower, but still above the Stock-Yogo critical
29

value for 10% relative bias.19
In the baseline, we use period fixed e↵ects to control for common shocks for the whole
country in each period, such as global economic trend and national policies. In column (3),
we replace period fixed e↵ects with period-by-province fixed e↵ects, to control for common
shocks within each province. This specification shows that our results are robust under a
more stringent identification assumption that allows for province-specific trends in unobserved determinants of migration trends to coincide with thermal inversion patterns over
time. In column (4) we replace the baseline weights (1995 population) with average population during the 1996-2010 period. Results are very similar to our baseline.
Columns (5) and (6) check the robustness of our results to di↵erent instrumental variables.
In column (5) we test the robustness of using di↵erent layers of temperature to calculate
thermal inversion. Our baseline model uses temperatures in the first and second layers (110
and 320 meters). Column (5) shows the results with temperatures in the first and third layers
(110 and 540 meters). Our results are robust alternative layers of inversion. In column (6) we
use number of days with thermal inversion as our instrumental variable instead of inversion
strength. Our results are robust to this alternative definition as well.
Finally, column (7) probes the robustness of our results to alternative weather controls.
The temperature controls used in the baseline are quite flexible, as they allow for temperature
in each degree bin to have a di↵erent e↵ect on migration. However, this specification does
not allow for heterogeneity of these e↵ects across regions. As Figure A.7 demonstrates,
the relationship between weather and inversions is di↵erent for di↵erent regions. If for any
reason there was a spurious correlation pattern of temperature and migration that coincided
with this heterogeneity, temperature could still bias our results. Thus, column (7) includes
interactions between all of our standard weather controls and six region dummies. Results are
very similar to our baseline results, which rules out that di↵erential temperature-migration
19

We also experiment with two-way clustering at prefecture and period level to account for potential
spatial correlation and nation-wide weather patterns that could result in similar deviations from the mean
occurrence in thermal inversions. Our e↵ects (not reported) are also robust to this specification of the
variance matrix.

30

patters across regions are being picked up by our instrument.

5

Discussion and Conclusions

Our findings suggest that population in China are willing to forgo potentially very large costs
and hurdles to protect themselves from air pollution. To put our estimates into perspective,
Kinnan, Wang, and Wang (2016) find that each province-level reform of the hukou system
resulted in a 32 percent increase in the migration inflow. Our estimates suggest that, had
a single county experienced a five-year increase in air pollution similar to the country’s
average (everything else equal), this county would have seen a reduction of 3 percent of
its population due to reduced floating migration, which represents a drop of 50 percent in
the average migration inflow. We also find that had a single county experienced a fiveyear increase in air pollution similar to the country’s average increase, this county would
have lost about 5 of its population due to pollution-induced migration. Note that in the
interpretation of our estimates we emphasize a change in pollution in a single county. This
is due to the nature of our instrument: it captures abnormally high pollution due to a local
and temporary burst in the strength and/or frequency of thermal inversions. This limits the
risk of capturing general equilibrium e↵ects, as the outmigration component of the net-flow
would have been unlikely to change housing prices and wages in receptor counties. The fall
in inflows, however, could have a↵ected local prices in the short-run. A drop in local housing
prices (and an increase in local wages) would have tempered the partial equilibrium e↵ect,
leading to a smaller response to air pollution.
The actual changes in pollution that occurred between 1996 and 2010 might have had
di↵erent e↵ects on migration to the ones we identify in this paper for two reasons. First, although pollution increased at di↵erent rates in di↵erent regions (see Figure 3), these changes
were highly correlated across counties between 2000 and 2010 due to the acceleration of
manufacturing activity throughout the country. Correlated changes would have resulted in

31

much stronger impacts on house prices and wages than uncorrelated changes in air pollution
(i.e. rural areas would have felt the inflow pressure from many a↵ected counties). Second,
the long-run e↵ect might be di↵erent if house stocks take some time to adjust. Our estimates
correspond to a five-year change in air pollution, which may allow for little adjustment in
the house stock. If the e↵ect of the inflow slow-down is large enough to bring down house
prices, then our estimates of the inflow response could carry a house price reduction e↵ect.
10-year or 15-year e↵ects of permanent changes in air pollution may lead to di↵erent house
price e↵ects as house stocks would have had more time to adjust.
Although at this point it is hard to use our estimates to put a value number on the
cost of these relocation decisions, which would be helpful to draw conclusions about the
willingness to pay for air pollution reductions, we use the returns to migration in Kinnan,
Wang, and Wang (2016) to at least provide some idea about the order of magnitude of the
cost of migrating. Kinnan, Wang, and Wang (2016) find that households that migrate in
response to a hukou reform increase income by 1.2 percent.20 If we assume that the benefits
of migrating are constant (which is admittedly a strong assumption), then the marginal
migrant would be facing a cost of migrating that is at least as high.
Our results so far do shed light on a number of interesting questions. First, we show that
individuals do incorporate air pollution information on counties of origin and destination
into their migration decisions and that they pay attention to changes in air pollution over
several years. Second, along with recent literature, we provide evidence that pollution is yet
another force that reshapes the sociodemographic distribution of locations and labor force as
highly educated people are more likely to respond to changes in air pollution. Third, we show
that the e↵ects appear to be di↵erent by age and stronger for individuals at the beginning of
their professional careers. This is particularly interesting, as so far the estimates of the cost
of air pollution in terms of a loss of health and/or life have been shown to be concentrated
among elderly and very young individuals. Our paper suggests that individuals in working
20

The yearly income per capita is of 774 USD.

32

age might be willing to forgo earnings in response to air pollution, facing a pecuniary cost
rather than health related costs.

33

References
Adhvaryu, Achyuta, Prashant Bharadwaj, James Fenske, Anant Nyshadham, Richard Stanley et al. 2016. “Dust and Death: Evidence from the West African Harmattan.” Tech.
rep., Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford.
Anderson, Michael L. 2015. “As the Wind Blows: The E↵ects of Long-Term Exposure to
Air Pollution on Mortality.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Arceo, Eva, Rema Hanna, and Paulina Oliva. 2016. “Does the E↵ect of Pollution on Infant
Mortality Di↵er Between Developing and Developed Countries? Evidence from Mexico
City.” The Economic Journal 126 (591):257–280.
Bayer, Patrick, Nathaniel Keohane, and Christopher Timmins. 2009. “Migration and hedonic
valuation: The case of air quality.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
58 (1):1–14.
Borgschulte, Mark and David Molitor. 2016. “Labor Market and Program Participation
Impacts of Health and Productivity Shocks: Evidence from Forest Fire Smoke.” .
Borjas, George J. 1999. “The economic analysis of immigration.” Handbook of labor economics 3:1697–1760.
———. 2015. “Immigration and globalization: A review essay.” Journal of Economic Literature 53 (4):961–974.
Buchard, V, AM da Silva, CA Randles, P Colarco, R Ferrare, J Hair, C Hostetler, J Tackett,
and D Winker. 2016. “Evaluation of the surface PM 2.5 in Version 1 of the NASA MERRA
Aerosol Reanalysis over the United States.” Atmospheric Environment 125:100–111.
Cai, Ruohong, Shuaizhang Feng, Michael Oppenheimer, and Mariola Pytlikova. 2016. “Climate variability and international migration: The importance of the agricultural linkage.”
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 79:135–151.
34

Chay, Kenneth Y and Michael Greenstone. 2003. “The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics :1121–1167.
———. 2005. “Does air quality matter? Evidence from the housing market.” Journal of
political Economy 113 (2):376–424.
Chen, Yuyu, Avraham Ebenstein, Michael Greenstone, and Hongbin Li. 2013. “Evidence
on the impact of sustained exposure to air pollution on life expectancy from China’s Huai
River policy.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (32):12936–12941.
Clark, Ximena, Timothy J Hatton, and Je↵rey G Williamson. 2007. “Explaining US immigration, 1971–1998.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 89 (2):359–373.
Currie, Janet, Eric A Hanushek, E Megan Kahn, Matthew Neidell, and Steven G Rivkin.
2009. “Does pollution increase school absences?” The Review of Economics and Statistics
91 (4):682–694.
Deryugina, Tatyana, Garth Heutel, Nolan H Miller, David Molitor, and Julian Reif. 2016.
“The Mortality and Medical Costs of Air Pollution: Evidence from Changes in Wind
Direction.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Deschenes, Olivier, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S Shapiro. 2012. “Defensive investments and the demand for air quality: Evidence from the nox budget program and ozone
reductions.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Dockery, Douglas W, C Arden Pope, Xiping Xu, John D Spengler, James H Ware, Martha E
Fay, Benjamin G Ferris Jr, and Frank E Speizer. 1993. “An association between air
pollution and mortality in six US cities.” New England journal of medicine 329 (24):1753–
1759.

35

Ebenstein, Avraham, Maoyong Fan, Michael Greenstone, Guojun He, Peng Yin, and
Maigeng Zhou. 2015. “Growth, pollution, and life expectancy: China from 1991–2012.”
The American Economic Review 105 (5):226–231.
Ebenstein, Avraham and Yaohui Zhao. 2015. “Tracking rural-to-urban migration in China:
Lessons from the 2005 inter-census population survey.” Population studies 69 (3):337–353.
EPA. 2008. “Final Report: Integrated Science Assessment for Sulfur Oxides.” Tech. rep.
———. 2009. “Final Report: Integrated Science Assessment for Particulate Matter.” Tech.
rep.
Feng, Shuaizhang, Alan B Krueger, and Michael Oppenheimer. 2010. “Linkages among
climate change, crop yields and Mexico–US cross-border migration.” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 107 (32):14257–14262.
Feng, Shuaizhang, Michael Oppenheimer, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2015. “Weather Anomalies, Crop Yields, and Migration in the US Corn Belt.” Tech. rep.
Fischer, Stanley. 2003. “Globalization and its challenges.” The American Economic Review
93 (2):1–30.
Fu, Shihe, V Brian Viard, and Peng Zhang. 2017. “Air pollution and manufacturing firm
productivity: Nationwide estimates for China.” .
Ghanem, Dalia and Junjie Zhang. 2014. “”E↵ortless Perfection”: Do Chinese cities manipulate air pollution data?”

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management

68 (2):203–225.
Gra↵ Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2012. “The impact of pollution on worker productivity.” The American economic review 102 (7):3652–3673.
———. 2013. “Environment, health, and human capital.” Journal of Economic Literature
51 (3):689–730.
36

Gupta, Pawan, Sundar A Christopher, Jun Wang, Robert Gehrig, YC Lee, and Naresh
Kumar. 2006. “Satellite remote sensing of particulate matter and air quality assessment
over global cities.” Atmospheric Environment 40 (30):5880–5892.
Hanlon, W Walker. 2016. “Coal Smoke and the Costs of the Industrial Revolution.” Tech.
rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hanna, Rema and Paulina Oliva. 2015. “The e↵ect of pollution on labor supply: Evidence
from a natural experiment in Mexico City.” Journal of Public Economics 122 (C):68–79.
Hao, Jiming, Shuxiao Wang, Bingjiang Liu, and Kebin He. 2001. “Plotting of acid rain and
sulfur dioxide pollution control zones and integrated control planning in China.” Water,
Air, and Soil Pollution 130 (1-4):259–264.
Heblich, Stephan, Alex Trew, and Zylberberg Yanos. 2016. “East Side Story: Historical
Pollution and Persistent Neighborhood Sorting.” .
Hicks, Daniel, Patrick Marsh, and Paulina Oliva. 2015. “Air pollution and procyclical mortality: Causal evidence from thermal inversions.” Tech. rep., Working paper.
Hsiang, Solomon, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank Mohan, D.J. Rasmussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer, Kate
Larsen, and Trevor Houser. 2017. “Estimating economic damage from climate change
in the United States.” Science 356 (6345):1362–1369.
Ito, Koichiro and Shuang Zhang. 2016. “Willingness to Pay for Clean Air: Evidence from
Air Purifier Markets in China.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jans, Jenny, Per Johansson, and Peter Nilsson. 2014. “Economic Status, Air Quality, and
Child Health: Evidence from Inversion Episodes.” .
Jessoe, Katrina, Dale Manning, and Edward J Taylor. 2016. “Climate Change and Labour

37

Allocation in Rural Mexico: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather.” The Economic Journal .
Kinnan, Cynthia, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang. 2016. “Access to Migration for
Rural Households.” .
Kumar, Naresh, Allen D Chu, Andrew D Foster, Thomas Peters, and Robert Willis. 2011.
“Satellite remote sensing for developing time and space resolved estimates of ambient
particulate in Cleveland, OH.” Aerosol Science and Technology 45 (9):1090–1108.
Linn, William S, Edward L Avol, Ru-Chuan Peng, Deborah A Shamoo, and Jack D Hackney.
1987. “Replicated dose-response study of sulfur dioxide e↵ects in normal, atopic, and
asthmatic volunteers.” American Review of Respiratory Disease 136 (5):1127–1135.
Linn, William S, Theodore G Venet, Deborah A Shamoo, Lupe M Valencia, Ute T Anzar, Charles E Spier, and Jack D Hackney. 1983. “Respiratory E↵ects of Sulfur Dioxide
in Heavily Exercising Asthmatics: A Dose-Response Study 1–3.” American Review of
Respiratory Disease 127 (3):278–283.
Molina, Teresa. 2016. “Pollution, Ability, and Gender-Specific Investment Responses to
Shocks.” .
Neidell, Matthew. 2009. “Information, Avoidance Behavior, and Health: The E↵ect of Ozone
on Asthma Hospitalizations.” Journal of Human Resources 44 (2):450–478.
Passel, Je↵rey S, Jennifer Van Hook, and Frank D Bean. 2004. “Estimates of the legal and
unauthorized foreign-born population for the United States and selected states, based on
Census 2000.” US Bureau of the Census, Washington, DC .
Pedersen, Peder J, Mariola Pytlikova, and Nina Smith. 2008.

“Selection and network

e↵ects—Migration flows into OECD countries 1990–2000.” European Economic Review
52 (7):1160–1186.
38

Pope III, C Arden and Douglas W Dockery. 2006. “Health e↵ects of fine particulate air pollution: lines that connect.” Journal of the air & waste management association 56 (6):709–
742.
Roback, Jennifer. 1982. “Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life.” Journal of Political
Economy 90 (6):1257–1278.
Sanders, Nicholas J et al. 2011. “Toxic assets: How the housing market responds to environmental information shocks.” In Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics Summer
Workshop.
Schlenker, Wolfram and W Reed Walker. 2016. “Airports, Air Pollution, and Contemporaneous Health.” Review of Economic Studies 83 (2):768–809.
Tanaka, Shinsuke. 2015. “Environmental regulations on air pollution in China and their
impact on infant mortality.” Journal of Health Economics 42:90–103.
Van Donkelaar, Aaron, Randall V Martin, Michael Brauer, Ralph Kahn, Robert Levy, Carolyn Verduzco, and Paul J Villeneuve. 2010. “Global estimates of ambient fine particulate
matter concentrations from satellite-based aerosol optical depth: development and application.” Environmental health perspectives 118 (6):847.
WHO. 2013. “Health e↵ects of particulate matter.” Tech. rep.
Zhang, Junjie and Quan Mu. 2016. “Air pollution and defensive expenditures: Evidence
from particulate-filtering facemasks.” .

39

Figure 1: Migration in China (1996-2010)
Panel A: Net Outmigration Ratio

Panel B: Destination-based Immigration Ratio

Notes: This figure depicts the average migration for each county in China over the period
1996-2010. In Panel A, migration is measured by net outmigration ratio, which is the
percent of population leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. In Panel B,
migration is measured by destination-based immigration ratio, which is defined as the
percent of population entering the county with their hukou in the origin.
40

Figure 2: Time Trend of Air Pollution and Thermal Inversion in China (1980-2015)

70

0.30

60

0.27

50

0.24

40

0.21

30
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Thermal inversions (℃)

Air pollutant (μg/m3)

Panel A: PM2.5 and Thermal Inversion

0.18
2015

Year
PM2.5

Inversion

25

0.30

20

0.27

15

0.24

10

0.21

5
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Thermal inversions (℃)

Air pollutant (μg/m3)

Panel B: SO2.5 and Thermal Inversion

0.18
2015

Year
SO2

Inversion

Notes: This figure plots the county-average concentration of PM2.5 and thermal inversion
(panel A) and SO2 and thermal inversion (panel B) in each year in China over the period
1980-2015. Two red vertical lines highlight the course of our study: 1996-2010. The blue
vertical line highlights the year of 2001, when China joined the WTO and pollution has
been significantly increased.
41

Figure 3: Pollution Changes in China (1996-2010)
Panel A: PM2.5

Panel B: SO2

Notes: This figure depicts the changes in PM2.5 (panel A) and SO2 (panel B) between the
period 1996-2000 and 2005-2010 for each county in China.

42

Figure 4: Histogram of Net Outmigration Ratio and Destination-based Immigration Ratio
Panel A: Net Outmigration Ratio with Death Adjustment

Percentiles
5

25 50 75

95

0.05

Density

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

Net outmigration ratio (%)
Panel B: Destination-based Immigration Ratio

Percentiles
5075

90

95

99

0.25

Density

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

0

20

40

60

80

100

Destination-based immigration ratio (%)
Notes: This figure plots the histogram of net outmigration ratio with death adjustment
(panel A) and destination-based immigration ratio (panel B). Percentiles 5, 25, 50, 75, and
95 are highlighted in red.
43

Figure 5: Time Trend of Air Pollution by Occurrences of Thermal Inversion (1980-2015)

Air pollutant (μg/m3)

80

60

40

20

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

Year
PM2.5 (inversion≦0.08℃)
PM2.5 (0.08℃<inversion≦0.24℃)
PM2.5 (inversion>0.24℃)

SO2 (inversion≦0.08℃)
SO2 (0.08℃<inversion≦0.24℃)
SO2 (inversion>0.24℃)

Notes: This figure plots the county-average pollution concentration in each year over the
period 1980-2015 for three categories: thermal inversion strength less than 0.08 C (33th
percentile), between 0.08 and 0.24 C (66th percentile), and above 0.24 C. Two red
vertical lines highlight the course of our study: 1996-2010.

44

Figure 6: Five-year Average of Thermal Inversion Within Each Province

Thermal inversions (℃)

0.60

0.45

0.30

0.15

0

North

Northeast

1996-2000

East

Southeast Southwest Northwest

2001-2005

2006-2010

Notes: This figure depicts the five-year average of thermal inversion strength for three
periods –1996-2000, 2001-2005, and 2006-2010 –within each province.

45

46
0.22
16.39

C
%

4.45
3.66
2.58
1.28

%
%
%
%
53.08
15.39

-9.17
-7.89
6.01

%
%
%

µg/m3
µg/m3

Mean

Unit

0.19
9.81

27.93
11.90

4.53
6.72
5.93
0.54

16.15
16.04
10.73

SD

0.21
16.07

42.68
11.97

2.50
2.37
1.72
1.31

-6.61
-5.30
3.41

Mean

0.19
9.65

19.85
8.90

2.23
4.10
4.06
0.39

9.89
9.83
6.16

SD

1996-2000

0.22
16.47

50.89
13.52

3.02
2.36
1.88
1.35

-5.82
-4.46
4.20

Mean

0.20
9.95

24.53
9.74

3.48
4.16
4.71
0.61

16.39
16.25
7.49

SD

2001-2005

0.23
16.64

65.67
20.67

7.84
6.25
4.15
1.19

-15.08
-13.90
10.40

Mean

0.20
9.83

32.76
14.41

5.20
9.56
7.94
0.57

19.07
18.88
14.90

SD

2006-2010

Notes: The unit of observation is county-period (5-year). Number of observations is 7,911. Net outmigration ratio is defined as the percent of
population (aged 15 to 60) leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. Destination-based immigration ratio is defined as the percent
of population (aged 15 to 60) entering the county with their hukou in the origin. Death rates are for population (aged 15 to 60). Pollution
data are reported at monthly level, and then are averaged to each year and further to each period. Thermal inversion strength is calculated
using the temperature di↵erence in altitudes of 110 and 330 meters within each 6-hour period, and then is averaged for each five-year period.
Positive di↵erence indicates an existence of a thermal inversion with magnitude representing the strength, while negative di↵erence indicates
an non-existence of a thermal inversion and is truncated to zero. The probability of occurrence is the averaged dummy variables for each
6-hour period with 1 indicating the existence of a thermal inversion, i.e., temperature in the layer of 110 meters is lower than that in the
layer of 330 meters, and 0 otherwise.

Variable
Migration
Net outmigration ratio (death adjustment)
Net outmigration ratio (no death adjustment)
Destination-based immigration ratio
Destination-based immigration ratio by origin
Within county
Across county within province
Across county outside province
Death rates
Air pollution
PM2.5
SO2
Thermal inversion
Strength
Probability of occurrence

1996-2010

Table 1: Summary Statistics

Table 2: The E↵ect of Thermal Inversions on
Pollution (First Stage)

Panel A: PM2.5
Thermal inversions
KP F -statistics
Panel B: SO2
Thermal inversions
KP F -statistics
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather controls
Weighting

(1)

(2)

78.6938***
(5.4654)
206.3

82.0176***
(5.1621)
250.9

24.9499***
(2.3596)
111.2
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

28.2183***
(2.4171)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: Dependent variables are PM2.5 in Panel A and
SO2 in Panel B. Regression models are estimated using
Equation (2) and include county fixed e↵ects and period fixed e↵ects. Weather controls include temperature
bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are weighted using population aged 15
to 60 in 1995 in column (3). Standard errors are listed
in parentheses and clustered at county level. ⇤ p <0.10,
⇤⇤
p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

47

48

1.8251***
(0.5265)
111.2
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.8243***
(0.1204)
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.5786***
(0.1637)
206.3

(2)

0.2898***
(0.0584)

(1)

(3)

1.4989***
(0.5069)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.5156***
(0.1743)
250.9

IV

7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.8439***
(0.1213)

0.2967***
(0.0589)

(4)

OLS

1.8716***
(0.5329)
111.2
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

0.5934***
(0.1656)
206.3

(5)

(6)

1.5433***
(0.5123)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.5309***
(0.1762)
250.9

IV

Death adjustment

Notes: The dependent variable is net outmigration ratio. Through columns (1)-(4), net outmigration ratio is
defined as the percent of population aged 15 to 60 leaving the county net of new arrivals, without death adjustment. Through columns (5)-(9), net outmigration ratio is defined as the percent of population aged 15 to
60 leaving the county net of new arrivals and death. Regression models are estimated using Equation (1) and
include county fixed e↵ects and period fixed e↵ects. Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C,
second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models
are weighted using population aged 15 to 60 in 1995 in columns (1), (4), and (8). Standard errors are listed
in parentheses and clustered at county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

KP F -statistics
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather controls
Weighting

KP F -statistics
Panel B
SO2

Panel A
PM2.5

OLS

No death adjustment

Table 3: The E↵ect of Pollution on Net Outmigration Ratio

Table 4: The E↵ect of Pollution on Destination-based Immigration Ratio
OLS
Panel A
PM2.5
KP F -statistics
Panel B
SO2
KP F -statistics
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather controls
Weighting

IV

(1)

(2)

(3)

0.1258***
(0.0299)

-0.2526***
(0.0679)
206.3

-0.3247***
(0.0820)
250.9

0.3603***
(0.0675)

-0.7967***
(0.2215)
111.2
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
No

-0.9439***
(0.2486)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is destination-based immigration ratio, which is defined as the percent of population aged 15 to 60 entering the county with their hukou in the origin. Regression models are estimated using Equation (1) and include county fixed effects and period fixed e↵ects. Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are
weighted using population aged 15 to 60 in 1995 in columns (1)
and (4). Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at
county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

49

Table 5: The E↵ect of Pollution on Net Outmigration Ratio: By
Education

Panel A
PM2.5
KP F -statistics
Panel B
SO2
KP F -statistics
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather Controls
Weighting
Share in the population (%)

Below Junior
high school
(1)

High
school
(2)

College
or above
(3)

0.4723**
(0.2350)
300.9

0.5736**
(0.2427)
224.2

0.9314**
(0.4433)
169.7

1.3406**
(0.6687)
161.2
7,662
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
36.67

1.6849**
(0.7140)
118.6
7,673
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
40.87

2.6684**
(1.2705)
96.25
7,617
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
22.46

Notes: The dependent variable is net outmigration ratio by each educational
level. Net outmigration ratio is defined as the percent of population aged 15 to
60 leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. Regression models are estimated using Equation (1) and include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects,
and flexible weather controls. Weather controls include temperature bins within
1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are weighted using population for each educational level in 1995. Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at
county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

50

Table 6: The E↵ect of Pollution on Net Outmigration Ratio: By Gender and Age Cohort
Age between
15-30
(3)

Age between
30-45
(4)

Age between
45-60
(5)

0.3595* 0.6973***
(0.1935) (0.1847)
250.9
250.9

0.7446**
(0.3173)
269.4

0.6895***
(0.2089)
255.6

0.0468
(0.2556)
281.1

1.0450* 2.0271***
(0.5622) (0.5380)
KP F -statistics
135.4
135.4
Observations
7,911
7,911
County FE
Yes
Yes
Period FE
Yes
Yes
Weather controls
Yes
Yes
Weighting
Yes
Yes

2.1896**
(0.9294)
138.1
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

1.9962***
(0.6139)
138.8
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

0.1336
(0.7289)
149.2
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Panel A
PM2.5
KP F -statistics
Panel B
SO2

Male

Female

(1)

(2)

Notes: The dependent variable is net outmigration ratio by each gender and age cohort. Net outmigration ratio is defined as the percent of population aged 15 to 60 leaving the county net of new arrivals
and deaths. Regression models are estimated using Equation (1) and include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects, and flexible weather controls. Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C,
second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression
models are weighted using population for each subgroup in 1995. Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

51

Table 7: The E↵ect of Air Pollution on Destination-based Immigration Ratio: By Origins
Total immigration

Panel A
PM2.5
KP F -statistics
Panel B
SO2
KP F -statistics
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather controls
Weighting

(1)

Across county
within province
(2)

Across county Within county
outside province
(3)
(4)

-0.3247***
(0.0820)
250.9

-0.1779***
(0.0595)
250.9

-0.0853**
(0.0409)
250.9

-0.0090
(0.0076)
250.9

-0.9439***
(0.2486)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.5171***
(0.1771)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.2479**
(0.1210)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

-0.0261
(0.0221)
135.4
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The dependent variable is destination-based immigration ratio, which is defined as the percent of population aged 15 to 60 entering the county with their hukou in the origin that is di↵erent from the destination
county. Column (1) includes all migrants regardless of origins. Column (2) includes migrants whose origins are
within the province. Column (3) includes migrants whose origins are outside province. Column (4) includes
migrants whose origins are within the same county but in another township. Column (4) serves as a placebo
test because we only define migrants across counties. Regression models are estimated using Equation (1)
and include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects, and flexible weather controls. Weather controls include
temperature bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind speed, and sunshine
durations. Regression models are weighted using population aged 15-60 in 1995. Standard errors are listed in
parentheses and clustered at county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

52

Table 8: Multiple Pollutant Models
Net outmigration ratio

PM2.5
SO2
AQI
KP F -statistics
p-value of joint sig.
SW F -statistics for PM2.5
SW F -statistics for SO2
Observations
County FE
Period FE
Weather controls
Weighting

Multiple
pollutant models
(1)
0.0416
(0.6418)
1.7405
(1.8227)
—
—
38.13
0.0003
104.02
83.51
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Single
pollutant index
(2)
—
—
—
—
0.4269***
(0.1415)
252.5
—
—
—
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Immigration ratio
Multiple
pollutant models
(3)
-0.5454*
(0.2809)
0.9236
(0.7973)
—
—
38.13
0.0008
104.02
83.51
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Single
pollutant index
(4)
—
—
—
—
-0.2611***
(0.0660)
252.5
—
—
—
7,911
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Notes: The dependent variables are net outmigration ratio in columns (1) and (2), and destination-based immigration ratio in columns (3) and (4). Net outmigration ratio is defined as the percent of population aged 15
to 60 leaving the county net of new arrivals and deaths. Destination-based immigration ratio is defined as the
percent of population aged 15 to 60 entering the county with their hukou in the origin. Regression models are
estimated using Equation (1) and include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects, and flexible weather controls.
Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity, wind
speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are weighted using population aged 15-60 in 1995. In columns
(1) and (3), we include both PM2.5 and SO2 in one regression and instrument them using both thermal inversion
strengths and numbers. In columns (2) and (4), we construct a single pollution index –Air Quality Index (AQI)
–to incorporate two pollutants into one measurement. AQI is then instrumented by thermal inversion strengths.
SW F -statistics are Sanderson-Windmeijer F-statistics for test of weak instruments for each endogenous variable.
The Stock-Yogo weak identification F test critical values for single endogenous regressor at 10% maximal IV size is
19.93. Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at county level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

53

54

0.5309**
(0.2143)
69.62
1.5433**
(0.6126)
35.02
-0.3247**
(0.1381)
69.62
-0.9439**
(0.4291)
35.02
Yes
Yes
No
Pop in 1995
Prefecture
Strength
1 and 2

0.5309***
(0.1762)
250.9
1.5433***
(0.5123)
135.4
-0.3247***
(0.0820)
250.9
-0.9439***
(0.2486)
135.4
Yes
Yes
No
Pop in 1995
County
Strength
1 and 2

(2)

(1)

-2.1375**
(0.9595)
18.76
Yes
No
Yes
Pop in 1995
County
Strength
1 and 2

-0.4290**
(0.1678)
120

4.6619**
(2.2372)
18.76

0.9356**
(0.4126)
120

Alternative
fixed
e↵ects
(3)

-0.9883***
(0.2648)
132
Yes
Yes
No
Average pop
County
Strength
1 and 2

-0.3342***
(0.0852)
269.7

1.4123***
(0.4984)
132

0.4776***
(0.1694)
269.7

(4)

Alternative
weights

-0.3756**
(0.1883)
181.6
Yes
Yes
No
Pop in 1995
County
Strength
1 and 3

-0.1278**
(0.0631)
355

1.2953***
(0.4361)
181.6

0.4407***
(0.1486)
355

Alternative
layer of
inversion
(5)

-1.0408***
(0.2649)
125.4
Yes
Yes
No
Pop in 1995
County
Days
1 and 2

-0.3528***
(0.0855)
239

1.4968***
(0.5199)
125.4

0.5074***
(0.1762)
239

Alternative
definition of
inversion
(6)

-1.6126***
(0.5155)
5.934
Yes
Yes
No
Pop in 1995
County
Strength
1 and 2

-0.5481***
(0.1188)
26.99

1.7940**
(0.8522)
5.934

0.6098**
(0.2563)
26.99

Interaction
between region
and weather
(7)

Notes: The dependent variables are net outmigration ratio in panels A and B, and destination-based immigration ratio in panels
C and D. Column (1) is the baseline model. In column (2), we cluster the standard errors at prefecture level. In column (3), we
replace period FE with period-by-province FE. In column (4), we weight regression using averaged population aged 15-60 during
1996-2010. In column (5), we calculate thermal inversion using layers at 110 and 540 meters. In column (6), we replace IV from
thermal inversion strengths to number of days with thermal inversion. In column (7), we add interactions between region dummies
and weather variables. Standard errors are listed in parentheses. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

KP F -statistics
County FE
Period FE
Period-by-province FE
Weighting
Clustering
IV
Layers

KP F -statistics
Panel D: Imm.
SO2

KP F -statistics
Panel C: Imm.
PM2.5

KP F -statistics
Panel B: Net out.
SO2

Panel A: Net out.
PM2.5

Alternative
clustering

Baseline

Table 9: Robustness Checks

Online Appendix
A.1

Data Details

Below we describe the details on how we calculate the destination-based immigrants. In the
2000 Census, the question on hukou status (R061) includes:
1. Living in this township,21 hukou is in this township
2. Living in this township for more than 6 months, hukou is outside the township
3. Living in this township for less than 6 months, leave the place of hukou for more than
6 months
4. Living in this township, hukou status not determined
5. Originally living in this township, now study or work abroad, does not own hukou.
For options 2 and 3, there are further options regarding the place of hukou: (R062)
1. Other township (xiang) in this county
2. Other town (zhen) in this county
3. Other subdistrict (jiedao) in this county
4. Other township (xiang) in this district22
5. Other town (zhen) in this district
6. Other subdistrict (jiedao) in this district
7. Other counties or districts in this province
21

Township is smaller administrative level than county, which includes three forms: subdistrict (jiedao),
town (zhen), and township (xiang). Subdistrict is mainly used in cities, while town and township are mainly
used in suburbs and rural areas
22
District is the equivalent to county in terms of administrative level. It is mainly used in cities.

55

8. Outside this province.
There is one question regarding when do you live in this township (R9). The options are:
1. Since born
2. Before October 31th, 1995
3. November 1st to December 31th, 1995
4. 1996
5. 1997
6. 1998
7. 1999
8. 2000.
There is one question (R10) asked where do you move (origin) to this township. The options
are:
1. Within this county
2. Outside this county (specify the province, prefecture, and county name).
We determine if a person is a destination-based immigrant (living in the current address
for more than six months based on NBS definition) during the past five years who does not
transfer the hukou based on the following conditions:23
• R061 = 2
• R062
• R9
23

7
3.

The 2000 Census date is November 1st , 2000.

56

We can also determine if a person is a destination-based immigrant who transfers the hukou
based on the following conditions:
• 1  R061  2
• 1  R062  6
• 3  R09  8
• R10 = 2.
The 2005 survey changed several questions. Specifically, the question on hukou status
(R06) has the following options:
1. This township
2. Other township in this county
3. Other counties (specify the province, prefecture, and county name)
4. Undetermined.
The question R08 asked when do you leave the place of hukou, and has the following
options:
1. Never leave
2. Less than six months
3. Six months to one year
4. One to two years
5. Two to three years
6. Three to four years
7. Four to five years
57

8. Five to six years
9. More than six years.
Unfortunately, the 2005 Survey did not ask question on the specific living address before
moving to this county (question R10 in the 2000 Census). Instead, it asked the living address
five years ago (November 1st , 2000) and has two options (R15):
1. Within this province
2. Outside this province (specify the province name).
We determine if a person is a destination-based immigrant who does not transfer the
hukou during the past five years based on the following conditions:
• R06 = 3
• 3  R08  7.
There are several drawbacks of our definition. First, suppose a person’s hukou is in county
A, and he moved from county A to county B seven years ago, and moved from county B to
county C three years ago. By our definition, he should not be counted as an immigrant for
county C because he does not meet the condition for question R08, but he should be counted
as an immigrant. This issue arises from question R08, as it asked when do you leave your
hukou, instead of when do you move to the current address in the 2000 Census. This makes
us to undercount the destination-based immigrant.
Second, suppose a person’s hukou is in county A, and he moved from county A to county
B four years ago, and moved from county B to county C three years ago, this person is
counted an immigrant for county C based on our definition, but he should also be counted
as an immigrant for county B. In other words, we can only capture the final immigration
status, not the intermediate steps.
Third, suppose a person’s hukou is in county A, and he moved from county A to county
B four years ago, and lives in county B ever since. In the survey date (November 1st , 2005),
58

he is temporally live in county C for business. Then based on our definition, this person is
regarded as an immigrant in county C, but he should be counted as an immigrant in county
B.
We determine if a person is a destination-based immigrant who transfers the hukou based
during the past five years based on the following conditions:
• 1  R06  2
• R08 = 1
• R15 = 2.
Noted this only captures the immigrant from outside provinces, as question R015 does not
report the specific living address before moving.
For 2010 Census, the questions on hukou status are similar to the 2005 Survey. To our
best knowledge, no individual-level data in 2010 are publicly available to researchers. Thus,
we obtain the county aggregated data on destination-based immigrants. The drawbacks also
exist for the 2010 data. Noted we cannot calculate origin-based outmigrants during 19962010 for two reasons. First, we only have the county aggregated data on destination-based
immigrants in 2010. Second, the 2000 Census does not report the specific county name of the
hukou. In other words, we can only calculate the origin-based outmigrants in 2005, which
we cannot run regressions using the fixed e↵ects model.

A.2

Comparison between AOD-based and Station-based Pollution
Data

We use AOD-based pollution data in this paper because station-based data for specific air
pollutants are only available after 2013. Before that, the Air Quality Index (AQI), which
incorporates major air pollutants are only available for a few cities. Our station-based data
are obtained from web-scratching of the China National Environmental Monitoring Center
59

(CNEMC), an affiliates to the Ministry of Environmental Protection of China. CNEMC
reports real-time hourly AQI and specific air pollutants for around 1,000 monitoring stations.24 We convert hourly station-based data to county using the IDW method in which we
choose 100 km radius. We then collapse to month level to compare with AOD-based PM2.5
and SO2 .
To start, we plot the monthly trend between AOD-based data (in black) and stationbased data (in blue) over the period 2013-2015 for PM2.5 in Figure A.8 and SO2 in Figure
A.9. We plot for the whole country as well as major cities across China including Beijing,
Chongqing, Guangzhou, Harbin, Shanghai, Tianjin, Xi’an, and Wuhan. Though there are
systemically di↵erence between AOD-based and station-based data, the trend fits reasonably
well.
We then conduct a formal statistical test between two sources of data in Table A.12. The
unit of observation is county-year. Column (1) reports the national average of two pollutants
for years 2013, 2014, and 2015 separately and jointly for AOD-based data. Standard deviations are presented in the parenthesis. Similarly, column (2) reports the ground-based data.
Column (3) reports the di↵erence between two sources of data, and the standard errors are
presented in the parenthesis. We find all the di↵erences are statistically significant at 1%
level. However, these di↵erences may be caused by the county-specific di↵erences. Therefore,
we report the di↵erence conditional on county fixed e↵ects and year fixed e↵ects in column
(4). All the di↵erences are gone. Because in our baseline model, we include county fixed
e↵ects and period fixed e↵ects, AOD-based data is thus a good proxy for station-based data.
We test the robustness by altering radius from 100 km to 50 km in column (5) and to 150
km in column (6) for the IDW method. We weight the test by population in 1995 in column
(7). Our results are robust.
24

The data can be viewed at http://106.37.208.233:20035/.

60

A.3

Tables and Figures

61

62

Temperature bins (days)

30

35

25

30

35

Temperature bins

Temperature (℃)
Inversions

0
20

0
15

0.25

5

10

0.50

5

Inversions

25

10

0

Panel C: Shanghai

Temperature bins

-5

20

0.75

-10

15

15

-15

10

Daily temperature (℃)

5

0.1
0

0
-5

0.2

5

-10

0.3

10

-15

0.4

15

Temperature bins (days)

Thermal inversion (℃)

Thermal inversion (℃)

5

10

20

15

20

25

30

35

Temperature bins

Daily temperature (℃)
Inversions

0
10

0

0

0.1

5

35

10

0

Panel D: Tianjin

30

Inversions

25

0.2

-5

15

Daily temperature (℃)

0

Temperature bins

-5

20

-10

-10

0.3

-15

-15

0.2

0.4

0.6

30

0

5

10

15

Panel B: Beijing

Notes: This figure plots the number of days and thermal inversion strength within each 1 C temperature bin. Panel A is the
national average. Panels B, C, D are calculated using Beijing, Shanghai, and Guangzhou, respectively.

Temperature bins (days)

Panel A: National Average

Temperature bins (days)

Figure A.7: Correlation between Temperature Bins and Thermal Inversions

Thermal inversion (℃)
Thermal inversion (℃)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

4

5

4

5

7

10

11

8

9

10

11

12

50

75

100

125

150

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

4

5

3

4

7

Month

6

6

7

10

11

9

10

11

8

9

10

11

12

12

12

Station-based data

8

Wuhan (Central)

5

9

Station-based data

8

Harbin (Northeast)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

AOD-based data

3

50

75

100

125

150

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

0

AOD-based data

Month
Station-based data

AOD-based data

Month
Station-based data

0

6

9

12

12

Station-based data

8

Tianjin (North)

5

11

0

4

7

Month

6

10

25

50

75

100

125

150

0

3

9

Station-based data

8

Guangzhou (South)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

AOD-based data

3

Beijing (Capital)

25

2

2

2

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

25

1

1

1

Country

25

50

75

100

125

150

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

0

25

50

75

100

125

150

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

6

4

5

6

4

5

6

7

Month

10

11

9

10

11

12

10

11

Station-based data

8

9

Station-based data

8

Xi'an (Northwest)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

9

12

12

Station-based data

8

Shanghai (East)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month
AOD-based data

3

Chongqing (Southwest)

Figure A.8: Monthly Trend between AOD-based and Ground-based PM2.5

Notes: This figure plots monthly trend between AOD-based and ground-based PM2.5 for the country and major cities.

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

PM2.5 (μg/m3)

63

SO2 (μg/m3)

SO2 (μg/m3)

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

4

5

4

5

7

Month

6

10

11

9

10

11

10

11

Station-based data

8

9

Station-based data

8

Tianjin (North)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

9

Station-based data

8

Guangzhou (South)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

AOD-based data

3

Country

12

12

12

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

4

5

4

8

5

6

7

Month

10

11

10

11

9

10

11

Station-based data

8

9

12

12

12

Station-based data

Wuhan (Central)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

9

Station-based data

8

Harbin (Northeast)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month

6

AOD-based data

3

Beijing (Capital)

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

0

20

40

60

80

1

1

1

2

2

2

4

5

6

4

5

6

4

7

Month

5

6

7

Month

10

11

9

10

11

10

11

Station-based data

8

9

Station-based data

8

9

12

12

12

Station-based data

Xi'an (Northwest)

AOD-based data

3

8

Shanghai (East)

AOD-based data

3

7

Month
AOD-based data

3

Chongqing (Southwest)

Figure A.9: Monthly Trend between AOD-based Data and Ground-based SO2

Notes: This figure plots monthly trend between AOD-based and ground-based SO2 for the country and major cities.

SO2 (μg/m3)

SO2 (μg/m3)
SO2 (μg/m3)
SO2 (μg/m3)

SO2 (μg/m3)
SO2 (μg/m3)

SO2 (μg/m3)

64

Table A.10: The E↵ect of PM
Years
Average PM2.5

0

KP F -statistics
Average PM2.5

0-1

KP F -statistics
Average PM2.5

0-2

KP F -statistics
Average PM2.5

0-3

KP F -statistics
Average PM2.5

0-4

KP F -statistics

All ages
(1)
0.0182
(0.0264)
77.20
0.0041
(0.0228)
74.49
0.0536*
(0.0295)
65.90
0.0755***
(0.0243)
75.30
0.0660***
(0.0172)
164.3

2.5

Age below 15
(2)
0.0341*
(0.0185)
57.87
0.0014
(0.0213)
52.14
0.0358*
(0.0194)
58.55
0.0388**
(0.0171)
62.95
0.0398***
(0.0091)
187

on Death Rates
Age between 15-60
(3)
-0.0034
(0.0130)
70.16
-0.0084
(0.0104)
65.92
0.0041
(0.0132)
61.37
-0.0009
(0.0104)
71.44
0.0040
(0.0070)
152.2

Age above 60
(4)
-0.1842
(0.1418)
73.11
-0.1112
(0.1250)
69.15
0.1796
(0.1401)
65.79
0.4653***
(0.1241)
76.03
0.4090***
(0.0872)
180.4

Notes: Number of observation is 7,911. The dependent variable is death rates (‰) in years 2000, 2005,
and 2010. Regression models include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects, and flexible weather controls.
Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity,
wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are weighted using population in each age group
in 1995. To incorporate lagged e↵ect of air pollution, we calculate the average of each air pollutant across
years. For example, average PM2.5 with years 0 indicates the contemporaneous PM2.5 , while average PM2.5
with years 0-1 indicates the average between contemporaneous and lagged one year. Average PM2.5 with
other years can be interpreted in the same manner. We instrument the average air pollutant using thermal inversion in the corresponding years. Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at county
level. ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

65

Table A.11: The E↵ect of SO2 on Death Rates
Years
Average SO2

0

KP F -statistics
Average SO2

0-1

KP F -statistics
Average SO2

0-2

KP F -statistics
Average SO2

0-3

KP F -statistics
Average SO2

0-4

KP F -statistics

All ages
(1)
0.0413
(0.0600)
52.25
0.0094
(0.0519)
53.57
0.1305*
(0.0731)
45.79
0.2509***
(0.0883)
28.99
0.1884***
(0.0516)
95.93

Age below 15
(2)
0.0899*
(0.0496)
28.21
0.0037
(0.0577)
23.11
0.1056*
(0.0574)
25.24
0.1536**
(0.0713)
15.59
0.1217***
(0.0282)
82.08

Age between 15-60
(3)
-0.0076
(0.0295)
46.93
-0.0191
(0.0238)
47.55
0.0100
(0.0317)
44.11
-0.0031
(0.0343)
28.72
0.0112
(0.0199)
94.98

Age above 60
(4)
-0.4015
(0.3118)
49.17
-0.2387
(0.2689)
53.56
0.4178
(0.3284)
46.55
1.5192***
(0.4608)
27.73
1.1812***
(0.2715)
93.31

Notes: Number of observation is 7,911. The dependent variable is death rates (‰) in years 2000, 2005,
and 2010. Regression models include county fixed e↵ects, period fixed e↵ects, and flexible weather controls.
Weather controls include temperature bins within 1 C, second-order polynomial in precipitation, humidity,
wind speed, and sunshine durations. Regression models are weighted using population in each age group
in 1995. To incorporate lagged e↵ect of air pollution, we calculate the average of each air pollutant across
years. For example, average SO2 with years 0 indicates the contemporaneous SO2 , while average SO2 with
years 0-1 indicates the average between contemporaneous and lagged one year. Average SO2 with other
years can be interpreted in the same manner. We instrument the average air pollutant using thermal inversion in the corresponding years. Standard errors are listed in parentheses and clustered at county level.
⇤
p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

66

Table A.12: Statistical Test Between AOD-based and Ground-based Pollution Data

2013
PM2.5
SO2
Obs
2014
PM2.5
SO2
Obs
2015
PM2.5
SO2
Obs
All
PM2.5
SO2
Obs
County FE
Year FE
Radius
Weighting

(1)
AOD

(2)
Station

(3)
Unconditional
di↵erence

(4)
Conditional
di↵erence

(5)
Conditional
di↵erence

(6)
Conditional
di↵erence

(7)
Conditional
di↵erence

55.0431
(29.5806)
30.4324
(19.2522)
2,495

73.1464
(32.1741)
25.5718
(15.1402)
2,495

-18.1034***
(0.7907)
4.8606***
(0.4639)
2,495

-0.0431
(0.3641)
0.0185
(0.2234)
2,495

0.0547
(0.6014)
0.0715
(0.3918)
1,162

-0.0411
(0.3219)
0.0132
(0.2042)
2,606

-0.0444
(0.3642)
0.0184
(0.2236)
2,495

62.7323
(19.6609)
34.3568
(17.0051)
2,500

73.6688
(31.9031)
25.5075
(15.0186)
2,500

-10.9364***
(0.4666)
8.8492***
(19.2242)
2,500

0.0118
(0.1891)
0.0277
(0.1284)
2,500

0.2181
(0.3297)
0.1119
(0.1881)
1,194

-0.0081
(0.1652)
0.0171
(0.1204)
2,608

0.0124
(0.1892)
0.0276
(0.1285)
2,500

49.9473
(16.2949)
25.1135
(12.8326)
2,500

72.4348
(33.0719)
26.0457
(15.8749)
2,500

-22.4875***
(0.4700)
-0.9323***
(0.3343)
2,500

0.0287
(0.2139)
-0.0462
(0.1334)
2,500

-0.3274
(0.3399)
-0.1951
(0.2635)
1,194

0.0496
(0.1952)
-0.0302
(0.1210)
2,608

0.0295
(0.2140)
-0.0459
(0.1335)
2,500

55.9081
(23.1578)
29.9672
(17.0016)
7,495
No
No
100 km
No

73.0833
(32.3867)
25.7084
(15.3492)
7,495
No
No
100 km
No

-17.1751***
(0.3479)
4.2587***
(0.2342)
7,495
No
No
100 km
No

-0.0008
(0.1541)
0.0000
(0.0966)
7,495
Yes
Yes
100 km
No

-0.0188
(0.2531)
-0.0045
(0.1682)
3,550
Yes
Yes
50 km
No

0.0001
(0.1370)
0.0000
(0.0887)
7,822
Yes
Yes
150 km
No

-0.0007
(0.1543)
0.0000
(0.0967)
7,495
Yes
Yes
100 km
Yes

Notes: Unit of observation is county-year. Columns (1) and (2) reports the national average of AOD-based data and
station-based data. Column (3) reports the unconditional di↵erence. Columns (4)-(7) reports the di↵erence conditional
on county fixed e↵ects and year fixed e↵ects. Standard deviations are listed in parentheses in columns (1) and (2) and
standard errors are listed in parentheses through columns (3)-(7). ⇤ p <0.10, ⇤⇤ p <0.05, ⇤⇤⇤ p <0.01.

67

