                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SOVEREIGN RISK CONTAGION

                                       Cristina Arellano
                                           Yan Bai
                                       Sandra Lizarazo

                                      Working Paper 24031
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24031


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




This paper combines and replaces two previously circulated papers: “Linkages in Sovereign Debt
Markets” by the first two authors and “Contagion of Financial Crises in Sovereign Debt Markets”
by the last author. We thank Laura Sunder-Plassmann for superb research assistance. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the International Monetary
Fund, the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Sandra Lizarazo. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sovereign Risk Contagion
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Sandra Lizarazo
NBER Working Paper No. 24031
November 2017
JEL No. F3,G01

                                           ABSTRACT

We develop a theory of sovereign risk contagion based on financial links. In our multi-country
model, sovereign bond spreads comove because default in one country can trigger default in other
countries. Countries are linked because they borrow, default, and renegotiate with common
lenders, and the bond price and recovery schedules for each country depend on the choices of
other countries. A foreign default increases the lenders’ pricing kernel, which makes home
borrowing more expensive and can induce a home default. Countries also default together
because by doing so they can renegotiate the debt simultaneously and pay lower recoveries. We
apply our model to the 2012 debt crises of Italy and Spain and show that it can replicate the time
path of spreads during the crises. In a counterfactual exercise, we find that the debt crisis in Spain
(Italy) can account for one-half (one-third) of the increase in the bond spreads of Italy (Spain).


Cristina Arellano                                 Sandra Lizarazo
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis                International Monetary Fund
Research Department                               1900 Pennsylvania Ave NW
90 Hennepin Avenue                                Washington, DC, 20431
Minneapolis, MN 55401                             sanvaliz@gmail.com
and NBER
arellano.cristina@gmail.com

Yan Bai
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com
1       Introduction
Sovereign debt crises occur in multiple countries at the same time. The Russian crisis of
1998, the Mexican crisis of 1994, and the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s, among
others, spilled over to other emerging markets. During these crises, the sovereign risk of
many countries rose and fell in tandem. More recently, during the 2012 European debt crisis,
many countries also experienced sizable spikes in their sovereign risk.1 Yet, despite sovereign
debt crises occurring in multiple countries simultaneously, theoretical work on sovereign risk
has mainly studied countries in isolation.
    We develop a multi-country model where default in one country triggers default in other
countries, generating comovement in sovereign risk. This contagion in sovereign risk arises
because countries borrow, default, and renegotiate with common lenders. A foreign default
lowers the home country’s bond prices and the future home recovery rates in the event of a
renegotiation. These two forces can induce a home default as rolling over the debt is more
difficult and renegotiating the defaulted debt in the future is more attractive. We apply our
model to the 2012 debt crises of Italy and Spain and show that it can replicate the time path
of spreads observed. In a counterfactual exercise, we assess the contribution of the foreign
debt crisis on home bond spreads and find that about one-half of the bond spread in Italy
and about one-third of the bond spread in Spain can be attributed to the debt crisis of the
other country.
    The model economy is dynamic and consists of two symmetric countries that borrow,
default, and renegotiate their debt with competitive lenders that are risk averse. Borrowing
countries are subject to fluctuations in their output, and bond prices reflect the risk-adjusted
compensation for the loss that lenders face in case of default. Default entails costs for
borrowing countries in terms of access to financial markets and direct output costs. After
default, countries can renegotiate with a committee of lenders through Nash bargaining
and pay the debt recovery. When multiple countries renegotiate with lenders, they do it
simultaneously.
    Countries are connected because bond prices and recovery rates for each country are
schedules that depend on both countries’ choices to default, borrow, and renegotiate, as
well as their output shocks. Borrowing countries are strategic players and understand that
their choices affect all bond prices and recoveries. We analyze an intraperiod game where
default, borrowing, and renegotiation decisions are best responses in the context of a dynamic
recursive Markov equilibrium.
    1
     Reinhart and Rogoff (2011) document not only that sovereign risk is highly correlated across countries,
but also that default events are clustered historically.


                                                     2
    Countries’ default incentives depend on one another through the strategic renegotiation
channel and the pricing kernel channel. A foreign default lowers the expected recovery rates
for the home country reducing the cost of a default for the home country. This strategic
renegotiation channel can induce a default in the home country. A foreign default also makes
borrowing more expensive for the home country by increasing the bond pricing kernel which
increases the incentives to default for the home country. The dependency of home default on
foreign default arises during fundamental foreign defaults, where the foreign country defaults
because of high debt and low income, and also during self-fulfilling defaults, where both
countries default only because the other is defaulting. Such dependencies generate ex-ante
correlated bond spreads.
    Renegotiations with multiple borrowing countries lead to lower recoveries because coun-
tries exert a large effective bargaining power when renegotiating simultaneously. Lenders are
willing to accept these lower recoveries because during these events they solve two default
events simultaneously. We show that this empirical implication of the model is borne out in
the historical cross-country data. In the data, recovery rates are about 16% lower on average
in years when many countries are renegotiating. We use these data to discipline this force in
our quantitative exercise.2
    In our model, as in many dynamic models of borrowing and default, the shape and
responses of the bond price schedule are crucial for equilibrium spreads dynamics and co-
movements. The bond price schedule for each country incorporates a common pricing kernel
and the country specific default probabilities and expected recovery rates. As is standard in
these models, the bond price for the home country worsens with larger home borrowing and
lower home output because default probabilities rise with large debt and low output.3 The
novelty in our model is that the foreign country’s choices for default and borrowing as well as
its output also affect the bond price schedule for the home country. Foreign defaults worsen
the bond price schedule for the home country because they increase the lenders’ pricing ker-
nel as they lower lenders’ wealth and consumption. This tighter home bond price schedule
can induce a home default. Foreign defaults also increase the home country’s future default
probabilities and lower the home country’s expected recovery rates because the pricing ker-
nel effects from a foreign default last until the foreign country renegotiates and resolves the
default.

   2
      The Brady plan of the early 1990s is a specific example in which many Latin American countries
renegotiated together and received an unusually good deal. These countries were able to exchange their
defaulted debt for new Brady bonds with principal collateralized by the U.S. government.
    3
      See Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) for an extensive discussion on the properties of
the bond price schedules in dynamic models of borrowing and default.


                                                   3
    Not only do actual foreign default events affect the home country bond price schedule
through its effect on the pricing kernel, but also the foreign country’s choices for borrowing
and its output affect the schedule because they change the home country’s future default
probabilities. When the foreign country is in a recession or borrows a large amount, its
own default probabilities in the future rise. Higher future foreign default probabilities raise
future home default probabilities. This higher likelihood of future joint defaults tightens the
home country’s current bond price schedule. In response to the tight bond price schedule, the
home country reduces its borrowing or defaults, if the effect is strong enough. The equilibrium
comovement of sovereign spreads across countries depends on the sensitivity of the bond price
schedule to foreign conditions relative to the strength of the endogenous borrowing response.
    We parameterize the model to Italy and Spain. The model predicts that country bond
spreads and default probabilities comove because foreign recessions increase both foreign and
home spreads. We show through impulse response functions that absent any changes in home
output, a 3% decline in foreign output leads to a 40 basis-point increase in foreign spreads.
The increase in home spreads in the impulse response function is about 40% that of foreign
spreads. The comovement of bond spreads across countries is a hallmark of the historical
sovereign debt crises in the world.
    To compare the model to the European experience, we perform an event analysis. We
feed into the model the paths for output observed in Italy and Spain from 2006 to 2015,
which feature sizable declines, and compare the predictions of the model for bond spreads.
In the model, bond spreads in the event increase in response to the decline in output in both
countries as well as to the contagion in sovereign risk. The bond spreads in the model can
replicate the paths in the data. Spreads in the model and data are very low in the beginning
of the event, increase starting in 2009, and peak in 2012 at about 5% for Italy and about
4% for Spain. We then assess the contribution of the foreign debt crisis for the increase
in bond spreads in each country through a counterfactual exercise that eliminates the debt
crisis in one country at a time. We find that contagion from the debt crisis from one country
to another is strong and accounts for more than one-third of the increase in spreads during
2012.
    We also show that the prediction of our model for the patterns of defaults, renegotiations,
and recoveries is consistent with the cross-country historical data for 77 countries since 1970.
In our model, as in the data, the probability of default increases when others default, and
the probability of renegotiation increases when others renegotiate and decreases when others
default. The patterns of recovery rates in our model also mirror the patterns in the data.
Recoveries not only are lower when other countries are renegotiating but also are higher when


                                               4
other countries are defaulting.
    Finally, we compare our benchmark results to two stripped-down models to quantify
the importance of the pricing kernel and strategic renegotiation channels in our benchmark
model. The stripped-down models have a risk neutral pricing kernel and zero debt recovery,
respectively. The correlation of home and foreign spreads in these stripped-down models is
substantially lower than in the benchmark, indicating that the results are driven mainly by
the interaction between the two channels. In our model, strategic renegotiations not only
generate differential recovery rates, which lead to correlated defaults, but also magnify the
pricing kernel channel of contagion. Debt recovery after renegotiations allows the model to
generate larger debt levels, which in turn amplifies the importance of debt dynamics and
default on the pricing kernel, increasing the comovement of sovereign risk.
    The model in this paper builds on the benchmark model of equilibrium default with
incomplete markets analyzed in Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008), and in a
seminal paper on sovereign debt by Eaton and Gersovitz (1981). These papers analyze the
case of risk-neutral lenders, abstract from recovery, and focus on the default experiences of
single countries. Borri and Verdelhan (2009) and Lizarazo (2013) study the case of risk-averse
lenders, and Pouzo and Presno (2011) study the case of lenders with uncertainty aversion.
They show that deviations from risk neutrality allow the model to generate spreads that are
larger than default probabilities, which is a feature of the data. Borri and Verdelhan also
show empirically that a common factor drives a substantial portion of the variation observed.
    Our paper is related to the literature on contagion through a common investor, such as
Kyle and Xiong (2001) and Calvo and Mendoza (2000). Kyle and Xiong (2001) analyze
the wealth channel of contagion and show that if investors’ preferences exhibit decreasing
absolute risk aversion, they have incentives to reduce the riskiness of their investment when
their wealth is lower. In our work, we build on this insight and provide a framework where
sovereign default lowers investors’ wealth. Calvo and Mendoza (2000) focus on how common
investors of multiple countries have incentives to reduce the gathering of country-specific
information during crises and retrench their loans. While we abstract from information
frictions as a source of contagion, we share their implication of reductions in capital flows
during episodes of crises.
    In the context of sovereign debt, our paper is related to the contemporaneous work by
Park (2013). He studies contagion in a model similar to ours in which multiple borrowers
trade with risk-averse lenders who are subject to capital requirements. His model can also
generate comovement in spreads across borrowing countries; however, he abstracts from any
debt recovery and strategic interactions.


                                              5
    Yue (2010) and Benjamin and Wright (2009) study debt renegotiation in a model with
risk-neutral lenders. They find that debt renegotiation allows the model to better match the
default frequencies and the debt-to-output ratios. Muller, Storesletten, and Zilibotti (2015)
also focus on debt renegotiation and show that a renegotiation protocol where creditors make
take-it-or-leave-it offers can alleviate the inefficiencies that arise during sovereign defaults.
    Our model also presents new types of self-fulfilling equilibria that lead to sovereign de-
faults. Coordination failures have been popular explanations for sovereign debt crises. The
main channel analyzed in the literature, however, emphasizes coordination failures among
lenders, whereas we focus on coordination issues among borrowers. Cole and Kehoe (2000)
and Lorenzoni and Werning (2013) develop models with multiple equilibria in which defaults
are self-fulfilling: lenders refuse to completely roll over the country’s debt because they think
that countries will default on the debt, which in turn leads to default. In contrast, the
self-fulfilling equilibria of our model arise because of strategic interactions among borrow-
ers, which we view as also relevant for the case in which sovereign countries borrow from
international lenders.
    Our application to the European debt crisis is most similar to Bocola and Dovis (2016).
They develop a model with fundamental and self-fulfilling sovereign defaults in the context
of a time-varying pricing kernel to study the Italian experience. They decompose the sources
of high Italian spreads and find that although fundamental domestic shocks can account for a
large fraction of the variation, sunspot shocks in the context of time-varying risk premia also
account for a sizable fraction of the variation. We view our model with strategic borrowing
countries as complementary and providing a rationale for time-varying risk premia.


2    Model
Consider an economy in which two symmetric countries, Home and Foreign, borrow from
a continuum of foreign lenders. Countries are strategic players who borrow, default, and
renegotiate their debt. Lenders are risk averse and competitive. Countries that default
receive a bad credit standing, are excluded from borrowing, and suffer a direct output cost.
Countries in bad credit standing can renegotiate their debt with a committee of lenders and
bargain over the debt recovery. After renegotiation is complete, countries regain their good
credit standing.
   The lifetime payoff to each borrowing country i is E ∞         t
                                                           P
                                                             t=0 β u(cit ), and the payoff to
             P∞ t
lenders is E t=0 δ u(cLt ), where cit is the consumption of the representative household in
each country, cLt is the consumption of lenders, and the function u(•) is increasing and


                                               6
concave. Borrowing countries are more impatient than lenders: 0 < β < δ < 1.
   Each borrowing country receives a stochastic endowment each period. Let y = {yi }∀i
be the vector of endowments for each country in a period. These shocks follow a Markov
process with transition matrix π(y 0 , y). We assume that lenders face no additional shocks.
The endogenous aggregate states consist of the vector of countries’ debt holdings b = {bi }∀i
and their credit standing h = {hi }∀i . The economy-wide state s incorporates the endogenous
and exogenous states: s = {b, h, y}.4


2.1     Borrowing Countries
The government of each country is benevolent, and its objective is to maximize household util-
ity. The government trades one-period discount bonds with foreign lenders, decides whether
to repay or default on its debt, and after a default, decides whether or not to renegotiate
the debt. The government rebates back to households all the proceedings from its credit
operations in a lump-sum fashion. We label country i as Home and country −i as Foreign.
Below we describe in detail the problem for the home country. The problem for the foreign
country is symmetric.
    We consider a Markov equilibrium where the governments take as given future decisions.
The current strategy for the government at Home incorporates its repayment or renegotiation
decision di and its borrowing decision b0i . When the country is in good credit standing hi = 0,
it decides to repay the debt by setting di = 0. Only after deciding to repay can the country
choose its new borrowing b0i . If the government decides to default by setting di = 1, the
government cannot borrow and its credit standing changes to bad the following period. When
the home government is in bad credit standing hi = 1, it decides to renegotiate by setting
di = 0. Renegotiation changes the government’s credit standing to good the next period.
After renegotiation the government starts with zero debt, b0i = 0. The current strategy for
both countries is summarized by {b0 , d} = {b0i , di }∀i .
    The home bond prices qi (s, b0 , d) and recoveries φi (s, b0 , d) are functions that depend on the
current strategies for both countries as well as the aggregate state. In making decisions, the
governments take as given the bond price and recovery functions. The bond price function
compensates the lender for the risk-adjusted loss in case of default and depends on the
strategies of both countries and the aggregate states because the lenders’ pricing kernel, as
well as future defaults, renegotiations, and recoveries, depend on all of these variables. The
recovery function is the result of a bargaining process, the outcome of which depends on

   4
     Although we focus on two symmetric countries for computational tractability, the forces we emphasize
also apply for environments with additional and asymmetric borrowing countries.


                                                   7
the countries’ strategies and the aggregate state. Below we specify how the bond price and
recovery functions are determined.
    The current home consumption depends on the aggregate state and the current strategies
of both countries ci (s, b0 , d). Consider the case of the home country having good credit
standing, hi = 0, and an arbitrary strategy to repay di = 0 and to borrow b0i . Consumption
in this case is
                                    ci = yi − bi + qi (s, b0 , d)b0i .                  (1)

    Consumption for country i also depends on the state and strategy of the other country
by their effect on the price qi . Now consider consumption with a strategy to default, such
that di = 1. Default results in exclusion from trading international bonds and output costs
yi − yid , with yid ≤ yi . Consumption equals output during these periods:

                                                   ci = yid .                                  (2)

   Finally, consider the case when country i is in bad credit standing such that hi = 1. When
renegotiation is chosen, di = 0, the country pays the recovery φi (s, b0 , d), starts tomorrow with
zero debt, b0i = 0, and consumption is

                                            ci = yi − φi (s, b0 , d).                          (3)

Here, the state and strategy of the other country also affect home consumption by their effect
on the recovery. If the home country does not renegotiate, then consumption satisfies (2).
    We represent the home country’s payoffs as a dynamic programming problem. The gov-
ernment today takes as given all the decisions of future governments, which are summarized
by the continuation value function from tomorrow on vi (s0 ) when the state tomorrow is s0 .
The lifetime payoff of the home country today when the state is s for arbitrary current
strategies (b0 , d) is
                                                                 X
                       wi (s, b0 , d) = {u(ci (s, b0 , d)) + β          π(y 0 , y)vi (s0 )}.   (4)
                                                                  y0


   Tomorrow’s state s0 = {b0 , h0 , y 0 } depends on the current strategy of both countries.
Specifically, the future credit standing and debt tomorrow depend on the default and rene-
gotiation of each country, as follows:
                                        (
                                            1 if di = 1
                                h0i =                                   for all i              (5)
                                            0 otherwise

                                                       8
                                
                                   0
                                 bi if hi = 0 and di = 0
                                
                          b0i =   bi       if di = 1                        for all i                 (6)
                                
                                  0        otherwise
                                

    In our model, each borrowing country internalizes the effects its strategies have on bond
prices and recoveries. We consider an intraperiod game between the two countries that has
two stages. In the first stage, countries make their default and renegotiation decisions. In
the second stage, if countries chose to repay in the first stage, they make their borrowing
decisions.5
    To develop the intraperiod game, we start with the second borrowing stage after default
and renegotiation decisions d have been made. The nature of this subgame depends on the
credit standing of countries and their repayment decisions. When all countries are in good
credit standing and repay, {di = 0}∀i , equilibrium borrowing strategies B(s, d) = {Bi (s, d)}∀i
are Nash in that {Bi = xbi (B−i , s, d)}∀i , where xbi (b0−i , s, d) is the borrowing best response of
each country i for arbitrary borrowing strategies b0−i , given states s and repayment choices d,

                       xbi (b0−i , s, d) = {b0i : max
                                                   0
                                                      wi (s, b0 , d; vi (s0 ))} for all i.            (7)
                                                     bi


When each country starts with a bad credit standing or it defaults, it cannot borrow and
hence does not enter the second borrowing stage of the game. Here, the remaining country
i chooses its borrowing to satisfy (7), where b0−i equals b−i or 0 according to the default and
renegotiation choices given by (6).
     In the first stage of the game, each country i chooses its repayment strategy di tak-
ing as given the equilibrium borrowing strategies of the second stage. The equilibrium re-
payment strategies D(s) = {Di (s)}∀i are Nash in that {Di = xdi (D−i , s, B(s, D)}∀i , where
xdi (d−i , s, B(s, d)} is the repayment best response of each country i for arbitrary repayment
strategies d−i , given states s and taking into account the outcome of the second borrowing
stage B(s, d):

              xdi (d−i , s, B(s, d)) = {di : max wi (s, B(s, d), d; vi (s0 ))}           for all i.   (8)
                                                di


     The resulting outcome of the intraperiod game is summarized by the repayment and
borrowing functions {D(s)} and {B(s) = B(s, D(s))}, as well as the consumptions c(s) =
{ci (s)}∀i and values v(s) = {vi (s)}∀i .


   5
    We subdivide the intraperiod game between the two countries into a repayment and borrowing stage
because it substantially simplifies our computational algorithm as explained in the Appendix.


                                                          9
Definition 1. A Markov partial equilibrium takes as given bond price functions {qi (s, b0 , d)}∀i
and recovery functions {φi (s, b0 , d)}∀i and consists of equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} and
payoffs c(s) and v(s) such that
(1) Given future value functions v(s0 ), period equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} are the
solution of the intraperiod game such that they satisfy (6), (7), and (8).
(2) Equilibrium payoffs v(s) implied by equilibrium strategies {B(s), D(s)} are a fixed point

                          vi (s) = wi (s, B(s), D(s); vi (s0 ))                   for all i.


2.2    Lenders
Competitive lenders trade bonds with the two borrowing countries. Every period lenders
receive a constant payoff from the net operations of other loans rL L and deposits rd D, which
we summarize by yL = rL L − rd D. We assume that lenders honor all financial contracts.
   Lenders take as given the evolution of the aggregate state,

                                                      s0 = H(s)                                              (9)

and the corresponding decision rules for debt, default, and renegotiation, {B(s), D(s)}.
Lenders choose optimal consumption cL and loans to the borrowing countries `0 = {`0i }∀i ,
taking as given the prices of bonds Q = {Qi }∀i and recoveries Φ = {Φi }∀i . The value
function for lenders is given by
                                                                          X
                  v L (`, s) =           max 0              {u(cL ) + δ        π(y 0 , y)v L (`0 , s0 )}.   (10)
                                 {cL ,`0i if hi =hi =0}∀i
                                                                          y0


Lenders maximize their value subject to their budget constraint that depends on the credit
standing of each borrowing country and whether they repay,
                                                                                     
                                 X
                                                                       0        Φi `i
                  cL = y L +           (1 − Di (s)) (1 − hi )(`i − Qi `i ) + hi         ,                   (11)
                                   i
                                                                                 bi

the evolution of the endogenous states when they do not trade with each country,
                                 (
                                       `i if h0i = 1
                         `0i =                                                     for all i,               (12)
                                       0 if (hi = 1 and h0i = 0)

and the evolution of the aggregate state (9).
   Using the first order conditions and envelope conditions for the lenders’ problem, one can

                                                              10
show that bond prices satisfy
                               X
                        Qi =             m(s0 , s)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 )))        for all i,           (13)
                                s0


where ζi (s0 ) is the present value of recoveries and is defined recursively by

                                                    Φi (s0 )
                        X                                             
                                     0                   0    0      0
             ζi (s) =         m(s , s) (1 − Di (s )) 0 + Di (s )ζi (s )                       for all i.   (14)
                         s0
                                                      bi

and m(s0 , s) is the lenders’ stochastic discount factor or pricing kernel,

                                                         δπ(y 0 , y)u0 (cL (s0 ))
                                           m(s0 , s) =                            ,
                                                             u0 (cL (s))

where cL (s) is the equilibrium consumption in state s.
    The bond prices in (13) and the values of recoveries in (14) are easily interpretable. The
bond price contains two elements: the payoff in nondefault states Di (s0 ) = 0 and the payoff in
default states Di (s0 ) = 1. The lender discounts cash flows by the pricing kernel m(s0 , s), and
hence states are weighted by m(s0 , s). For every unit of loan `0i , the lender gets one unit in the
nondefault states and the value of recovery ζi (s0 ) in default states. The recovery value is the
expected payoff from defaulted debt the following period. It also contains two parts. If the
country renegotiates next period, Di (s0 ) = 0, and the value of recovery for every unit of loan
          0
is Φib(s0 ) . If the country does not renegotiate, Di (s0 ) = 1, and the present value of recovery
       i
is the discounted value of future recovery given by ζi (s0 ). These future recovery values are
weighted by the pricing kernel m(s0 , s), which implies that recovery values are weighted more
heavily for states s0 that feature a higher pricing kernel.
    The bond price compensates the lender for any covariation between its kernel and the
bond payoffs. If default happens in states when m(s0 , s) is high, the price contains a positive
risk premia for the default event. Moreover, if the value of recovery is low when m(s0 , s)
is high, the price also contains positive risk premia for the covariation of recovery. The
pricing kernel tends to be high when borrowing countries borrow large amounts and when
they default because these choices tend to lower cL .


2.3    Renegotiation Protocol
During renegotiation, countries renegotiate their debt with a committee of lenders. The
renegotiation protocol we consider is one in which the committee of lenders bargains simul-


                                                             11
taneously with all the countries using Nash bargaining.6
    To build the Nash bargaining problem, consider each borrowing country i paying a can-
didate recovery value φ̂i to lenders. The payoff for this country wi depends on the ag-
gregate state s and is defined as in (4) over arbitrary strategies (b0 , d). The payoff for
this borrowing country from renegotiation is then wi (s, b0 , d; φ̂i ) for this candidate value
of recovery φ̂i . The payoff for lenders from renegotiating and receiving candidate recov-
eries {φ̂i , φ̂−i } given aggregate state s and arbitrary strategies (b0 , d) equals the value of
the representative lender evaluated at the aggregate debt values and arbitrary strategies
VL (s, b0 , d; φ̂i , φ̂−i ) ≡ vL (b, s, b0 , d; φ̂i , φ̂−i ).
    If the parties do not reach an agreement, each country receives the value of renegotiation
failure denoted by vif (s). The value for renegotiation failure for a country with bad credit hi =
1 is permanent financial autarky with yi = yid such that vif (s{hi =1} ) = u(yid ) + βE vif (s0{hi =1} ).
The value for renegotiation failure for countries with good credit vif (s{hi =0} ) is the value aris-
ing in an environment with only one country borrowing from lenders. This value is character-
ized in the Appendix in the single-country Markov equilibrium. The value of renegotiation
failure for lenders is consistent with that of the borrowing countries, and hence it depends on
aggregate state s. When both countries have bad credit standing hi = h−i = 1, the value of
renegotiation failure for lenders is permanent autarky such that VLf (s{hi =1}∀i ) = u(yL )/(1−δ).
If only one borrowing country has bad credit, then the value from renegotiation failure for
lenders also arises from a single-country Markov equilibrium in the Appendix.
    The Nash bargaining problem solves for the recovery values {φ1 , φ2 } that maximize the
product of the surpluses of all parties such that
                        h                                  iθL Y h                               iθi
                     max VL (s, b0 , d; φ1 , φ2 ) − VLf (s)        wi (s, b0 , d; φi ) − vif (s)       (15)
                     φ1 ,φ2
                                                               i=1,2


subject to all parties receiving positive weighted surplus, θi (wi (s, b0 , d; φi ) − vif (s)) ≥ 0 and
θL (VL (s; φ1 , φ2 ) − VLf (s)) ≥ 0, and the law of motion for aggregate states (9). The bargaining
weights for borrowing countries depend on the credit standing, θi = θhi , such that only
countries with bad credit and with the option to renegotiate have positive weights. For
simplicity, we also impose zero recoveries for countries with good credit φi (hi = 0) = 0.7
    An important aspect of the renegotiation protocol we consider is the simultaneity in
bargaining between the committee of lenders and all countries. This renegotiation protocol
is reminiscent of the Brady renegotiation episode that included many countries in Latin
   6
      This strict simultaneous bargaining protocol has often been used in industrial organization models of
multifirms. See Dobson (1994) and Horn and Wolinsky (1988) for details.
    7
      This assumption is without loss. Any recovery payment from countries with hi = 0 does not affect
lenders’ consumption, as seen from lenders’ budget constraint 11.


                                                          12
America that were in default.


2.4     Functions for Bond Prices and Recoveries
The lenders’ problem and the renegotiation protocol determine the functions for bond prices
and recoveries. First consider the case when both countries are in good credit standing,
{hi = 0}∀i . Here, bond price functions q(s, b0 , d) = {qi (s, b0 , d)}∀i solve the demand system
determined by lenders’ first order conditions:
                              X
                       qi =         [m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 ))] for all i,   (16)
                               s0


where the state tomorrow s0 = {b0 , h0 , y 0 } depends on countries’ current strategies (b0 , d) and
the lenders’ pricing kernel m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d) is itself a function of prices, countries’ strategies,
and current and future states.
   Now consider the case when country i is in good credit standing and country −i is in bad
credit standing, hi = 0 and h−i = 1. The bond price function for country i and the recovery
function derived from (15) for country −i, {qi (s, b0 , d), φ−i (s, b0 , d)} solve

                                     X
                              qi =         [m(s0 , s; q, b0 , d)(1 − Di (s0 )(1 − ζi (s0 ))]       (17)
                                      s0

                        θ−i u0 (y−i − φ−i )           θ u0 (cL (s, b0 , d, qi , φ−i ))
                  h                               i=h L                                 i,
                                            f
                   w−i (s, b0 , d; φ−i ) − v−i (s)   VL (s, b0 , d; qi , φ−i ) − VLf (s)

where the lender’s consumption and values are evaluated for every strategy and corresponding
price and recovery.
    Finally, when both countries are in bad credit standing, {hi = 1}∀i recovery functions
φ(s, b0 , d) = {φi (s, b0 , d)}∀i solve

                         θi u0 (yi − φi )          θ u0 (cL (s, d; φi , φ−i )
                  h                           i=h L                              i for all i.      (18)
                      wi (s, d; φi ) − vif (s)   V L (s, d; φi , φ−i ) − VLf (s)

   The risk-free rate is defined in a standard way as the inverse of the expected pricing
kernel. We can define a risk-free rate function over arbitrary strategies (b0 , d) given state s
as
                                                      1
                                  rf (s, d, b0 ) =             ,                            (19)
                                                   E m(s, s0 )
where the prices and recoveries {qi , φi }∀i solve equations (16), (17), and (18).



                                                            13
2.5     Equilibrium
We focus on recursive Markov equilibria in which all decision rules are functions only of the
state variable s.


Definition 2. A recursive Markov equilibrium for this economy consists of (i) countries’
policy functions for repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {B(s), D(s), C(s)}, and values
v(s); (ii) lenders’ policy functions for lending choices and consumption {`0 (`, s), cL (`, s)} and
value function v L (`, s); (iii) the functions for bond prices and recoveries {q(s, b0 , d), φ(s, b0 , d)};
(iv) the equilibrium prices of debt Q(s) and recovery rates Φ(s); (v) the evolution of the ag-
gregate state H(s); and (vi) the lenders’ and borrowers’ values in the case of renegotiation
failure VLf (s) and v f (s) such that given b0 = `0 :



   1. Taking as given the bond price and recovery functions, the policy and value functions
      for countries satisfy the Markov partial equilibrium in Definition 1.

   2. Taking as given the bond prices Q(s), recoveries Φ(s), and the evolution of the aggregate
      states H(s), the policy functions and value functions for the lenders {`0 (`, s), cL (`, s),
      v L (`, s)} satisfy their optimization problem.

   3. Taking as given countries’ policy and value functions, bond price and recovery functions
      {q(s, b0 , d), φ(s, b0 , d)} satisfy (16), (17), and (18).

   4. The prices of debt Q(s) clear the bond market for every country,

                                            `0i (s) = Bi (s) for all i.


   5. The recoveries Φ(s) exhaust all the recovered funds,

                                     φi (s, B(s), D(s)) = Φi (s) for all i.


   6. The goods market clears,
                                        c1 + c2 + cL = y 1 + y 2 + y L .

   7. The law of motion for the evolution aggregate states (9) is consistent with countries’
      decision rules and shocks.



                                                    14
    8. The values in the case of renegotiation failure for lenders and borrowers{VLf (s), vif (s)∀i}
       arise from the single-country Markov equilibrium in Definition 3 in Appendix I.




3      Joint Defaults
In this section, we develop a simple two-period example to illustrate why countries have
incentives to default together.
     Consider a two-period version of our model with no uncertainty, where countries have
                                                                                         c1−σ −1
identical endowment paths y and y 0 . The lenders’ payoff function is u(cL ) = L1−σ . In
period 1, the two countries with debt bi and b−i are in good credit standing and are deciding
whether to repay their current debt or default on it. If countries repay their debt, they choose
to borrow. In period 2, countries either repay their debts if they borrowed in period 1 or pay
the recovery φ0 if they defaulted in period 1. In this example without uncertainty, in period
2 countries with good credit always repay and countries with bad credit always renegotiate,
{d0i = 0}∀i . Default does not happen in equilibrium in period 2 because default would be
perfectly foreseen and the price of such a loan would be zero. Default incentives in period 2,
however, limit the borrowing possibilities for period 1. In particular, in period 1 countries
effectively face a borrowing limit b̄, which is the maximum repayment that countries would
be willing to make and equals the default penalty in period 2, b̄ = y 0 − y d , where y d < y 0 is
the income in case of default.
     In this example, we assume that β is sufficiently less than δ such that it is optimal for
countries to borrow to the limit in period 1. Hence, we abstract from the interdependence
across countries in the borrowing decisions and focus on the interdependence in their repay-
ment/default decisions. In this simplified environment, the relevant states for bond prices are
the debt states b and the default decisions of both countries d, {qi (b, d)}∀i . The relevant states
for recovery tomorrow are the credit standing of both countries h0 , which are determined by d,
{φ0i (h0 )}∀i . This example has these reduced states because we are assuming that endowments
are constant for the countries. Here again, we label i as Home and −i as Foreign.
     In period 1, each country repays and sets di = 0 if the value of repayment is greater than
the value of default:

              u(y − bi + qi (b, d)b̄) + βu(y 0 − b̄) ≥ u(y d ) + βu(y 0 − φ0i (h0 )) for all i.   (20)

    It is apparent that default is more likely for country i when debt bi is high, the price qi
is low, and the recovery tomorrow φ0i is low. The default decisions of the two countries are

                                                     15
linked because bond prices today and recoveries tomorrow depend on the decisions of both
countries through the lenders’ problem.
    It is useful to derive the home country’s default best response conditional on the foreign
country’s default decision, xdi (d−i , b). The foreign default decision affects the home country’s
future recovery φ0i and current debt price qi . We show that a foreign default today decreases
the home recovery φ0i because the effective bargaining power when two countries renegotiate
simultaneously with lenders is larger than when each country renegotiates alone.

Proposition 1. When two countries renegotiate simultaneously, recovery is smaller than
when one country renegotiates alone: φ0i (h0−i = 1) ≤ φ0i (h0−i = 0).

    Proof. See Appendix II. We label this effect the strategic renegotiation force. Intuitively,
this result arises because lenders are willing to accept lower recoveries in multiple-country
renegotiations to solve the two default episodes simultaneously.8 An important assumption
for this result is that each country will not renegotiate with lenders by itself in case of
renegotiation failure in the multiple-country renegotiation. This implicit agreement is optimal
for the borrowing countries because it allows them to pay lower recoveries.
    This result implies that a foreign default d−i = 1 increases the right-hand side of equation
(20) and thus increases the incentive to default for the home country.
    The second effect to consider is how a foreign default affects price qi through its impact
on the pricing kernel. This effect depends on the net capital flows that lenders forgo with
the foreign default, b−i − q−i b̄. The larger the foreign forgone capital flows, the higher the
increase in the pricing kernel with a foreign default. We label this effect the pricing kernel
effect. The following proposition shows that capital flows are increasing with b−i , and the
effect of a foreign default is increasingly detrimental for qi the higher is b−i .

Proposition 2. Home bond prices increase with the foreign country’s debt when the foreign
country repays: qi (b, d) is increasing in b−i when d−i = 0.

    Proof. See Appendix II.
    As in single-country default models, the home country will default when its current debt
bi is sufficiently high. It is useful to consider two home debt cutoffs, b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) and
b̂(b−i , d−i = 1), which depend on the foreign state and default decision. Home defaults when
its debt level is above these two cutoffs.
   8
    The outcome that default costs are lower when many borrowers are in default is also present in envi-
ronments with bailouts increasing in the number of borrowers in default, as in Schneider and Tornell (2004),
and when there are limits on the ability to liquidate when many borrowers are in default, as in Arellano and
Kocherlakota (2014).


                                                    16
             b   i                                                                                     b   i

                                            Dependency	  zone	  
                                                                                                                                           di = 1
                                                                                                                      di = 0
                         di = 0            di = 0 if d        i   =0                                              d        =1
                                                                                                                                       d    i   =1
                                                                       di = 1                                          i
                                            di = 1 if d       i   =1
                                                                                                                                     Mul$ple	  equilibrium	               di = 1
                                                                                                                                    di = 0, d     i   =0                d    i   =1
                                                                                          b̂ i (bi , di = 0)          di = 0
                                                                                                                                    di = 1, d     i   =1
                                                                                                                  d    i   =0
                                                                                          b̂ i (bi , di = 1)

                                                                                                                     di = 0         di = 0                    di = 1
                                                                                                                 d    i    =0       di = 0                d    i   =0


                      b̂(b i , d   i   = 1) b̂(b i , d    i   = 0)              bi                             b̂(b i , d       = 1) b̂(b i , d
                                                                                                                            i                         i   = 0)                        bi

                     (a) Home Best Response                                                                            (b) Equilibrium


                                                                  Figure 1: Financial Contagion

     The effects of a foreign default on the price qi and the future recovery φ0i imply that
b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) is increasing in b−i and that b̂(b−i , d−i = 1) is independent of b−i . The ranking
of b̂(b−i , d−i = 0) and b̂(b−i , d−i = 1) at b−i = 0 depends on the details of the utility of lenders.
We assume that the strategic renegotiation force is strong enough such that b̂(b−i = 0, d−i =
0) > b̂(b−i = 0, d−i = 1).
     To summarize this analysis, Figure 1(a) plots the home best responses for default as
a function of its own debt level bi and the foreign country’s debt level b−i conditional on
the foreign default decision d−i . For sufficiently low (or high) levels bi , the home country
always repays (or defaults) independently of the foreign decision. For intermediate levels of
bi , however, the home country repays only if the foreign country repays. We label this region
the dependency zone. By symmetry, the best response of the foreign country is identical to
that of the home country, such that for intermediate levels of debt, the foreign country repays
only if the home country repays.
     Figure 1(b) illustrates the equilibrium in this example by considering both best response
functions. The figure shows that in the dependency zones, both countries have joint repay-
ments and joint defaults. Consider the dependency zone for country 1. When the foreign debt
is low enough, the foreign repayment guarantees a home repayment. For high foreign debt,
a foreign default guarantees a home default. When the foreign debt is in the intermediate
region, our model features multiple equilibria: either both countries default or both countries
repay. Nevertheless, even in this region, the equilibrium features either joint defaults or joint
repayments.
     This example has highlighted the two forces that in our model lead to joint defaults due
to a common lender. The main idea is that foreign defaults lead to home defaults because


                                                                                     17
foreign defaults lead to lower future recoveries and tighter current bond prices for the home
country due to strategic renegotiation and the pricing kernel effects. Joint defaults and joint
repayments occur for fundamental and self-fulfilling reasons. In this example, however, we
have abstracted from debt dynamics, bond spreads, and have considered an arbitrary level
of initial debt. In practice, the level of debt is endogenous to countries’ decisions, and their
choices interact with defaults and renegotiations. In the following section, we analyze the
general dynamic model with endogenous borrowing and bond spreads.


4     Quantitative Analysis
This section presents the quantitative analysis of the model. We first describe the parametriza-
tion of the model and discuss the main mechanisms by analyzing how the bond price function
depends on the other country’s states and choices. We show that our model delivers comove-
ment between countries’ bond spreads, defaults, and recoveries. We then perform an event
analysis applied to Italy and Spain and find that our model can replicate the paths of bond
spreads seen in the data and the high spreads during 2012. In a counterfactual analysis, we
assess the contribution of contagion to the debt crisis in each country. Finally, we present a
comparative static exercise to decompose the forces driving the results.


4.1    Parametrization
Here we discuss the functional forms and parameter values used in the quantitative analysis.
We parameterize the model to reproduce data from Italy and Spain. We also use cross-
country data on recovery rates to inform other parameters.


Recovery Rates An important ingredient in our model is that recovery rates can vary with
the number of countries renegotiating. The parameters that control the mean and differential
recoveries in multiple relative to single-country renegotiations are the bargaining parameters
and the output costs from nonrenegotiation and default. We measure the empirical variation
of recoveries with the dataset in Cruces and Trebesch (2013), which compiles recovery rates
across 182 sovereign restructures for the period 1970-2010.
    To examine the relation between recovery rates and the number of countries renegotiating,
we group the years in the dataset based on the number of countries renegotiating in the
year. The number of countries renegotiating in each year ranges from one country to seven




                                              18
countries.9 Figure 2 plots the average recoveries as a function of the number of countries
renegotiating. The figure shows that, historically, recoveries have been lower when many
countries renegotiate ranging from about 0.7 when only one country renegotiates to about
0.5 when seven countries renegotiate.

                       .7
                       .65
                       .6
                       .55
                       .5
                       .45                       Recovery Rates




                             0           2                4                   6       8
                                             Number countries renegotiating

                                        Average Recovery              Fitted values




                                 Figure 2: Recovery Rates and Countries

   In our model, we can only distinguish recoveries in periods with single renegotiations from
recoveries in periods with multiple-country renegotiations. Using the cross-country data,
we define multiple-country renegotiation periods as those years with two or more countries
renegotiating and single-country renegotiation periods as those years with only one country
renegotiating. The difference in recoveries in the data between multiple and single-country
renegotiations is 16%, while the overall average recovery rate is 60%.10

Preferences and Technology We set the length of a period to one year. We assume
that the stochastic process for output for each borrowing country follows a log-normal AR(1)
process: log(yt+1 ) = ρ log(yt ) + εt+1 with E[ε2 ] = η 2 . The shock processes for the two
countries are identical and uncorrelated between each other. We discretize the shocks into
a nine-state Markov chain using a quadrature-based procedure (Tauchen and Hussey, 1991).
To set the volatility and persistence of this process, we use linearly detrended real GDP
for Italy and Spain for the period 1960 to 2015 and set these parameters to be the average

   9
      Cruces and Trebesch (2013) document multiple renegotiations for some of the default episodes. For
these we consider only the final renegotiation of the episode.
   10
      We found similar results using an alternative dataset of renegotiations provided by Benjamin and Wright
(2009). In this dataset, recovery rates are 13% lower in years with multiple-country renegotiations.


                                                        19
ones across the estimated values for the two countries.11 We normalize the mean output for
borrowing countries and lenders to 1.
                                                                            c1−σ
    The utility function for the borrowing countries and lenders is u(c) =       . We set the
                                                                           1−σ
risk aversion coefficient σ to 2, which is a common value used in real business cycle studies.
    For the output cost of default, we follow Chatterjee and Eiygungor (2012) in assuming
that it is controlled by two parameters {λ1 , λ2 } as follows

                                   y d = y − max{0, λ1 y + λ2 y 2 }.

   This state-dependent cost of default allows the model to deliver a differential recovery
between single and multicountry renegotiations as well as to generate reasonable levels of
bond spreads, as discussed by Chatterjee and Eiygungor (2012).

Moment Matching With these assumptions, the numerical specification of the model
requires values for five parameters: the lenders’ and borrowers’ discount rates {δ, β}, the
default costs {λ1 , λ2 }, and the borrower’s bargaining parameter θ. We choose these five
parameters in a moment-matching exercise to best fit five moments: an average risk-free
rate of 4%, a mean and standard deviation for bond spreads of 1.0% and 1.3%, an average
recovery of 60%, and a difference between recoveries in multiple-country renegotiations and
single-country renegotiations of 16%. Table 1 summarizes the parameter values. Spreads in
the model and data are defined as the difference between the country yield and the risk-free
rate spr = 1/q − rf . Recovery rates in the model are defined as the recovery relative to the
debt in default φ/b.
    The mean risk-free rate is calculated from the series for German five-year bond yields since
1980. For spreads, we use annual series of Italian and Spanish five-year Euro bonds since
2001. The mean and standard deviation for Italian spreads are 1.1 and 1.4, respectively. The
corresponding values for Spanish spreads are 0.9 and 1.2. The spreads moments we target
are the average ones across the values for the two countries.
    We solve the model as the limit of a finite horizon model in which each period the
borrowing countries’ equilibrium strategies are Nash, taking as given the future decisions
that are encoded in the future values. As in the simple example, for a certain region of the
state space, our model features multiple equilibria. We select the equilibrium that maximizes
the joint values for the two borrowing countries, v1 +v2 . The numerical algorithm is explained

  11
    To isolate the magnitude of the contagion channel, we consider an uncorrelated output process for the
benchmark. In the event analysis of the next section, however, we feed in the observed output comovement
and perform our main counterfactual.


                                                   20
                                  Table 1: Parameter Values
                                        Value                  Target

 Assigned parameters
 Shocks process                         ρ = 0.935, η = 0.027   Italy and Spain output
 Risk aversion                          σ=2                    Standard from literature

 Parameters from moment matching
 Output cost after default              λ1 = −0.168            Italy and Spain spread:
                                        λ2 = 0.186                  mean and standard deviation
 Bargaining power                       θ = 0.466              Recovery:
 Borrowers’ discount factor             β = 0.845                   mean and difference
 Lenders’ discount factor               δ = 0.96               Mean risk-free rate

in detail in the Appendix.
    Table 2 reports the results from our moment-matching exercise. Overall, the model fits
the data fairly well. In the model, the mean and volatility of the spread of 1.0% and 1.4%
are similar to those in the data of 1.0% and 1.3%. The average recovery in the model of
60% is equal to the average in the data. Recoveries in the model during multiple-country
renegotiations are 17% smaller than single-country renegotiations, close to the 16% difference
found in the data. Finally, the risk-free rate of 4% is similar in the model to the data.


                              Table 2: Moment-Matching Exercise
                                                   Data (%)    Model (%)

                    Mean spread                      1.0           1.0
                    Volatility spread                1.3           1.4
                    Mean recovery                    60             60
                    Multiple-country recovery        -16           -17
                    Mean risk-free rate              4.0           4.1




    Although the calibrated moments are jointly controlled by all parameters, certain param-
eters affect certain moments more. The mean and volatility of spreads are mainly controlled
by the borrowers’ discount factor and the output costs of default. The mean recovery and
the recovery difference are controlled by the bargaining power and also by the output costs
of default because these are also the costs from renegotiation failure. The mean risk-free rate
is mostly determined by the lenders’ discount factor.

                                              21
4.2    Model Mechanisms
Before comparing our model to other aspects of the European debt crisis, we explore the
model’s mechanisms for contagion. We focus on how the states and choices of one country,
the foreign country, affect the spreads, default, and recovery rates of the other country, the
home country.
   We first illustrate the spread schedules for the home country as a function of its borrowing
and the foreign country’s output, borrowing, and default choice. We then show how average
spreads, default probabilities, and recovery rates vary for the home country when the foreign
country has low spreads, when it has high spreads, when it defaults, or when it renegotiates.
Finally, we present impulse response functions to a decrease in output in the foreign country
and show that both foreign and home spreads increase.

Spread Schedules. Each borrowing country i faces bond price schedules qi (s, b0 , d) that
depend on the aggregate states s as well as the borrowing and default choices for both
countries (b0 , d) because these variables affect country i’s default probability and recovery
rate, and also the lenders’ pricing kernel. We define the spread schedule for each country as
the difference between the country’s yield and the risk-free rate 1/qi (s, b0 , d) − rf (s, b0 , d).
    We plot the spread schedules for the home country and show that foreign choices and
states affect the home schedules. The schedule for the home country is tight when the
foreign country defaults, borrows a large amount, or is in a recession.
    Figure 3 plots the spread schedules for the home country as a function of its borrowing
level b0i , for states when both countries are in good credit hi = h−i = 0. For the baseline
schedule, we set the level of the output and debt states for both countries to be at the mean
level, and the borrowing level for the foreign country to be at the optimal level b0−i = B(s, d).
As is standard in dynamic models of debt and default, home spreads increase with large
home borrowing because default is more likely when debt is high.
    We also graph the spread schedules for alternative states and choices of the foreign country,
keeping the other states as in the baseline. As the figure shows, when the foreign country
borrows a larger amount, 20% larger than optimal, the schedule at home tightens. When
the foreign country defaults, the schedule further tightens. When the foreign country is in a
recession, with output 5% lower than the baseline, the schedule at home is also tighter.
    To illustrate the magnitudes of these changes, consider the home country borrowing 8%
of output. For the baseline setting, the spread is less than 1%; if the foreign country defaults,
the spread jumps to 20%; if the foreign country enters a recession, the spread increases to
about 7%.


                                                22
    The foreign country’s states and choices affect the home spread schedule because they
change the home country’s probability of defaulting the next period as well as its recovery
conditional on defaulting. When the foreign country borrows a lot or is in a recession, its next
period’s default probability rises, which increases the home default probability because of the
strategic renegotiation and pricing kernel channels. Moreover, the fact that recoveries are
lower during multiple-country renegotiations further increases the spreads at home ex-ante.
    An actual foreign default also tightens the home schedule for two reasons: a rise in the
lenders’ pricing kernel and a higher home default probability the next period. A foreign
default lowers lenders’ consumption, which increases the lenders’ kernel and hence the home
spread. A foreign default this period can also lead to a higher home default probability the
next period because the foreign country can choose to delay renegotiation such that both
countries exploit the lower recovery rate arising from joint renegotiations.12

                                                 Spread Schedule
                               25


                               20                                  foreign default


                               15
                                                large foreign borrowing
                     Percent




                               10
                                               low foreign income

                               5


                               0
                                                                          baseline

                               -5
                                    0.05       0.06         0.07            0.08     0.09
                                                        Debt

                                           Figure 3: Spread Schedule

    Of course, the optimal borrowing and default choices for the home country change in
response to different foreign strategies and states. As is typical in models of borrowing and
default, tight spread schedules lead to less borrowing. This endogenous borrowing response
weakens the comovement of equilibrium spreads in the model. In fact, home spreads in
equilibrium can increase or decrease in response to high foreign spreads depending on the
strength of the endogenous borrowing response relative to the shift in the schedule. Very
  12
     Broner et al. (2006) and Gonzales and Levy (2008) find empirical support for these mechanisms in cross
country data. They document that a change in the risk appetite of the investors, which in our model maps
into changes in the lenders’ kernel, have important effects on sovereign bond spreads and on the portfolio
allocation of investors.


                                                       23
tight spread schedules can also induce an actual default because they make it harder to roll
over any existing debt. We analyze these equilibrium responses next.

Spreads, Default Probabilities, and Recoveries. We now report simulation results
across the limiting distribution of states in our model. In Table 3, we report spreads, default
probabilities, and recovery rates for the home country in the limiting distribution conditional
on whether the foreign country is in good credit or bad credit. We divide the good credit
foreign states into states with low foreign spreads, defined as below the 25th percentile, which
equals 0.1%, high foreign spreads, defined as above the 75th percentile, which equals 1.6%,
and foreign default. Home spreads and probabilities of default are only observed in states
when the home country is in good credit standing, while recovery rates are only observed in
states when the home country is in bad credit standing.


                       Table 3: Comovement in Limiting Distribution
                                Foreign good credit      Foreign bad credit
       Home             Low spreads High spreads Default

       Spread                0.7            1.8          1.3             1.0
       Default prob.         0.8            1.4          47              2.2
       Recovery              67             71           78              43




    Table 3 shows that when the foreign country has low spreads, spreads at home are also
low and on average equal to 0.7%. When foreign spreads are high, home spreads are also
high and on average equal to 1.8%. Default probabilities at home are also lower when the
foreign country has low spreads relative to when the foreign country has high spreads, 0.8%
and 1.4%, respectively. The default probability, however, jumps up to 47% when the foreign
country actually defaults. Although contagion in sovereign risk and default is sizable, a large
fraction of variation in home spreads and default probabilities results from changing domestic
conditions. Consider, for example, the case when the foreign probability of default is 100%,
which by construction is the case in the column labeled Default in Table 3. Here, the home
country is more likely to repay than to default: 53% relative to 47% of the time.
    These comovements arise in our model due to the shapes of the functions for spreads
and recoveries. As illustrated above, the spread schedules are tight when the foreign country
borrows a large amount or is in a recession. These cases are associated with high foreign

                                              24
spreads in equilibrium. In response to the tight schedules, the home country has higher
spreads and default probabilities in equilibrium. The very tight spread schedules during
foreign defaults also induce home defaults.
    Foreign states also have large effects on the recoveries that the home country pays. In
states when the foreign country is repaying the debt and has low spreads, recoveries are
67%; they are somewhat higher, equal to 71%, when the foreign country is repaying and
has high spreads. Recovery rates are the highest, equal to 78%, when the foreign country
defaults, and they are the lowest, equal to 51%, when the foreign country is in bad credit and
renegotiates together with the home country. The probability of renegotiation is 100% for
the home country, except during periods when the foreign country defaults; then it collapses
to 1%. Renegotiation is delayed with a foreign default because the home country prefers to
wait and renegotiate together with the foreign country to pay a lower recovery.
    The recovery functions play an important role for the comovements. The recovery function
is most lenient when the foreign country is also renegotiating because here the countries
exert a higher bargaining power, which leads to low recoveries. The recovery function for the
home country is tightest when the foreign country defaults because this default increases the
lenders’ marginal utility, which increases the lenders’ marginal surplus from the renegotiation
with the home country.
    The model implications on the ranking of home recovery rates based foreign defaults and
foreign renegotiations and on the simultaneity of default and renegotiations across countries
are borne out in the cross-country data. As we will see in Section 5, the historical cross-
country data feature recovery rates that are not only low when many countries renegotiate
but also high when many countries default. These data also feature simultaneous defaults
and renegotiations across countries.

Impulse responses. Having presented how spreads for one country depend on the other
country on average, we now study these links by presenting impulse responses to shocks. We
consider the responses of home and foreign spreads to a negative shock to the foreign output.
    We construct the impulse response functions in our nonlinear model following Koop et al.
(1996). We simulate 1, 000 paths for the model for 1, 000 periods. From periods 1 to 500, the
aggregate shocks follow their underlying Markov chains. In period 501, the impact period,
we reduce each of the values of foreign output y−i across the paths by 3%, which is about
half of the standard deviation of the shock. From period 501 on, the aggregate shocks follow
the conditional Markov chains. The impulse responses plot the average, across the 1, 000
paths, of the variables from period 501 to 512 conditional on countries being in good credit


                                              25
standing hi = h−i = 0 and not defaulting di = d−i = 0. The output values for the foreign
and home countries are reported in percentage deviations from their value at t = 500, while
the foreign and home spreads are in percentage points.

                           Output                                 Spread
               1
                       Home                         1.4
               0
                                                                      Foreign
              -1                                    1.2

              -2
                                                     1            Home
              -3        Foreign

              -4                                    0.8
                   1   3   5   7     9 11                 1   3   5    7    9 11
                           Periods                                Periods
                                   Figure 4: Impulse Responses

    Figure 4 graphs the impulse response functions. In the left panel, we plot the output
values for the foreign and home countries, which are our shocks. We label the impact period
as 1 in the figure. In the impact period, foreign output drops by about 3%. From then on,
output returns to its mean following its Markov chain. The home output remains unchanged
throughout. In the right panel, we plot the spreads for the foreign and home countries. In
response to a decline in foreign output of 3%, foreign spreads spike 0.45% (45 basis points)
on impact. After the impact, foreign spreads fall substantially and return to their average
level as output recovers. This negative comovement between output and spreads is typical
in debt and default models.
    Most importantly, this figure shows that home spreads also rise in response to a decline in
foreign output even though the home country faces no domestic shock. In the impact period,
home spreads increase about 0.2% (20 basis points) and then return to their average level.
The increase in home spreads is about 40% that of the rise in spreads in the foreign country
where the shock originated.


4.3    Event Analysis
We have shown that our model features contagion across sovereign spreads, as spreads at
home rise when foreign spreads rise even if home conditions do not change. We now turn
to compare the model predictions for the spread comovement during the debt crises in Italy

                                               26
and Spain. Unlike the impulse response exercise, during the event both countries experienced
recessions. We feed into the model a sequence of shock realizations that replicate the time
paths of output in these two countries and then compare the resulting model’s time paths of
spreads to data. In this event analysis, the resulting correlation in spread paths arises because
of contagion and also because of a deterioration in domestic conditions in both countries.
    In Figure 5 we plot the data and model paths for output from 2006 to 2015.13 In the
beginning of the event, output for Italy and Spain was above trend, peaking at about 5%
and 10% above trend in 2007 and 2008. Starting in 2009, output for both countries fell
substantially. From peak to trough, output in Italy and Spain fell close to 10% and 15%,
respectively.
                                                     Output
                              1.1


                                                 Spain


                             1.05


                                        Italy

                               1




                             0.95
                                2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                         Year

                                          Figure 5: Event Output

    For the model series in Figure 5, we follow a procedure similar to the one we used for the
impulse responses and feed in shocks such that the model replicates the output series in the
data. We simulate 1, 000 paths for 1, 000 periods. For the first 500 periods the aggregate
shocks follow their underlying Markov chains. Period 501 is the first period of the event,
which corresponds to 2006. From 2006 on, we feed into the model the sequence of shocks
that best approximate the paths of output. Specifically for each period and country, we feed
in the two grid points that are closest to the data, namely the closest grid point above and
below the data. The fraction of draws for each of these two grid points is based on the linear
distance to the data point. The model output paths equal the average output across the
simulated paths, which by construction replicate the data.
    We now analyze the predictions for spreads. The left panel of Figure 6 plots the data and
model time paths for spreads in Italy, and the right panel plots those for Spain. The model
  13
       Output in the data is reported relative to a 2% trend.


                                                         27
                    Spread: Italy                          Spread: Spain
           5                                          5
           4                                          4
           3       Model                              3
           2                                          2         Data

           1                                          1
                              Data                                     Model
           0                                          0
            06        09          12        15        06        09          12   15
                           Year                                      Year
                                       Figure 6: Event Spread

paths are also averages across the simulations. The data paths illustrate the large increases
in spreads for both countries from about 0 to about 5% for Italy and 4% for Spain during
2012. Spreads decrease starting in 2013 to less than 1% in 2015.
    The model paths for spreads replicate the data paths fairly well. During 2006 and 2007,
spreads are close to zero for both countries in the model and in the data. In 2009 spreads
rise in the model as in the data, although for the case of Italy, the magnitude of the increase
in the model is larger than that observed in the data. Spreads in the model peak in 2012 as
in the data. The model predicts a spread of about 4.5% for Italy and 4% for Spain, close to
the magnitudes observed in the data. Finally, the model matches the data during 2014 and
2015 as spreads decreased to similar magnitudes as in the data.
    As the figure shows, spreads across these two countries are correlated in the model and
the data. The model predicts a correlation of spreads during this event of 0.9, close to the
data correlation of 0.95. The comovement in spreads arises in the event because of two rea-
sons. First, domestic output fell substantially for both countries during this period, as seen
in Figure 5. This positive comovement in output naturally generates comovement in spreads
because default probabilities rise for both countries when their outputs fall. Second, the con-
tagion mechanisms in our model make spreads correlated as increases in default probability
in one country induce a higher default probability in the other country.
    We now turn to assess the contribution of contagion during this event by performing coun-
terfactual experiments with our model. In these counterfactuals, we evaluate how spreads in
Italy (or Spain) would have evolved during the event absent a debt crisis in Spain (or Italy).
To eliminate the debt crisis in Spain (or Italy) in the counterfactual, we feed in a flat output

                                                 28
path for Spain (or Italy) that does not contain a recession.
    More precisely, for the first counterfactual, we feed in the event the exact same sequence
of shocks to Italy as in the benchmark analysis, but hold the Spanish output at its mean
throughout the event. In the second counterfactual, we feed in the shocks for Spain as in the
benchmark while holding constant Italy’s output.
    We then evaluate the resulting spreads for Italy and Spain and compare them with the
benchmark model paths. The difference between the counterfactual spreads and the bench-
mark spreads provides a measurement for the contribution of the Spanish (Italian) debt crisis
to the Italian (Spanish) spreads due to contagion.

                    Spread: Italy                        Spread: Spain
           5                                       5
           4            Bench                      4
           3                                       3         Bench

           2                                       2
           1                                       1
                       Counterfactual
           0                                       0         Counterfactual

            06        09          12     15        06       09          12     15
                           Year                                  Year
                           Figure 7: Event Spread: Counterfactual

    In Figure 7 we compare the path of spreads in the benchmark with the path in the
counterfactuals. Consider first the left panel, where we plot the counterfactual spread path
for Italy and compare it with the benchmark path. The rise in spreads for 2009 in the
counterfactual is very similar to the benchmark. In contrast, the counterfactual spread rises
more modestly in 2012, reaching only 2%, about half of the increase in the benchmark. This
result implies that the recession and debt crisis in Spain had a negative impact on Italy’s
spreads during 2012, accounting for about half of the 2012 spreads. Finally, during 2015,
Spain’s recovery helps Italy; absent Spain’s recovery, spreads in Italy would have remained
quite elevated.
    The right panel in Figure 7 presents the counterfactual exercise for Spain. The increase
in Spanish spreads in the counterfactual is also more muted, reaching about 2.5% in 2012,
or about two-thirds of the level in the benchmark. This result implies that the recession
and debt crisis in Italy account for about one-third of the elevated spreads in Spain. Italy’s

                                              29
smaller contribution to Spain can be explained by the fact that Italy experienced a smaller
output decline than Spain during the event.
    In sum, our model implies that bond spreads during the debt crises in Italy and Spain
responded both to the deterioration in domestic conditions and to contagion through financial
links. The debt crisis in each country contributed to the debt crisis in the other country, and
this contribution accounted for a sizable fraction of the observed increase in spreads.


4.4    Comparative Statics
The comovement in spreads arises in our benchmark model because of two main channels:
the strategic renegotiation channel and the pricing kernel channel. Recall that the strategic
renegotiations among borrowing countries generate correlated recoveries that lead to corre-
lated defaults. Also, lenders’ concavity generates a varying pricing kernel, which is common
for the borrowing countries and depends on their choices. In this section, we quantify the
importance of these channels in generating our results and find that the interaction between
strategic renegotiations and the pricing kernel accounts for much of the comovement in bond
spreads.
    To understand these two channels, we analyze two stripped-down versions of our model.
We compute a linear model with risk neutral lenders where the pricing kernel is constant.
The interactions between borrowing countries in this model arise only because of the strategic
renegotiations and correlated recoveries. We also compute a zero recovery model where we
shut down the strategic renegotiations and assume zero recovery after default. The results in
the benchmark model relative to the stripped-down models highlight how the two channels
interact.
    Table 4 reports the sensitivity results for the two versions of our model as well as the
benchmark results. The table reports comovements and means of the variables of interest in
the limiting distribution for each model.
    Consider first the results for the linear model. The linear model is identical to the bench-
mark, except that the risk aversion parameter for lenders is 0. This model generates a positive
correlation between home and foreign spreads of 0.13, which is about one-fifth of the corre-
lation in the benchmark. The differences in recoveries in multiple renegotiations relative to
single renegotiations of -0.18 are similar to the benchmark. These results indicate that the
strategic renegotiation force by itself leads to a moderate correlation in spreads of the two
countries. In terms of means, the linear model generates larger mean spreads and default
probabilities, yet very comparable mean recoveries. The higher default probabilities in the
linear model arise because the bond price schedules for the two countries are more lenient

                                              30
here, as more borrowing does not increase the pricing kernel absent default.
    Now consider the results from the zero recovery model. This model is identical to the
benchmark, except that the recovery function is replaced with zero. As Table 4 shows, in this
model the correlation of bond spreads between the home and foreign country in the limiting
distribution is small and equal to 0.02, while the mean spread and default probability are
much larger than in the benchmark. The zero recovery model generates bond price schedules
that are much more tight and steep than in the benchmark. Equilibrium debt levels in this
model drop by a factor of 6, from about 6% of output in the benchmark to less than 1% when
recovery is zero. This property implies that the zero recovery model not only eliminates the
strategic renegotiation force but also largely eliminates the varying pricing kernel force, as
with very small debt levels, defaults barely affect the pricing kernel. In fact, the standard
deviation of the lenders’ consumption drops from 1.3% in the benchmark to 0.6% in the
model with zero recovery.
    As the table shows, the cross-country bond spread correlation of 0.63 in the benchmark
model arises mainly from the interaction of strategic renegotiation and the time varying
pricing kernel, as each channel by itself gives at most a modest positive correlation. The
reason is that the recoveries present with strategic renegotiation allow for larger debt levels
in the benchmark, which in turn magnifies the pricing kernel channel of contagion.

                              Table 4: Decomposing Mechanism
       Limiting Distribution (%)                   Benchmark    Linear   Zero Recovery

       Correlations home and foreign spreads (%)       63          13          2
       Recovery Multiple-Single                        -17        -18          0
       Means
        Spread                                         1.0       2.9          4.5
        Default probability                            2.1       6.8          3.9
        Recovery                                       60         63          0




5    Broader Empirical Results
The analysis above focused on the experiences of Italy and Spain during the recent European
debt crisis and on the comovement in bond spreads of these countries. In this section, we
provide empirical support for additional implications of our model using a broader dataset
on defaults, renegotiations, and recoveries. As described above and illustrated in Table 3,
our model contains the following additional empirical predictions:

                                              31
  1. Default probabilities are higher when other countries are defaulting and lower when
     other countries are renegotiating.

  2. Renegotiation probabilities are lower when other countries are defaulting and higher
     when other countries are renegotiating.

  3. Recovery rates are lower when other countries are renegotiating and higher when other
     countries are defaulting.

    We show that these empirical implications are consistent with the historical experiences of
countries. We assemble a panel dataset of 77 developing countries from 1970 to 2011, which
includes all the countries that have experienced a default event as defined by Standard and
Poor’s (S&P) or are in the Cruces and Trebesch (2013) dataset in addition to all emerging
market countries.
    We measure whether the fraction of countries that are in default and the fraction of
those that are renegotiating correlate with the probability that any one country i defaults or
renegotiates at time t. Specifically, we run the following two linear probability regressions:

defaultit [renegotiationit ] = αi +βD Frac Defaultit +βR Frac Renegotiateit +βdy Debt/GDPit +εit .


    The variable defaultit is a binary and equals 1 if the country is in default according to
S&P and zero otherwise. The variable renegotiationit equals 1 if a country that is in default
renegotiates the debt and is no longer in default according to S&P and equals zero if it is
in default without renegotiating the debt. The variables Frac Defaultit and Frac Renegotiateit
are the fraction of countries, not including i, that are in default or are renegotiating in the
dataset. To smooth discrete changes in these variables, we use five-year moving averages.
Finally, we include as additional controls country fixed effects and the level of debt to output
for each country and year. The variable Debt/GDPit is equal to the external debt to GDP
ratio and is taken from the World Development Indicators database.
    The first additional implication of our theory predicts that in the default regression,
βD > 0 and βR < 0. Moreover, as in standard default models, we expect βdy > 0. The
second additional implication of the theory predicts that in the renegotiation regression,
βD < 0 and βR > 0. The country fixed effects absorb the average default and renegotiation
frequency for each country.
    A main channel in our model for the default/renegotiation comovement is the variation in
recoveries. As already shown in the calibration of the model, in the data recoveries are lower
on average in years with multiple renegotiations. Here we extend this analysis and examine

                                               32
how recovery varies continuously with the two variables, Frac Defaultit and Frac Renegotiateit ,
as well as with Debt/GDPit . We run a similar regression as follows:



       recoveryit = α + γD Frac Defaultit + γR Frac Renegotiateit + γdy Debt/GDPit + εit .


    The variable recoveryit equals the recovery rate estimates from the Cruces and Trebesch
(2013) dataset.14 Our theory predicts that γD > 0 and γR < 0. Moreover, as in other models
of renegotiation, our model predicts that γdy < 0.



                                Table 5: Cross-Country Regressions
                                           Default       Renegotiation       Recovery
               Fraction in Defaultit       1.36∗∗∗       -0.88∗∗∗            0.92∗∗∗
               Fraction Renegotiatingit    -2.13∗        4.60∗∗              -7.39∗∗∗
               Debt/GDPit                  0.11∗∗        -0.03∗              -0.21∗∗∗
               Country fixed effects       Yes           Yes                 No

               Adjusted R2                 0.28          0.06                0.34
               Observations                2682          552                 139




    Table 5 reports the regression results. All standard errors are clustered at the country
level. The coefficients on all the independent variables of interest have the sign predicted
by the theory and are significant. The results in the default regression indicate that a 1%
increase in the fraction of other countries in default increases the default probability of any
one country by 1.4%, whereas an increase of 1% in the fraction of other countries renegotiating
decreases the default probability by 2.2%. More indebted countries are also more likely to
be in default. An increase of 10% in Debt/GDPit increases the default probability by 1%. In
the renegotiation equation, an increase of 1% in the fraction of countries in default decreases
the renegotiation probability by 0.9%, whereas a 1% increase in the fraction of countries
renegotiating increases the renegotiation probability by 4.6%. The debt to GDP ratio has
no effect on the renegotiation probability. The results in the recovery equation say that
a 1% increase in the fraction of countries in default increases recovery by a bit less than
1%, whereas an increase in the fraction of renegotiators increases recovery by 7.4% from an

  14
     We use the recoveries in Cruces and Trebesch (2013) during the final renegotiations. The results are
similar if we use a weighted average recovery based on the partial renegotiations.


                                                   33
average of 60%. The Appendix contains additional robustness results as well as descriptive
statistics for all the variables. It shows that the main results are maintained when controlling
for world GDP as well as for selection issues.
    The historical patterns across countries documented in this section are consistent with
our theory. Countries default together and renegotiate together because recoveries are more
favorable during multiple country renegotiations.


6        Conclusion
We have developed a multi-country dynamic model of borrowing and default that generates
sovereign risk contagion across countries. Countries are linked to one another because they
borrow, default, and renegotiate with common lenders. A foreign default worsens the home
country’s bond prices and lowers the home country’s future debt recovery rates in the event
of a renegotiation. These two forces can trigger a home default because rolling over the debt
is more difficult and renegotiating the defaulted debt is more attractive. In a quantitative
application to the 2012 European debt crisis, we find that these forces are quantitatively
important for generating the observed correlation of bond spreads.
    Understanding the reasons for the simultaneity of costly sovereign debt crises across coun-
tries is important for the policy approaches to these crises. Our work points to strategic
complementarities in borrowing, default, and renegotiation as powerful drivers for the simul-
taneity of crises. In this context, financial policies such as bailout guarantees and interna-
tional bankruptcy courts can potentially prove useful improving the efficiency of sovereign
debt markets.15 Future work exploring in detail policies aimed at reducing sovereign risk
contagion seems fruitful.



References
 [1] Aguiar, M., and G. Gopinath (2006). Defaultable Debt, Interest Rates and the Current
     Account. Journal of International Economics, 69(1): 64–83.

 [2] Arellano, C. (2008). Default Risk and Income Fluctuations in Emerging Economies.
     American Economic Review, 98(3): 690–712.


    15
     In the context of self-fulfilling debt crises, Roch and Uhlig (2016) show that bailout guarantees improve
the efficacy of defaultable sovereign debt markets.


                                                     34
 [3] Arellano, C., and N. Kocherlakota (2014). Internal Debt Crises and Sovereign Defaults.
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 68,(Supplement): S68–S80.

 [4] Benjamin, D., and M. Wright (2009). Recovery Before Redemption: A Theory of Delays
     in Sovereign Debt Renegotiations. Manuscript, State University of New York at Buffalo.

 [5] Bocola, L. and A. Dovis (2016). Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises: A Quantitative Analysis.
     NBER Working Paper 22694.

 [6] Borri, N., and A. Verdelhan (2009). Sovereign Risk Premia. Manuscript, LUISS Guido
     Carli University.

 [7] Broner, F., Gelos, G., and Reinhart, C. (2006). When in peril retrench: Testing the
     portfolio channel of contagion. Journal of International Economics 69(1): 203-230.

 [8] Calvo, G., and E. Mendoza (2000). Rational contagion and the globalization of securities
     markets. Journal of International Economics, 51(1): 79-113.

 [9] Chatterjee, S., and B. Eyigungor (2012). Maturity, Indebtedness, and Default Risk.
     American Economic Review, 102(6): 2674-99.

[10] Cole, H. L., and T. J. Kehoe (2000). Self-Fulfilling Debt Crises. Review of Economic
     Studies, 67(1), 91–116.

[11] Cruces, J. J., and C. Trebesch (2013). Sovereign Defaults: The Price of Haircuts. Amer-
     ican Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3): 85-117.

[12] Dobson, P. W.(1994). Multifirm Unions and the Incentive to Adopt Pattern Bargaining
     in Oligopoly. European Economic Review, 38(1): 87-100.

[13] Eaton, J., and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and
     Empirical Analysis. Review of Economic Studies, 48(2): 289–309.

[14] Gonzales, M., and Levy, E. (2006). Global factors and emerging market spreads. Eco-
     nomic Journal 118(533): 1917-1936.

[15] Horn, H., and A. Wolinsky (1988). Bilateral Monopolies and Incentives for Merger.
     RAND Journal of Economics, 19(3): 408-419.

[16] Kyle, A. S. and W. Xiong (2001). Contagion as a Wealth Effect. Journal of Finance,
     56(4): 1401-1440.


                                             35
[17] Koop, G., M. H. Pesaran, and S. M. Potter (1996). Impulse response analysis in nonlinear
     multivariate models. Journal of Econometrics, 74(1): 119-147.

[18] Lizarazo, S. V. (2013). Default Risk and Risk Averse International Investors. Journal of
     International Economics, 89(2): 317-330.

[19] Lorenzoni, G., and I. Werning (2013). Slow Moving Debt Crises. Working Paper no.
     13-18, MIT Department of Economics.

[20] Müller, A., K. Storesletten, and F. Zilibotti (2015). Sovereign Debt and Structural Re-
     forms. CEPR Discussion Paper DP10588.

[21] Park, J. (2013). Contagion of Sovereign Default Risk: The Role of Two Financial Fric-
     tions. Manuscript, University of Wisconsin-Madison.

[22] Pouzo. D., and I. Presno (2011). Sovereign Default Risk and Uncertainty Premia.
     Manuscript, University of California at Berkeley.

[23] Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogoff (2011). From Financial Crash to Debt Crisis. American
     Economic Review, 101(5): 1676-1706.

[24] Roch, F. and H. Uhlig (2016). The Dynamics of Sovereign Debt Crises and Bailouts.
     IMF Working Paper.

[25] Schneider, M., and A. Tornell (2004). Balance Sheet Effects, Bailout Guarantees and
     Financial Crises. Review of Economic Studies, 71(3): 883–913.

[26] Tauchen, G., and R. Hussey (1991). Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approx-
     imate Solutions to Nonlinear Asset Pricing Models. Econometrica, 59(2): 371-396.

[27] World Bank, World Development            Indicators,   http://data.worldbank.org/data-
     catalog/world-development-indicators.

[28] Yue, V. Z. (2010). Sovereign Default and Debt Renegotiation. Journal of International
     Economics, 80(2): 176-187.




                                             36
Appendix I. Auxiliary Models
One Large Country Model
     L
Let vi,f ail (`i , si ) be the value to the lender when trading only with country i:

                                                                               X
                   L
                  vi,f ail (`, si ) =           max          {u(cL ) + δ              π(yi0 , yi )vi,f
                                                                                                   L         0 0
                                                                                                       ail (` , si )},     (21)
                                        {dL ,`i if hi =h0i =0}
                                              0
                                                                                yi0


subject to its budget constraint,
                                                                                                        
                                                                           Φi `          0
                          cL = yL + [1 − Di (s)] (1 − hi )(` − Qi ` ) + hi                                   ,
                                                                           bi

the evolution of the endogenous states akin to equation (12), and a law of motion of aggregate
states for the case that country i is dealing alone with lenders s0i = Hf ail (si ). The optimal
solution of the lender is given by cL,f ail (`, si ) and `0f ail (`, si ).
    The problem for country i in the case when it trades alone with the lenders is similar
to one described in Section 2.1 with three main differences. First, its aggregate states are
only si = {bi , hi , yi }. Second, the price function qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ) and recovery φi,f ail (si , b0i , di )
depend only on its own states and its own strategies. Third, the intraperiod Nash game
between countries is absent. The decision rules for this problem are labeled Bi,f ail (si ) for
borrowing and Di,f ail (si ) for repayment. These decisions in turn determine the evolution of
the aggregate state s0i = Hf ail (si ).
    When hi = 0, the price function qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ) solves
                              X
                 qi,f ail =        mf ail (s0i , si ; qi,f ail , b0i , di ) [1 − Di,f ail (s0i )(1 − ζi,f ail (s0i ))] .   (22)
                              s0


Here, the decision rules of the country and the lender’s kernel are those corresponding to the
problem when country i trades alone with the lender.
   When the country is in bad credit standing and chooses to renegotiate, the recovery
function φi,f ail (si , di ) solves

                                θu0 (yi − φi,f ail )             (1 − θ)u0 (si , φi,f ail , di )
                                                               = L                           L
                                                                                                   .                       (23)
                         [vi (si ; φi,f ail ) − vi ,aut (yi )]  [V (si , φi,f ail , di ) − Vaut  ]

    We now describe the equilibrium
Definition 3. A single-country recursive Markov equilibrium consists of (i) country i’s policy
functions for repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {Bi,f ail (si ), Di,f ail (si ), Ci,f ail (si )}, and

                                                                  37
values vi,f ail (si ); (ii) lenders’ policy functions for lending choices and dividends {`0f ail (`, si ),
                                                     L
cL,f ail (`, si )} and value function vi,f             ail (`, si ); (iii) the functions for bond prices and recoveries
{qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ), φi,f ail (si , di )}; (iv) the equilibrium prices of debt Qi,f ail (si ) and recovery rates
Φf ail (si ); (v) the evolution of the aggregate state Hf ail (si ) such that given b0 = `0 :



    • Taking as given the bond price and recovery functions, country i’s policy functions for
      repayment, borrowing, and consumption, {Bi,f ail (si ), Di,f ail (si ), Ci,f ail (si )}, and values
      vi,f ail (si ) solves country i’s problem when it trades alone with the lenders.

    • Taking as given the bond prices Qf ail (si ), recoveries Φf ail (si ), and the evolution of
      the aggregate states Hf ail (si ), the policy functions and value functions for the lenders
      {`0f ail (`, si ), cL,f ail (`, si )}, vi,f
                                              L
                                                  ail (`, si )} satisfy lenders’ optimization problem in (21).


    • Taking as given countries’ policy and value functions, bond price and recovery functions
      {qi,f ail (si , b0i , di ), φi,f ail (si , di )} satisfy (22) and (23).

    • The prices of debt Qf ail (si ) clear the bond market, `0i,f ail (bi , si ) = Bi,f ail (si ).

    • The recoveries Φi,f ail (si ) exhaust all the recovered funds: φi,f ail (si , Di,f ail (si )) = Φf ail (si ).

    • The law of motion for the evolution aggregate states Hf ail (si ) is consistent with country
      i’s decision rules and shocks.


Small Country Model
The model for the small country is a one-country competitive version of the benchmark
model. This model is studied in Yue (2010), but here the risk-free rate is time varying and
depends on the evolution of the aggregate states. The recursive problem for the small country
takes as given the law of motion of aggregate states (9). Given the individual state (bs , ys , hs )
and aggregate state s, the small country’s problem is given by

      vs (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = max {(1 − ds )vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) + ds vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 0, , s)}.
                                  ds ={0,1}


    If it repays, the small country chooses optimal consumption and savings:

        vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = max
                                      0
                                        {u(ys − bs + qs (b0s , ys , s)b0s ) + βEvs (b0s , ys0 , h0s = 0, s0 )}.
                                    cs ,bs




                                                          38
If it defaults, the small country’s value is given by

                           vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 0, s) = {u(ysd ) + βEvs (bs , ys0 , h0s = 1, s0 )}.                                       (24)

     If the country is in bad credit standing, it chooses whether to renegotiate according to

        vs (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) = max {(1 − ds )vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) + ds vs1 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s)}.
                                       ds ={0,1}


Its renegotiation value depends on the recovery φs (bs , y, s) and is given by

                    vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s) = u(ys − φs (bs , y, s)) + βEvs (0, ys0 , h0s = 0, s0 ).

Without renegotiation, its value is the same as the default value given by equation (24).
   In equilibrium, bond price and recovery functions for the small country satisfy the fol-
lowing equations:

                 qs = E [1 − d0s (b0s , ys0 , h0s , s0 )(1 − ζs (b0s , ys0 , h0s , s0 ))] Em(s0 , s),
                                                             φs (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )
ζs (bs , ys , hs , s) = E[(1 − d0s (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 ))                             + d0s (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )ζs (bs , ys0 , h0s , s0 )]E [m(s0 , s)] ,
                                                                      bs
                                          θu0 (ys − φs )
            1−θ =                                                      ,
                         [vs0 (bs , ys , hs = 1, s; φs ) − vaut (ys )]

where m(s0 , s) is the equilibrium pricing kernel from the two-big-country problem.


Appendix II. Proofs
Proof for Proposition 1. Let us call φi2 and φ−i 2 the recovery values for country i and −i
respectively when the two countries renegotiate jointly with lenders, and φi1 be the recovery
value when country i renegotiates alone with lenders. Nash bargaining implies that φi2 satisfies

          θu0 (y20i − φi2 )     (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
                                                       2 )      (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
                                                                                       2 )
                              =               −i           ≤                                   .
          0i      i
       u(y2 − φ2 ) − u(y )  d           i
                                u(yL + φ2 + φ2 ) − u(yL )    u(yL + φ2 + φ2 ) − u(yL + φ−i
                                                                     i      −i
                                                                                           2 )


The inequality holds because u is an increasing function and φ−i
                                                              2 ≥ 0. Suppose the following
condition holds:

                         (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi2 + φ−i
                                                2 )        (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi2 + b̄)
                                                       ≤                               .                                                 (25)
                      u(yL + φi2 + φ−i              −i
                                     2 ) − u(yL + φ2 )   u(yL + φi2 + b̄) − u(yL + b̄)


                                                                    39
Then, the recovery under two borrowing countries φi2 satisfies

                           θu0 (y20i − φi2 )         (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi2 + b̄)
                                                 ≤                               ,
                        u(y20i − φi2 ) − u(y d )   u(yL + φi2 + b̄) − u(yL + b̄)

where recovery alone φi1 satisfies

                           θu0 (y20i − φi1 )         (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φi1 + b̄)
                                                 =                               .
                        u(y20i − φi1 ) − u(y d )   u(yL + φi1 + b̄) − u(yL + b̄)

It is easy to show by contradiction that φi2 ≤ φi1 because u and g are increasing and concave.
Note that concavity is not necessary to guarantee φi2 ≤ φi1 .
    We still need to show that inequality (25) holds. Given b̄ ≥ φ−i 2 , we need to show that
                         u0 (yH +x)                     i
the function f (x) = u(yH +x)−u(yL +x) with yH = yL + φ2 ≥ yL weakly increases with x. Under
the assumption that u(c) = c1−σ /(1 − σ), we can write f (x) as
                                  (                   σ−1                        σ )
                   −σ(1 − σ)                  yH + x            1−σ           yH + x
           f (x) =                   1−                       +          1−                ,
                      ∆2                      yL + x             σ            yL + x

where ∆ = (yH + x)σ [(yH + x)1−σ − (yL + x)1−σ ]. It is easy to show that f 0 (x) ≥ 0. Q.E.D.
    Proof for Proposition 2. Conditional on repaying, country i’s net capital flow to lenders
increases with its initial debt holding bi . To see this, let ωL (b−i , d−i ) and ωL0 (d−i ) be the
lenders’ wealth from trading with the other country −i in period 1 and period 2, respectively.
In particular,
                            ωL (b−i , d−i ) ≡ yL + (1 − d−i )T B(b−i ).

We can define the net capital flow from country i as T Bi = bi − qi b̄, where qi solves

                                            δu0 [ωL0 (d−i ) + b̄]
                                   qi = 0                                 .
                                       u [ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄i ]

It is easy to show that

                                               u0 [ωL (d−i ) + bi − qi b̄]
         ∂T Bi /∂bi =                                                                               ≥ 0.
                        u0 (ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄) − qi u00 (ωL (b−i , d−i ) + bi − qi b̄)b̄

Higher b−i therefore leads to higher net capital flow T B−i and so higher lenders’ wealth from
country −i since ωL (b−i , d−i ). The bond price of country i thus increases with b−i conditional
on country −i repaying.



                                                       40
Appendix III. Computational Algorithm
We first discretize the endowment space y = (y1 , y2 ) into 81 pairs using the Tauchen-Hussey
(1991) method and the debt space b = (b1 , b2 ) into 225 pairs. We then compute the model
as the limit of a finite horizon model with T periods. We start with a large enough T and
solve the problem backwardly until the value functions and decision rules converge. In each
period, we compute two models: a single-country model and a two-country model. We need
to compute the first model, since its equilibrium values are used in solving for the Nash
bargaining allocations of the second model.
    We now describe the algorithm for a generic period t ≤ T .

   1. Single-country model.
       In this computation, we take as given the following functions from period t + 1: country
                                                         1        1
       i’s value function and default decision {vi,t+1      (s), Di,t+1 (s)}, discounted value of future
                  1
       recovery ζi,t+1 (s), and lenders’ consumption and value function when dealing with coun-
                                   L
       try i alone {cLi,t+1 (s), Vi,t+1 (s)} for i = 1, 2 and s = {(bi , hi , yi )}i=1,2 .16 We then update
       these function for period t using the optimal decisions from this period.
       Let us first construct expected future value function W and expected repayment func-
       tion ψ on the grids of (b0 , s). They both depend on the current state s and are a function
       of debt choice b0 :
                                 X
               1
             Wi,t+1 (b0 , s) =        π(y 0 |y)vi,t+1
                                                1
                                                      (s0 )
                                 y0
                                 X
              1
                    (b0 , s) =        π(y 0 |y)u0 [cLi,t+1 (s0 )] (1 − Di,t+1
                                                                        1
                                                                              (s0 )) + Di,t+1
                                                                                        1
                                                                                              (s0 )ζi,t+1
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                          (s0 ) .
                                                                 
             ψi,t+1
                                 y0


       With these two functions, we can solve the single-country model at period t. In par-
       ticular, we solve it in two cases: when the country has good credit standing and when
       the country has bad credit standing.
       For the country in good credit standing, we solve its problem in two steps. In the first
       step, we find the optimal borrowing decision conditional on repaying. In the second
       step, we find the optimal default decision taking as given the optimal borrowing decision
       and repaying value from the first step.

  16
     For convenience of notation, we write the state space of the single-country model the same as that of
the two-country model. Of course, in the single-country model, country −i’s state (b−i , h−i , y−i ) does not
affect country i’s problem.


                                                              41
1.1 Borrowing decision. Taking as given expected future value function W and ex-
    pected repayment function ψ, we solve the following optimization problem:

                         1,r
                        vi,t (s) = max
                                    0
                                              u(yi − bi + qb0 ) + βWi,t+1
                                                                     1
                                                                          (b0 , s)
                                     b

                                s.t. qu0 [yL + bi − qb0 ] = δψi,t+1
                                                              1
                                                                    (b0 , s).                 (26)

     Note that we do not use the grid-search method to solve for the optimal b0 . In-
     stead, we solve b0 continuously by interpolating the functions of Wi,t+11
                                                                                 (b0 , s) and
                           1,r
       1
     ψi,t+1 (b0 , s). Let Bi,t (s) and Q1i,t (s) be the optimal borrowing decision and the
                                                                                        1,r
     corresponding equilibrium bond price satisfying equation (26) when b0 = Bi,t           (s),
     respectively.
1.2 Default decision. It is a zero-one choice depending on which value is larger, re-
    paying or defaulting:

                              1                     1,r          1,d
                             vi,t (s) = max (1 − d)vi,t (s) + d vi,t (s),
                                          d

                                      1,d
     with the default value given by vi,t                    1
                                          (s) = u(yid ) + βWi,t+1           1
                                                                  (s). Let Di,t (s) be the
     optimal default decision.

For the country in bad credit standing, we solve it in two steps as well. In the first
step, we solve the optimal recovery for each grid s . We then figure out the optimal
renegotiation decision taking as given the optimal recoveries.

1.3 Recovery function. For each grid s with hi = 1, the optimal recovery φ satisfies
    the following equation:

                  (1 − θ)u0 (yL + φ)                       θu0 (yi − φ)
                             L            aut
                                              =                 1             aut
            u(yL + φ) + δEVi,t+1 (s0 ) − VL,t   u(yi − φ) + βWi,t+1 (0, s) − vi,t (y)

                                                             aut               aut
     where the autarky value for lenders is given by VL,t        = u(yL ) + δVL,t+1   and the
                                                   aut
                                                       (y) = u(yid ) + β y0 π(y 0 |y)vi,t+1
                                                                                      aut
                                                                                            (y 0 ).
                                                                        P
     autarky value for the country is given by vi,t
     The optimal recovery is denoted as φ1i,t (s).
1.4 Renegotiation decision. Taking as given the recovery schedule φ1i,t (s), the country
    makes a zero-one choice over renegotiation:

       1
      vi,t (s) = max (1 − d)[u(yi − φ1i,t (s)) + βWi,t+1
                                                    1
                                                         (0, s)] + d[u(yid ) + βWi,t+1
                                                                                  1
                                                                                       (b, s)].
                  d




                                              42
            1
       Let Di,t (s) be the optimal non-renegotiating decision.

  We can now evaluate lenders’ consumption at period t according to

                                                                     1,r
            cLi,t (s) = yL + (1 − Di,t
                                   1
                                       (s)) (1 − hi ) bi − Q1i,t (s)Bi,t (s) + hi φ1i,t (s) .
                                                                                         


  The value of the lender is given by
                                                                 X
                                   Vi,tL (s) =u(cLi,t (s)) + δ        π(y 0 |y)Vi,t+1
                                                                                 L
                                                                                      (s0 ),
                                                                 y0

                                                                                     1,r
  where the future debt in s0 for country i is Bi,t1                      1
                                                     (s). In particular, Bi,t (s) = Bi,t (s)
                  1            1                            1                   1
  if hi = 0 and Di,t (s) = 0, Bi,t (s) = 0 if hi = 1 and Di,t (s) = 0, and Bi,t (s) = bi if
     1
  Di,t (s) = 1.
  The discounted value of future recovery at period t is given by
                         X
           1
                               π(y 0 |y)u0 (cLi,t (s0 )) (1 − Di,t
                                                               1
                                                                   (s0 ))φ1i,t (s0 ) + Di,t
                                                                                        1
                                                                                            (s0 )ζi,t+1
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                        (s0 ) .
                                                                                                            
          ζi,t (s) = δ
                         y0


2. Two-country model.
  We take as given the following functions from period t+1: country i’s value function and
  default decision {vi,t+1 (s), Di,t+1 (s)}, discounted future value of recovery ζi,t+1 (s), and
  lenders’ consumption and value function when dealing with country i alone {cL,t+1 (s),
  VL,t+1 (s)} for i = 1, 2 and s = {(bi , hi , yi )}i=1,2 . We then update these functions for
  period t using the optimal decisions from this period.
  We first need to construct the expected value function W and the expected repayment
  function ψ for any pair of b0 = (b01 , b02 ) on the grid:
                            X
       Wi,t+1 (b0 , s) =            π(y 0 |y)vi,t+1 (s0 )
                              y0
                            X
        ψi,t+1 (b0 , s) =           π(y 0 |y)u0 [cL,t+1 (s0 )] {(1 − Di,t+1 (s0 )) + Di,t+1 (s0 )ζi,t+1 (s0 )} .
                              y0



  We solve this model in two steps. In the first step, taking as given default/renegotiation
  choices of the two countries, we solve the optimal borrowing decisions and update the
  value functions for repaying, defaulting, renegotiating, and non-renegotiating. In the
  second step, we find the optimal default/renegotiation decision taking as given the
  optimal borrowing decisions in the first step.

                                                            43
2.1 Borrowing decisions and value functions. We solve three cases in this step.
      • Case 1. Both countries are in good credit standing. We solve three sub cases.
         – Case 1.1. Both choose not to default.
           In this case, taking as given {Wi,t+1 , ψi,t+1 }i=1,2 , we look for the fixed point
           {Bi,t (s, d), B−i,t (s, d)} that satisfies for each i = 1, 2

                        Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i ,qi ,q−i } wi,t (s, (b0i , B−i,t (s, d)), d),

            subject to the following conditions:

            wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yi − bi + qi b0i ) + βWi,t+1 (b0 , s),
                       qi u0 [yL + (bi − qi b0i ) + (1 − d−i )(b−i − q−i b0−i )] = δψi,t+1 (b0 , s),
                      q−i u = u0 [yL + (bi − qi b0i ) + (1 − d−i )(b−i − q−i b0−i )] = δψ−i,t+1 (b0 , s).

            Let the equilibrium bond prices be Qi,t (s, d) for i = 1, 2.
         – Case 1.2. Country i repays but country −i defaults.
           We only need to solve country i’s optimal debt:

                          Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i ,qi } wi,t (s, b0i , d)
                          s.t. wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yi − bi + qi b0i ) + βWi,t+1 (b0 , s),
                                   qi u0 [yL + (bi − qi b0i )] = δψi,t+1 (b0 , s).

            The value of country −i is given by

                                                    d
                     w−i,t (s, Bi,t (s, d), d) = u(y−i ) + βW−i,t+1 ((Bi,t (s, d), b−i ), s).

            Let the equilibrium bond prices be Qi,t (s, d) for i = 1, 2.
         – Case 1.3. Both choose to default.
           The value functions of default are given by, for each i,

                                    wi,t (s, b, d) = u(yid ) + βWi,t+1 (b, s).                     (27)

      • Case 2. Country i is in good credit standing and country −i is in bad credit
        standing. We solve four sub cases here.
         – Case 2.1. Both choose to repay.
           In this case, di,t = d−i,t = 0. We only need to solve country i’s optimal

                                             44
  debt with b0−i = 0:

      Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i ,qi ,φ−i } wi,t (s, b0i , d)
     s.t. wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yi − bi + qi b0i ) + βWi,t+1 ((b0i , 0), s),
               qi u0 [yL + (bi − qi b0i ) + φ−i ] = δψi,t+1 ((b0i , 0), s)
                       θu0 (y−i − φ−i )             (1 − θ)u0 (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d)
                                                = L                                       .
                 v−i (s; φ−i ) − v−i,aut (y−i )  Vt (s, qi , φ−i , b0 , d) − VfLail (si )

  Country −i’s value is given by

     w−i,t (s, (Bi,t (s, d), 0), d) = u(y−i − φ−i ) + βW−i,t+1 ((Bi,t (s, d), 0), s).

  Let the optimal recovery be φ−i,t (s, d) and the equilibrium bond price be
  Qi,t (s, d).
– Case 2.2. Country i repays but country −i chooses not to renegotiate.
  Country i’s optimal debt and value solve the following problem. We only
  need to solve country i’s optimal debt with b0−i = b−i :

           Bi,t (s, d) = argmax{b0i ,qi } wi,t (s, b0i , d)
           s.t. wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yi − bi + qi b0i ) + βWi,t+1 ((b0i , b−i ), s),
                     qi u0 [yL + (bi − qi b0i )] = δψi,t+1 ((b0i , b−i ), s)

  Country −i’s value is given by

       w−i,t (s, (Bi,t (s, d), b−i ), d) = u(yid ) + βWi,t+1 ((Bi,t (s, d), b−i ), s).

  Let the equilibrium bond prices be Qi,t (s, d).
– Case 2.3. Country i defaults but country −i renegotiates.
  The recovery function φ−i solves the following equation:

                   θu0 (y−i − φ−i )             (1 − θ)u0 (s, φ−i , b0 , d)
                                            = L                                  .
             v−i (s; φ−i ) − v−i,aut (y−i )  Vt (s, φ−i , b0 , d) − VfLail (si )

  Let the optimal recovery be φ−i,t (s, d). With b0 = (b0i , b0−i ), b0i = bi and




                                   45
             b0−i = 0, the value functions of the two countries are given by

                            wi,t (s, b0 , d) = u(yid ) + βWi,t+1 (b0 , s)
                           w−i,t (s, b0 , d) = u(y−i − φ−i,t (s, d)) + βW−i,t+1 (b0 , s).

          – Case 2.4. Both choose not to repay.
            The values of the two countries are updated according to equation (27).
      • Case 3. Both countries are in bad credit standing.
        The two recovery functions solve the Nash bargaining problem jointly. Oth-
        erwise, the two recovery functions are independent of each other.
2.2 Default/renegotiation decisions.
    Taking as given the optimal borrowing decisions and value functions from Step
    2.1, we find the equilibrium default/renegotiation decisions {Di,t (s), D−i,t (s)} that
    solve jointly

                  Di,t (s) ∈ argmax{di,t } wi,t (s; di,t , D−i,t (s), B(di,t , D−i,t (s)))

                D−i,t (s) ∈ argmax{d−i,t } w−i,t (s; Di,t (s), d−i,t , B(Di,t (s), d−i,t )).

    If there are multiple pairs of (Di,t , D−i,t ) as equilibrium for a state s, we take the
    pair that maximizes wi,t (s, Di,t (s), Bi,t (s, Di,t (s)))+w−i,t (s, D−i,t (s), B−i,t (s, D−i,t (s))).
    We use these equilibrium default/renegotiation decisions to update the functions
    for period t.
2.3 We finally update the period t value for each country i:

                                 vi,t (s) = wi,t (s, Di,t (s), Bi,t (s, Di,t (s))),

    lenders’ consumption

                           2
                           X
        cL,t (s) = yL +          [(1 − hi,t )(1 − Di,t (s)) [bi − Qi,t (s, Di,t (s))Bi,t (s, Di,t (s))]
                           i=1
                           X2
                       +         [hi,t (1 − Di,t (s))φi,t (s, Di,t (s))],
                           i=1




                                                 46
           and the expected discounted recovery ζ
                                                 X
                ζi,t (s) = δ                              π(y 0 |y)u0 (cL,t (s0 )) [(1 − Di,t (s0 ))φi,t (s0 ) + Di,t (s0 )ζi,t+1 (s0 )] .
                                                     y0


           The value of the lender is given by
                                                                                           X
                                                          VL,t (s) =u(cL,t (s)) + δ               π(y 0 |y)VL,t+1 (s0 ),
                                                                                             y0


           where the future debt in s0 for country i is Bi,t        ∗
                                                                      (s). In particular, Bi,t ∗
                                                                                                 (s) =
                                                           ∗
           Bi,t (s, Di,t (s)) if hi = 0 and Di,t (s) = 0, Bi,t (s) = 0 if hi = 1 and Di,t (s) = 0, and
            ∗
           Bi,t (s) = bi if Di,t (s) = 1.


Appendix IV. Empirical Robustness
This appendix provides descriptive statistics and robustness of the empirical results in Section
5. Figure 8 plots the five-year moving average of the fraction of countries in default and



                                                                                                                     .06
                                .4       .3




                                                                                                                     Fraction Renegotiating
                     Fraction in Default




                                                                                                                                     .04
                             .2




                                                                                                                       .02
                                .1
                                0




                                                                                                                     0




                                              1970             1980               1990        2000            2010
                                                                                   year

                                                            Fraction in Default           Fraction Renegotiating




                                  Figure 8: Historical Defaults and Renegotiations

the fraction of countries renegotiating over time. The figure illustrates that default rose in
the early 1980s and remained elevated until the mid-1990s. Such an inverted hump shape
mainly reflects the debt crises of the 1980s across Latin America. The fraction of countries




                                                                                   47
renegotiating the debt rose to almost 0.06 in the mid-1990s.17
   We provide two sets of robustness analysis for the regression results. We first address the
concern that a common world shock might be driving the fraction of countries in default and
the fraction of countries renegotiating. In Table 6 we add linearly detrended world GDP to all
the regressions. World GDP is significant in the renegotiation and recovery regressions. World
booms are associated with fewer renegotiations and higher recovery rates. The variables Frac
Defaultit and Frac Renegotiateit continue to be significant and with the expected sign in all
specifications. All standard errors continue to be clustered at the country level.

                        Table 6: Cross-Country Regressions with World GDP
                                                Default        Renegotiation          Recovery
                 Fraction in Defaultit          1.36∗∗∗        -0.44∗∗                0.44∗∗
                 Fraction Renegotiatingit       -2.18∗         3.14∗∗                 -5.28∗∗∗
                 Debt/GDPit                     0.11∗∗         -0.04∗                 -0.21∗∗∗
                 World GDPt                     0.03           -2.42∗∗∗               2.52∗∗∗
                 Country fixed effects          Yes            Yes                    No

                 Adjusted R2                    0.28           0.06                   0.38
                 Observations                   2682           552                    139


    We also estimate the renegotiation and recovery regressions, taking into account the
inherent selection of these observations. Being in a state where renegotiation and recovery are
nonmissing observations requires the country to be in a default state. The default state equals
1 in years where each country is in default or renegotiates. Table 7 presents the maximum
likelihood estimation results from this specification with clustered errors. We estimate the
selection equation with a probit and use lags of the independent variables as regressors. The
coefficients on Frac Defaultit , Frac Renegotiateit , and Debt/GDPit in the renegotiation and
recovery equations continue to be significant and with the expected sign. Economically, the
coefficients are somewhat smaller than in the benchmark specification.




   17
     Recall that in the regressions, the main independent variables Frac Defaultit and Frac Renegotiateit
are of the fraction of countries, not including i, that are in default or are renegotiating. In this figure, however,
we simply illustrate overall fractions.


                                                         48
Table 7: Cross-Country Regressions with Heckman Selection Estimates
                                  Renegotiation   Recovery
     Fraction in Defaultit        -0.55∗∗         1.44∗∗∗
     Fraction Renegotiatingit     2.45∗∗          -6.83∗∗∗
     Debt/GDPit                   -0.03∗∗         -0.19∗∗∗

     Selection Eq.                State default   State default
     Fraction in Defaultit−1      5.13∗∗∗         5.12∗∗∗
     Fraction Renegotiatingit−1   -6.43           -6.23
     Debt/GDPit−1                 0.39∗           0.40∗
     Observations                 2682            2279




                                   49
