NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EMPLOYER PENALTY, VOLUNTARY COMPLIANCE, AND THE SIZE DISTRIBUTION OF FIRMS:
EVIDENCE FROM A SURVEY OF SMALL BUSINESSES
Casey B. Mulligan
Working Paper 24037
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24037

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

I appreciate the financial support of the Health Economics Initiative of the Becker Friedman
Institute at the University of Chicago, assistance from Samantha Loo, and comments from
Coleman Drake, Trevor Gallen, and seminar participants at the University of Chicago. The
survey was done in partnership with the Mercatus Center at George Mason University. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Casey B. Mulligan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Employer Penalty, Voluntary Compliance, and the Size Distribution of Firms: Evidence
from a Survey of Small Businesses
Casey B. Mulligan
NBER Working Paper No. 24037
November 2017
JEL No. D22,H25,H32
ABSTRACT
A new survey of 745 small businesses shows little change in the size distribution of businesses
between 2012 and 2016, except among businesses with 40–74 employees, in a way that is closely
related to whether they offer health insurance coverage. Using measures of both size and
voluntary regulatory compliance, the paper links these changes to the Affordable Care Act’s
employer mandate. Between 28,000 and 50,000 businesses nationwide appear to be reducing their
number of full-time-equivalent employees to below 50 because of that mandate. This translates to
roughly 250,000 positions eliminated from those businesses.

Casey B. Mulligan
University of Chicago
Department of Economics
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
c-mulligan@uchicago.edu

A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24037

I.

Introduction
Taxes and regulations are known to affect the size distribution of businesses, due

to the fact that smaller businesses are less subject to enforcement. Large informal sectors
are an obvious result in developing countries (Gërxhani 2004), but measurement
challenges have hindered quantifying the size distortions’ impact on developed-country
employment and productivity. This paper uses new and unique data that is readily linked
to a specific regulation: the 2010 Affordable Care Act’s (ACA) employer mandate. The
mandate’s size provision took effect in 2015 and is especially interesting, not only due to
its notoriety, but because of its bright-line threshold and enforcement by monetary
penalty. This paper quantifies the size incentive of that penalty, develops a framework
for combining evidence on size with evidence on voluntary compliance, and uses a new
survey of businesses to quantify the number of businesses that changed from large to
small as a consequence of the law.
The key size threshold in the ACA is 50 full-time equivalent employees (FTEs),
which establishes the legal definition of a “large” business that is subject to the employer
mandate. Momentarily ignoring the distinction between FTEs and total employment, I
display in Figure 1 a time series of the share of employment by small businesses, by a 50total-employees criterion, among private businesses sized 25-99. The data is sourced
from the tables prepared by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality from the
insurance/employer component of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. 1 Both the
2015 and 2016 shares are well outside the range observed in the recent history 2008-14,
and in the direction to be expected given that large employers were subject to a new
regulation.
Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen (2016) show how the distortionary effects of
size-dependent regulations appear muted when the observer uses a different measure of
size than regulators do. This is the case in Figure 1, which looks at total employment as
The MEPC-IC is a nationally representative sample “drawn annually from the most recently
updated version of the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Register” and includes about 39,000
private businesses each year (Agency for Healthcare Research Quality 2017). It has no public use
files.
1

1

opposed to the full-time equivalents specified by the ACA and has total employment
binned rather broadly (25-49 and 50-99). Both Garicano, Lelarge, and Van Reenen
(2016) and Gurio and Roys (2014) therefore obtain size measures that are especially
close to regulator measures and find large size distortions in the French economy. They
do not link the distortions to specific regulations, but instead focus on France where there
are many size-dependent regulations thought to be binding. One of their estimation
methods is to compare the actual firm size distribution to a Pareto distribution and
measure the nonmonotonicity of the actual distribution in the neighborhood of the
threshold.
The Mercatus-Mulligan data used in this paper has five measurement advantages.
First, it separately measures full- and part-time employment and therefore can produce
good proxies for FTEs. Second, the size distortion can be linked to a specific and
relatively new regulation, which permits a before-after analysis as shown in Figure 1.
Third, voluntary compliance – that is, offering employer-sponsored health insurance
(ESI) even when exempt from the mandate – can be measured.

This allows the

measurement of size distortions to focus on businesses for which the employer mandate
is binding. Fourth, the survey was not conducted at the corporate level and therefore did
not require any corporation’s approval to publish results.

Rather, individuals were

confidentially surveyed, and these individuals happened to be managers at businesses. If
the sample aggregate happens to reveal politically-incorrect business practices, such a
finding cannot impugn any particular business.

Fifth, the managers of the sample

businesses were asked whether and how the law changed their hiring practices, with
answers that can be compared to size and compliance.
Section II of this paper briefly provides the quantitative details of the Affordable
Care Act’s employer mandate. Section III has a simple cost function framework for
considering a business’ tradeoffs between changing its hiring practices versus its fringebenefit offerings, especially as it relates to the propensity to offer ESI by size of business.
The Mercatus-Mulligan sample details are provided in Section IV. Section V displays
estimates of the nationwide prevalence of “49er” businesses, which are defined to be
small businesses that have fewer than 50 full-time-equivalent employees for the purpose
of avoiding employer-penalty assessments. Section VI concludes.

2

II.

ACA Background
Multiple components of the ACA can affect employment and the composition of

employee compensation: premium tax credits, cost-sharing subsidies, Medicaid
expansions, the individual mandate, the employer mandate, and the small employer
health tax credit. Except in the increasingly rare cases in which part-time positions are
eligible for ESI too, an employee (and family) at a firm that offers affordable coverage
would be eligible for premium tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies (hereafter,
“exchange subsidies”) only if he worked part-time, or not at all, which reduces his
willingness to supply full-time labor to employers offering affordable coverage. This can
discourage employers from offering coverage. A Medicaid expansion can encourage or
discourage earning income. 2

The individual mandate, which imposes a monetary

income-based penalty on non-poor households who fail to purchase coverage when it is
affordable, can discourage households from earning income but encourage workers to
supply their labor to businesses offering coverage rather than those not offering it.
The employer mandate, which is the focus of this paper, is also designed to
encourage people to be enrolled in health insurance. However, unlike the other abovementioned ACA components, the employer mandate is enforced based on the size of the
employer and is therefore expected to affect the distribution of employment and healthinsurance offerings across employers according to their size.
Federal statutes and regulations specify that the employer mandate is enforced in
four steps, ordered chronologically below, and terminated with either a Section 4980H(a)
penalty or a Section 4980H(b) penalty. First, an employer is designated as large or small
based on its full-time-equivalent (FTE) employment in the calendar year prior to the
coverage year, with 50 as the cutoff.3 Part-time employees (less than 30 hours per week)

2

A household that was keeping its income below the Medicaid income threshold without the
expansion would be encouraged to earn more under a threshold-raising expansion. On the other
hand, households earning above both thresholds are more likely to reduce their income (for
eligibility purposes) when the threshold is higher.
3
U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service (2017). The FTEs are calculated on
business days and special provisions are made for seasonal employees. Employees are
aggregated across companies with common ownership (Section 4980H(c)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code, as amended by the ACA).

3

count toward FTEs in proportion to their hours worked. 4 Employers self-designate
themselves as large.5 Second, at the conclusion of the coverage year, large employers use
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Form 1094-C to indicate, by month, full-time
employment, total employment, and whether minimum essential coverage was offered to
“at least 95% of its full-time employees and their dependents.” They use Form 1095-C to
list, by month, the required employee contribution for that coverage and the name (SSN,
etc.) of each employee enrolled (U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service
2017). Third (and perhaps chronologically overlapping with the coverage year and the
employer submissions of IRS Forms 1094-C and 1095-C), the Department of Health and
Human Services notifies employers (FFM notices) about their employees and dependents
who received exchange subsidies during the coverage year.
Fourth, the IRS uses the FFM notices together with Forms 1094-C and 1095-C to
determine each large employer’s penalty, if any. No penalty is owed by small employers,
employers without FFM notices, or employers with only plan-ineligible employees
(especially part-time employees) listed on their FFM notices.

Employers offering

minimum essential coverage do not owe any Section 4980H(a) penalty. Employers not
offering minimum essential coverage do not owe any Section 4980H(b) penalty.
For coverage year 2017, the 4980H(a) penalty is $2,265 per full-time employee
(the first 30 full-time employees are exempt) on the payroll during the coverage year,
prorated by month. The 4980H(b) penalty is $3,398 for each full-time employee that
appears on the FFM notice, capped at $2,265 per full-time employee on the payroll
during the coverage year.6 Neither penalty is deductible from the employer’s businessincome tax, which makes it more expensive than the same dollar amount paid as
employee salary. Table 1 shows how the salary equivalent of the Section 4980H(a)
penalty, hereafter referred to as “the employer penalty,” is $3,449 for an employer paying
business-income tax at a 39 percent marginal rate in 2017.

Hereafter I refer to the

amount of the employer penalty in terms of a salary equivalent.
4

Section 4980H(c)(2)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended by the ACA, says that the
conversion factor from part-time employees to full-time employees is the ratio of the former
group’s monthly work hours to 120. For example, if February had exactly four work weeks, then
every employee working 15 hours per week would count as one half of a full-time equivalent for
the month of February.
5
Presumably, the IRS could be using Form 941 filings to help identify large employers.
6
Both penalties are indexed for nationwide health-cost inflation.

4

Ignoring FFM notices for the moment, the employer penalty adds an extra
marginal employer cost to having full-time employees during the coverage year, which,
in 2017, is the minimum of $3,449 and the cost of offering affordable coverage to the
employee. 7 The same penalty also creates a cost of having more than fifty FTE
employees in the year prior to the coverage year. In particular, the prior-year hire that
triggers the large-employer designation – puts FTEs above 50 – costs as much as $68,987
in addition to the usual salary and benefits for that person. 8 The large-employer
designation costs less than $68,987 to the degree that his FTEs include plan-ineligible
employees, such as part-time workers or new hires that spend parts of the year in
employee-orientation or plan-waiting periods, or that the business faces a marginal
income tax rate less than the 39 percent rate used in Table 1.
At first glance, it might appear that the true marginal cost associated with the
large-employer designation is less because an employer hiring the 50th FTE during the
coverage year could get “lucky” and have no full-time employees show up on the FFM
notice (to be delivered in the year after the coverage year). But in that contingency there
is a higher marginal cost of the 51 st FTE because the 51 st may be the person who appears
on an FFM notice, thereby triggering a penalty for up to 21 full-time employees rather
than just 20.9 For the purposes of this paper, it is worth noting that FFM notices to some
degree smooth out the threshold effect and put somewhat more weight on full-time
employment than part-time employment, even for the purposes of the large-employer
designation.
The Small Employer Health Tax Credit is based on employer size but, unlike the
employer penalty, it does not have a sharp size threshold because the credit is phased out
continuously with size (between 10 and 25 FTEs) and with average annual employee
wage (between about $26,000 and $52,000) (United States Government Accountability

7

The cost of offering coverage is more accurately understood as the lost employer-employee
surplus, if any, from not having the option of having cash compensation instead of health
insurance.
8
$68,987 is twenty times the penalty’s $3,449 salary-equivalent because a business with 50 fulltime employees has 20 more penalties than a business having 49 full-time employees and zero
part-time employees.
9
This combinatorial phenomenon is closely related to “gambler’s ruin:” getting “lucky” (no FFM
notice) on the nth FTE raises the cost of getting unlucky on the (n+1)st.

5

Office 2012, Table 2).10 Moreover, credit participation has been reported as “limited”;
this paper has some new data to contribute on this point (see Appendix I).

III.

Modeling the distribution of labor-market outcomes
The structure of the employer penalty potentially causes businesses that would

otherwise be designated as large businesses (50 or more FTEs) to keep their employment
below the threshold. A simple cost-function analysis shows how, in theory: (i) the ACA
penalty creates this incentive; (ii) compliance – that is, offering ESI – is nonmonotonic
with employer size around the threshold; and (iii) the mass of firms below the threshold
are a mix of those that would and would not offer ESI absent the ACA.

III.A. The costs of compliance and penalty avoidance
Each employer has an efficient size , measured as FTEs. Its actual size, also
measured in FTEs, is n and its associated costs are f(n), where f is a concave function
having its minimum at n   = 0.11 The employer can offer ESI at cost (), net of the
willingness of employees to pay for that coverage via less cash compensation.



presumably varies across employers, even conditional on . It can be negative, in which
case the joint surplus of the employer and employee (including any pre-ACA income-tax
advantages) is enhanced when coverage is offered.  also includes administrative costs
and insurance-premium loads, and the scale economies often present on these types of
costs suggest that: (a)  and  would be negatively correlated across employers and (b)
larger employers are more likely to offer ESI. Item (b) has been frequently observed
(Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust 2012) and is
confirmed in this paper’s new data.
Absent the ACA, the firm’s only costs are f(n) + ()ESI, so that costminimizing FTEs is n = , and the cost-minimizing offer decision is simply the indicator
In using the descriptor “continuously,” I ignore the fact that sometimes the IRS instructs
taxpayers to round various credit determinants to the nearest integer.
11
For example,  could represent the minimum of a firm-level average cost curve f(n), as in
Viner (1932).
10

6

of whether  < 0. Because the  < 0 businesses offer ESI even without the ACA, they
might be considered voluntary compliers with the stated purpose of the ACA’s employer
mandate. The  > 0 businesses do not voluntarily comply: they do not offer ESI without
an additional pecuniary incentive.
With the ACA, there are two additional costs to consider: the employer penalty
L(n)(n30)n and an additional cost of ESI, en:
𝑐 (𝑛, 𝐸𝑆𝐼; 𝜈, 𝛿 ) = 𝑓(𝑛 − 𝜈) + (1 − 𝐸𝑆𝐼 )𝐿(𝑛)(𝑛 − 30)𝜏𝑛 + (𝛿 (𝜈) + 𝜏𝑒 𝑛)𝐸𝑆𝐼

(1)

L(n) is an indicator for large-employer status (n  50). n would be $3,449 for an
employer with no part-time employees; the static model here ignores the distinction
between coverage year and prior year and does not account for zero marginal penalty for
large employers that nonetheless have fewer than thirty full-time employees.
The constant e > 0 multiplies n, representing an impact of the ACA on the supply
of workers to employers offering ESI. For example, households that are otherwise
eligible for exchange subsidies are less willing to supply labor to firms offering coverage.
Even without subsidies, exchange coverage is a health insurance alternative to ESI that is
created by the ACA. The ACA’s additional regulation of employer plans may also
discourage ESI.

e would be negative if the individual mandate were encouraging

households to supply labor to ESI firms rather than non-ESI firms (e.g., the individual
mandate and the perception that exchange coverage is a poor substitute for ESI may push
households in that direction). Also note that, unlike n, part of e could be a marginal cost
to an industry without affecting the size of suppliers within that industry because it causes
suppliers to exit. A fuller analysis would also consider the decision to split a larger
business into multiple small ones and give more emphasis to the case in which the shift of
labor supply away from ESI employers was greater in magnitude than n, but for
simplicity I keep the number of businesses constant and give most of the attention to the
case in which e is less than n.12

Although 𝜏𝑒 represents differential supply of labor to ESI firms, nothing in the model (1)
represents the impact of the ACA on overall labor supply incentives. The model also fails to
represent changes in the composition of demand among various types of employers as a
12

7

When not offering ESI, the cost function is discontinuous in FTEs at the n = 50
threshold between small and large businesses, where it jumps by 20n. Businesses not
offering ESI that would otherwise be large can sharply reduce their costs by cutting their
employment below the threshold. Moreover, because e > 0 by itself raises the cost of
ESI, some businesses that would be large and offering ESI but for the ACA may be
induced by the law to drop ESI and reduce FTEs below the threshold. I refer to either
type of business as a “49er” because 49 is the largest integer number of FTEs that is
below the n = 50 threshold. 13 By this definition, 49ers are not offering ESI under the
ACA.

III.B. The propensity to comply by size of business
Presumably, 49er businesses are the ones with  above but relatively close to 50.
Therefore, this model predicts that the ACA can increase the ESI propensity of
businesses with FTEs above but close to fifty for two reasons: n > 0 reduces the cost of
ESI for large business and n > 0 eliminates 49ers, who disproportionately would not be
offering ESI absent the ACA, from the sample of businesses with FTEs above but close
to fifty.
On the other side of the n = 50 threshold, the ESI propensity is low for two
reasons: e > 0 increases the cost of ESI and the introduction of the 49ers that, by
definition, would otherwise be large businesses. If we assume that 49ers have  greater
than but close to 50 FTEs and ultimately have n less than but close to 50, then the ESI
propensity is nonmonotonic in size: it is especially low just below n = 50 and especially
high just above it. This pattern is obvious in my data, as will be shown below.
consequence of the ACA costs they differentially experience and pass on to their customers.
Mulligan (2015b) shows that the overall labor-supply incentives are in the direction of less labor
supply; Gallen and Mulligan (2013) look at, among other things, the composition of demand.
This paper’s applications of the model (1) should be interpreted as measuring some of the
employment effects holding constant the composition of demand and the willingness to supply
labor to nonESI employers. As noted, this paper also neglects employer exit or entry.
13
I do not assume that a 49er business has exactly 49 FTEs because employers may run discrete
shifts or locations and therefore maintain a workforce in multiples of, say, 4. Also note that many
businesses with less than 50 FTEs are not 49er businesses by my definition, because they would
have fewer that 50 FTEs even if they were not trying to avoid employer-penalty assessments.

8

In addition to the two types of 49ers, seven other types of responses to the ACA
are possible in this model: (1) small businesses with no response in employment or ESI
offering; (2) small businesses that keep employment constant but drop ESI due to e > 0;
(3) small businesses that add ESI and reduce employment due to the marginal cost of
employment e > 0;14 (4) small businesses that keep ESI but reduce employment due to
the marginal cost of employment e > 0; (5) relatively large businesses that marginally
reduce employment due to the marginal cost n > 0, but still staying above the threshold,
and not offering ESI; (6) large businesses that are induced by the ACA to offer ESI but
also marginally reduce employment; and (7) large businesses that offer ESI regardless of
the ACA and marginally reduce employment due to e > 0.

IV.

Survey Design
I estimate the national number of 49ers using a small-business survey that was

conducted by Hanover Research for the Mercatus Center at George Mason University,
hereafter “the Mercatus-Mulligan survey.” Hanover was instructed to survey managers
or owners employed full-time at a business that existed in both 2016 and at the time of
the survey (the week of March 13–17, 2017) and had between 2 and 199 full-time
employees. The survey respondents must, at the time of the survey, have a role in the
businesses’ hiring and employee-benefit decisions. The sampling began by identifying
members of a verified-respondents panel whose personal information indicated that they
likely fit the required respondent profile. 15

A random sample of identified panel

members was invited by email to participate in the survey and receive a reward for
completion.

A survey was terminated early, and any responses excluded from the

sample, if responses to one of the first eight questions indicated that the respondent did

14

When offering ESI, the cost function is continuous in FTEs with a single minimum. The ACA
reduces the cost-minimizing n (ESI = 1) to the extent that e > 0.
15
For example, the respondent is employed in the occupation of manager.

9

not fit the aforementioned profile. 16 Hanover further excluded about 15 percent of
respondents from its final sample of 745 because the respondent: (i) completed the survey
too quickly, (ii) flat or straightlined through the responses (e.g., always chose answer
“A”) or (iii) gave nonsense answers to the open-ended questions. Respondents provided
their answers online at their convenience (typically in the early evening) and were
permitted to take a long pause during their survey. Including the long pauses, the median
(average) survey duration was 13 (26) minutes, respectively. The sampling was stratified
between business sizes 2-49 and 50-199: in principle, invitations to one of the strata
would cease if that strata were significantly larger than the other. However, in this
survey no action was taken to rebalance the strata because the two were of similar size
throughout the survey week.17
Respondents appeared to work or reside in 47 states plus the District of
Columbia. 18 They worked in a variety of industries, as shown in Appendix I. Almost
exactly equal numbers of respondents indicated that they more frequently vote Democrat
versus Republican.

Hereafter, I use “respondent” to refer to either the individual

employee that completed the survey or the entire business. 19
I also note that, because the survey was individual-based, a business’ probability
of inclusion in the sample increased with the number of employees it had fulfilling the
respondent criteria.

To estimate an employment-weighted average for the national

population of businesses, I therefore take the corresponding unweighted average in the
Mercatus-Mulligan sample. To estimate an average for the business population, I take
weighted sample averages, where the weights are the inverse of the sample businesses’
total employment. The former case is illustrated in Figure 2, which shows the fraction of
aggregate small-business employment in each business-size category (classified by total
employment in 2016) in our sample and compares it to the national distribution in 2014,
which is the most recent year available. The Mercatus-Mulligan series shown in Figure 2
16

Appendix I shows the questionnaire and the number of respondents that exited the survey early
for failing one of the profile requirements.
17
The final sample had 415 respondents from businesses with 2-49 full-time employees and 330
respondents from businesses with 50-199.
18
Location is derived from the respondent’s connection to his internet service provider. Note that
respondents were able to participate in the survey via mobile devices. Two of the 745 ISP
locations were outside of the United States.
19
8.2 percent preferred not to indicate party affiliation. 1.2 percent were not registered to vote.

10

is just the unweighted sample frequency whereas the Census-Bureau series is taken from
its employment table rather than its business-count table.

Further discussion and

illustrations are provided in Appendix I.

V.

Estimates of the number of 49ers created by the ACA
The Mercatus-Mulligan survey separately measured firm-level full-time and part-

time employment, as defined by the ACA, for calendar year 2016. They were measured
in brackets: 0, 1-4, 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, 20-24, 25-29, 30-34, 35-39, 40-49, 50-74, 75-99,
100-49, 150-99, and 200+.20 Full-time employment was also measured at the time of the
survey (March 2017). These brackets were finer than those available from MEPS-IC
public tabulations (recall Figure 1), but even so total employment and full-time
equivalent employment can therefore only be approximated.

V.A. Before-after estimates from total employment measures
The Mercatus-Mulligan survey does not measure employment before the
implementation of the employer mandate.

Obtaining a before-after estimate of the

number of 49er businesses therefore requires combining it with earlier and comparable
data on the size distribution of small businesses. The Census Bureau’s business survey of
2012 is one such survey, because it uses firm-level size bins although it measures total
employment rather than FTEs or their components. 21
Appendix I shows that there is not a noticeable change in the size distribution if
the 40-49 bracket is combined with 50-74. However, the 40-74 total employment bracket
has become more intensive in businesses with 40-49 employees. The Mercatus-Mulligan
sample-share point estimate is 0.45, which is remarkably greater than 0.37 for 2012.22

20

Recall that the survey has no businesses with zero or one full-time employees and no
businesses with 200 or more full-time employees; these brackets are relevant for part-time
employment.
21
The Census Bureau provides separate counts of “establishments” and “firms”; I use the firm
counts. Mercatus-Mulligan survey does not contain these terms (with one exception on page 18
where “firm” is used); it refers to the sample respondent’s “company.”
22
I simulated a bootstrap distribution from the Mercatus-Mulligan sample. Only 2.8 percent of
the bootstrap samples have a share as small as the 2012 share from the Census Bureau.

11

This is essentially the same result as Figure 1’s MEPS-IC result, except with different
source data that has finer size bins.
Because any business with at least one part-time employee has total employment
greater than its FTEs, an employer can change from large to small by the ACA’s
definition without going below 50 total employees. In other words, a 49er business is by
definition to the left of the 50-FTE threshold even though it can be on either side of the
50-employee threshold. The 49ers to the right of that threshold do not affect the amount
of employment at businesses with fewer than 50 total employees except to the extent that
the workers who are let go (or not hired) are absorbed by a business that does have less
than 50 total employees. If we had an estimate of the impact of the employer mandate on
the amount of employment by businesses with, say, 40-49 employees, that would be a
lower bound on prevalence of 49er businesses as measured by their combined
employment.
The first row of Table 2 shows estimates of this type derived from the MercatusMulligan/Census-Bureau comparison above (first column) and from the MEPS-IC
(second column). The first column takes the Mercatus-Mulligan estimate of national
employment by businesses sized 40-49 and subtracts what it would have been if it had
grown from its level in 2012 (as measured by the Census Bureau) at the same rate as
national payroll employment (7.6%), with a result of 636,842 extra employees. If we
attribute these extra employees to 49er businesses with less than 50 employees, and they
average 40 employees each, then there were 15,921 49er businesses with less than 50
employees in 2016. The second column repeats the exercise with the MEPS-IC, but
using the 25-49 bracket and comparing 2015-16 to 2013-14.
The estimates in the top panel of Table 2 have a couple of potential sources of
error. One is that the total employment data do not show exactly what 40-49 or 25-49
employment would have been without the employer mandate and therefore do not show
the exact impact of the mandate on employment in the categories. Even if we knew the
impact on employment in those categories, it would be different from the employment of
the 49er businesses because the employer mandate presumably has a nonzero effect on
the employment of, say, businesses sized 40-49 that are not 49er businesses. I interpret
that top panel as an order-of-magnitude check on what this paper’s cross-sectional
estimates show.
12

Because most small businesses have part-time employees, there are likely more
49er businesses with 50+ employees than with less than 50. Estimating the number of
49er businesses having at least 50 employees is, with these data, even more difficult
because (i) those businesses do not change total-employment categories, (ii) the two
types of 49ers have offsetting effects on average employment of the 49er businesses with
at least 50 total employees. 23 The middle panel of Table 2 reports how much extra the
businesses sized 50-99 would have to hire in order for employees per business in that
group to either have increased from 2013-14 at the same rate as the entire labor market
(Assumption A) or at a zero rate (Assumption B). 24 The extra employees reflect the
activities of both types of 49ers as well as the activities of the non49er businesses in the
50-99 size category. The smaller 49ers presumably would have had fewer employees
than the average business size 50-99, and thereby raise the average by leaving the
category. The non49ers may also be reducing average employees per business because
the employer penalty is a tax on full-time employment. If these two cancel, then the
entries in the middle panel of Table 2 are estimates of the aggregate number of positions
removed by the 49er businesses that have at least 50 employees. If we further assume
that the average 49er business with at least 50 employees reduced employment by 10,
then we can divide by 10 to get estimates of the number of 49er businesses that have at
least 50 employees.
Overall, these back-of-the envelope calculations with time series on total
employment suggest that there are roughly 28,000 to 50,000 49er businesses, with
roughly 9,000 to 16,000 of them having fewer than 50 total employees. As expected,
49ers are difficult to detect with total employment measures.

V.B. Estimates using compliance rates
An accurate assessment of the impact of regulation on the size distribution of
businesses requires size measures that closely approximate how size is measured by the
23

The larger 49ers reduce the average because they remain a business in the 50+ category but
reduce employment.
24
These calculations are not attempted with Mercatus-Mulligan and the Census Bureau data
because such calculations would be sensitive to small differences in how the two surveys define
firms or employees.

13

regulation, which in the case of the ACA is FTEs. Even with FTE measures, detecting an
economically meaningful number of 49er businesses – say, ten percent of the all
businesses that would otherwise have 50-74 FTES – is a statistical challenge because the
mandate presumably does not bind for the majority of business that would offer health
insurance coverage regardless of the mandate. These challenges have been cited in
previous research the effect of regulation on the size distribution of businesses (Gurio and
Roys (2014) and Garicano, Lelarge and Van Reenen (2016)).
The Mercatus-Mulligan survey has an advantage in measuring voluntary
compliance. Table 3’s top row shows that 64 percent of small businesses were offering
ESI at the time of the survey. Weighted by employment, the percentage is 74. The bars
in Figure 3 display the propensity to comply by business size, measured as the bracketed
number of full-time employees at the time of the survey. Compliance includes voluntary
compliance, that is, any business that offers health insurance coverage to its employees
even though it is exempt from the mandate. Notice how the compliance propensity dips
sharply between 30 and 49 full-time employees. The tallest bar in the chart is the one
that begins at 50 full-time employees.
Even without the ACA, the propensity to offer ESI is expected to increase with
business size. I adjust for this by counting the number of other fringe benefits that each
sample respondent offers. 25 As shown by Figure 3’s solid series, this number is a
smoother function of business size and increases with size in almost every instance.
Figure 3’s pattern can be detected in a regression framework by regressing an
indicator variable for ESI on indicator variables for the size brackets between 30 and 49,
the number of other fringe benefits, the business’ median annual salary of nonmanagement full-time employees, and industry indicator variables. As shown in Table
4’s ordinary least squares (OLS) column, the indicator coefficients range from 0.12 to
0.20, which is about the dip shown in Figure 3.
The other-fringes variable is economically and statistically significant.

The

interquartile range for that variable is 4, which by itself explains twenty percentage points

25

By using such a measure, I fail to detect those businesses that are 49ers because their cost of
offering fringe benefits is generally high. The other fringe benefits are: 401K matching, dental
insurance, paid maternity/paternity leave, short-term disability, long-term disability, life
insurance, commuter benefits, and childcare benefits.

14

of ESI propensity.

As shown in Figure 3, twenty percentage points is comparable to

what can be explained with business size. This result is probably unsurprising because
both employer and employee characteristics pushing toward ESI (business size,
employee-family situations, etc.) tend also to push toward offering other fringe benefits.
The coefficients on size still do not fully reflect the prevalence of 49ers because
some of them might have had fewer than 50 full-time employees even without the ACA.
But they can be adjusted by assigning each business a probability of having 30-49 FTEs
based on their brackets for full- and part-time employment. A sample respondent’s
probability assignment is done in three steps: (i) assigning a probability of each integer
number of full-time employees 10, 11, … 199 from the reported bracket and assuming
that size is distributed Pareto within brackets,26 (ii) assigning a probability of each integer
number of part-time employees 0, 1, … 249 from the reported bracket and assuming that
size is distributed Pareto within brackets, (iii) forming a joint distribution by assuming
within-bracket independence between full- and part-time employment. Assuming each
part-time employee is 2/3 FTE, the joint distribution assigns each sample respondent a
probability of FTEs in the interval [30,50).
The probability is then used as a regressor in the ESI equations, using full-time
employment bracket indicators as instrumental variables. The two-stage least squares
estimates are shown in the second column of Table 4. The estimated coefficient on the
probability variable is 0.267, which suggests that businesses with 30-49 FTEs are 26.7
percentage points less likely to offer ESI, holding constant the other regressors. This is
almost twice as much as the coefficients shown in the OLS column, which is expected
given that full-time employment is not the same as FTEs and the latter is what designates
an employer as large for penalty purposes. Either of these is suggesting that, weighted by
employment, businesses with size close to, but below, the threshold are 12-27 percent
less likely to be offering coverage. I interpret these extra non-ESI employers as the
49ers.
Although not shown in the table, the coefficient on the probability variable would,
transformed to a marginal effect at the sample means, also be 0.27 if the second column
were estimated as a probit rather than a linear probability variable. Results are similar if
26

The cross-bracket data and estimates are shown in Appendix II.

15

the dental benefit is omitted or entered separately from the other non-ESI benefits (third
and fourth columns of the table). The probability variable’s coefficient is somewhat
closer to zero if 2016-size indicators are also used in the first stage regression (see the
TSLS2 column). The TSLS3 column shows no statistically significant effect when the
only first-stage size indicators are from 2016, and the point estimate is about one third of
what it is with TSLS1.
As discussed in Section II, the FTE threshold applies in the calendar year prior to
the coverage year. For this reason, my preferred specifications measure ESI at the time
of the survey (March 2017) and relate it to the FTE threshold in the prior calendar year
(2016).

At the same time, measurement error in the probability variable and its

ingredients (e.g., respondents have imperfect recall or interpret the meaning of the
workforce question somewhat differently than the ACA measures the FTEs) suggests that
its ingredients should not be used to predict it in the first stage regressions. This is the
reason why Table 4’s TSLS1 specifications exclude the 2016 full-time indicators, except
as ingredients to constructing the probability variable. 27
Table 5 shows the arithmetic for translating the regression coefficient into an
estimate of the national total number of 49er businesses, regardless of whether their total
employment is more or less than fifty. Limiting the Mercatus-Mulligan sample to 5-199
total employees, the sample average probability variable is 0.141 as shown in row (2).
The 2014 Census Bureau data, scaled to 2016 using national payroll employment over
that period, suggests that there are 44 million people nationally who worked in 2016 for
employers sized 5-199 (total employment). Multiplying the two, we have about 6 million
people nationally who worked for employers with 30-49 FTEs (row (6)). Interpreting the
coefficient of 0.267 (second column of Table 4) as indicating 49ers, that makes 1.7
million employees at 38,327 49er businesses nationwide. Table 5’s 38,327 bottom line is
fairly consistent with the rougher before-after estimates shown in Table 2.

For each of the first stages of Table 4’s TSLS1 and TSLS2 specifications, the F-test on the joint
hypothesis that the three time-of-survey full-time indicators have zero coefficients in the has a pvalue less than 0.001. Also note that, for a regression of ESI on the exogenous variables for the
TSLS3 specification, the F-test on the joint hypothesis that the three 2016 full-time indicators
have zero coefficients in the has a p-value of 0.48. These results are consistent with the
hypothesis that 2016 full-time employment is measured with more error than time-of-survey fulltime employment.
27

16

V.C. ESI transitions
Table 3 shows that it was uncommon for businesses to be without ESI in both
2013 and at the time of the survey. With this much ESI-status transition, not to mention
size transition, we expect 2016 or time-of-survey size to poorly predict ESI in 2013. The
final three columns of Table 4 confirm this, although perhaps it is surprising that the
probability-variable point estimates are not negative as in the table’s previous five
columns.
Table 3 shows that it was rare for small businesses to add ESI in the six months
prior to the survey. 28 It was more common to drop ESI in that timeframe. Table 4’s final
column suggests that dropping ESI is especially common for businesses with between 3049 FTEs in 2016. Indeed, if we compare that column’s probability-variable coefficient
with the second column, it suggests that more than half (16.8 of 26.7) of the extra nonESI businesses of that size recently dropped their ESI. This is consistent with the
hypothesis that a number businesses that would have been close to, but above 50 FTEs
are induced by the ACA to both (a) drop ESI – doing so permits their employees to
receive exchange subsidies – and (b) reduce their employment in order to avoid the
employer penalty. 29

V.D. Employer reports about the ACA’s effect on their hiring
The above results indicate that businesses near the 50-FTE threshold and not
voluntarily offering ESI were reducing their hiring in order to avoid being penalized for
failing to offer ESI.

We can also check whether the managers at these businesses

describe their hiring practices as responding to the ACA in this way, because survey

28

If ESI is offered on a calendar-year basis, then adding or dropping in the six months prior to the
survey means that the plan began on January 1, 2017 or ended on December 31, 2016,
respectively.
29
As answers to an open-ended survey question about how the ACA affects their ESI offering,
employers wrote things like “Sometimes the employees don’t want the private medical care
because they want to use Obamacare instead of paying a private one,” and “Employees at my
company are not eligible to apply for plans offered through the Marketplace because my company
offers insurance coverage.”

17

respondents were asked how “employment practices changed at your company as a result
of the ACA.” They were given multiple answer choices, and could chose more than one.
For the purposes of regression analysis, I summed indicators for the replies “Yes,
we are reducing hours for new employees,” “Yes, we are reducing hours for existing
employees,” “Yes, we are hiring more employees at part-time status rather than full-time
status,” or “Yes, we are hiring fewer employees.” I also formed an indicator variable as
the disjunction of these four answers. The overall sample means of the counting and
indicator variables are 0.46 and 0.34, respectively. 30
Table 6 is much the same as Table 4, except in using these two reduced-hiring
measures as dependent variables. The coefficients on the FTE-probability variables are
economically and statistically significant. In other words, businesses just below the 50FTE threshold are disproportionately reporting that the ACA caused them to reduce
hiring.

V.E. The number of positions absent from 49er businesses
The national number of positions absent from 49er businesses is the product of
the number of 49er businesses and the average number of extra positions that 49er
businesses would have had but for the ACA. Without more information on how 49ers are
formed – e.g., how the cost function (1) varies across businesses and whether (and why) a
49er business might choose a number of FTEs strictly less than 49 FTEs – the MercatusMulligan sample is not well suited to estimate the latter. Table 7 therefore allows the
reader to make an educated guess as to the average number of FTEs absent among 49ers
and then lookup a national number of positions absent. At an average of 6 FTEs per
49er, that makes roughly 250,000 positions eliminated nationwide at 49er businesses. At
10 FTEs per 49er, that is about 400,000 positions.
Three external pieces of evidence suggest that the average number of absent FTEs
per 49er exceeds three or four, and could be as great as ten. First, most “49er” businesses
must have strictly fewer than 49 FTEs, because businesses with exactly 49 FTEs are too
30

44% of respondents said that the ACA did not change their employment practices. 4% said that
they did not know the effect of the ACA on employment practices. The most common response
(25% of the full sample) among the remaining was that weekly hours were being reduced.

18

difficult to detect with the total employment data (recall Figure 1). Second, assuming
that the distribution of FTEs but for the ACA would have been smooth, there are too
many 49er businesses for all of them to have had exactly 50 or 51 FTEs but for the ACA.
Otherwise, but for the ACA, there would be an extraordinary pile of businesses at 50 and
51 FTEs.
Third, recall that Table 2 also has estimates of aggregate positions eliminated by
49er businesses. Based on the MEPS-IC, Table 2 shows that 192,657 fewer employees
are found in 2015-16 in businesses sized 50-99 than would be found if those businesses
had the same average employment as in 2013-14 (Assumption B). The total is 399,158 if
average employment had grown in proportion to the total labor market (Assumption A).
Note that these totals exclude the 49ers that have total employment less than 50, although
I suspect that they are less numerous than the 49ers with 50 or more. The totals also
include large businesses that marginally reduced their employment due to the penalty.
With those caveats, we can estimate the average number of positions eliminated by 49ers
by dividing Table 2’s middle panel aggregates by the number of 49er businesses with
more than 50 employees. If that number is 20,000, then the average positions eliminated
ranges from 10 (Assumption B) to 20 (Assumption A).

At 40,000 businesses, the

average positions eliminated ranges from 5 to 10.
Alternatively, we can directly estimate the aggregate number of positions
eliminated with Table 2’s aggregates (middle panel). In other words, the MEPS-IC data
suggest that 49er businesses eliminated between 192,657 and 399,158 positions, plus all
of the positions eliminated by 49er businesses with less than 50 total employees, minus
the positions eliminated by large employers. This range consistent with the roughly
250,000 positions suggested by the MM sample.
The elimination of 250,000 positions from 38,327 businesses is economically
significant. Note that about 82,000 employers had 50-74 employees in 2014, and another
40,000 had 75-99 employees.

Together they employed about 5 million (8 million)

people, respectively. Presumably their number and collective employment would have
grown about three or four percent like the aggregate labor market did. The MEPS-IC
shows that the business size categories (by total employment) 50-99 and 100-999 actually

19

grew at a significantly lower rate from 2013-14 to 2015-16 than did any of the other
categories.31

31

Recall that more than half of the 49ers are expected to be in the 50-99 total-employment
category, even though they have less than 50 FTEs.

20

V. Conclusions
This paper reports the first results of a new survey of 745 businesses with 2-199
full-time employees and their hiring and compensation practices. The paper focuses on
the question of how many businesses are small, by the legal definition, solely because of
the Affordable Care Act’s employer mandate: the 49ers. The stakes are large, because
crossing the 50-FTE threshold from below costs the salary equivalent of almost $70,000
per year in addition to the marginal employee’s salary and benefits.
Before-after comparisons between the Census Bureau business survey and the
Mercatus-Mulligan survey show little change in the size distribution of businesses
between 2012 and 2016, except among businesses in the total-employment range 40-74.
Among the latter businesses, the employment percentage of those with less than fifty
employees has increased from 37 to 45, and this does not count the fact that a number of
49ers reduce employment below 50 full-time-equivalent employees (FTEs) without
reducing their total employment below 50. Annual time series from the MEPS-IC show
an extraordinary jump in the employment percentage of those with less than fifty
employees, beginning in 2015, which is the same year when the large-employer
designation began its 50-FTE threshold.
The size distortion is closely linked with whether a business offers employersponsored health insurance (ESI) to its employees. Even by comparison with businesses
employing fewer than 30 full-time workers, the propensity to offer ESI is low among
employers with 30-49 full-time employees. The size of this dip in the ESI propensity
indicates the prevalence of 49er businesses: they do not offer ESI and thereby keep
employment low enough to avoid the ACA’s large-employer designation. The crosssection finding is my second and strongest piece of evidence that the ACA’s employer
mandate is pushing a significant number of businesses below the 50-FTE threshold.
My point estimate is that the United States has 38,327 49er businesses that
collectively employ 1.7 million people. This translates to roughly 250,000 positions that
are absent from 49er businesses because of the ACA, but the Mercatus-Mulligan sample
by itself is not well suited for accurately assessing the average number of positions that
the 38,327 49er businesses eliminated.

The sample also indicates that businesses
21

continue to adjust their employment over time. For example, many of them reported that,
because of the ACA, they hire fewer workers or at least fewer full-time workers, but tried
not to adjust the situations of their existing employees. If the ACA and its employer
mandate remains in place, perhaps the prevalence of 49er businesses will increase over
time.
By definition, the 49er businesses have less than 50 FTEs and do not offer ESI.
But it appears that a majority of them had been offering it in the prior year. Employers
with 30-49 FTEs are also disproportionately likely to report that they hire less or have
shorter work schedules because of the ACA. This is my third finding pointing toward an
economically significant effect of the ACA on the size distribution of businesses. To my
knowledge, this is the first paper to find a business-size distortion that is readily visible in
aggregate U.S. data. It is also remarkable that the distortion can be linked to a specific
regulation with a precisely known penalty for violations.
Individual-based surveys of businesses are rarely used in economics, but that is
bound to change as the survey industry is becoming more efficient (i.e., cheaper for the
researcher). It is worth noting the contrast between the Mercatus-Mulligan survey design
and in-depth studies of a particular business (e.g., (Einav, et al. 2014, Handel and Kolstad
2015)). The former design has the advantage of representing a wide range of industries
and geographic areas.

Moreover, this study is not sponsored by any business and

therefore does not require a corporation’s approval for its release. Corporate approval is
a concern for studies of a particular business, especially when the topic involves publicrelations-sensitive issues such as distorting business practices to lessen the cost of wellintended federal regulations. Another dividend from using a professional survey research
firm is that every respondent completed the survey.
This paper does not put its estimates into an equilibrium framework. 32 Future
research needs to estimate the number of eliminated positions at 49er businesses that
resulted in jobs created at businesses that compete with 49ers in product or labor markets.
To the extent that the employer mandate shifts employment from 49ers to other
businesses, future research needs to assess the aggregate productivity loss from the shifts,
32

See Gallen (2013) for a model along these lines. Business entry and exit also need further
consideration: they are not captured by the Mercatus-Mulligan survey, although they may be
reflected in my Figure 1.

22

recognizing that the ACA’s large-employer definition is just a vivid example of a more
general pre-existing enforcement phenomenon. Even without the ACA, businesses are
taxed and regulated, and understand that adding to their payroll tends to increase the
enforcement of those rules, albeit not discretely at 50 FTEs (Bigio and Zilberman 2011,
Bachas and Jensen 2017). One ingredient in such productivity calculations would be the
number of positions shifted, which I found to be roughly 250,000.
From the equilibrium perspective, another interpretation of my cross-section
finding – the nonmonotonic relationship between ESI and employer size around the
threshold – is that businesses below the threshold did not adjust their size but merely
dropped their coverage, in which case, I have mislabeled them as 49ers. Indeed, I find
that such businesses are disproportionately likely to have dropped their coverage in the
past year. However, this alternative explanation does not by itself explain why (i) so
many businesses were added to the 25-49 (total employment) size category, (ii) so few
were added 50-99, or (iii) coverage rates are not particularly low for businesses with less
than 30 FTEs.
The implementation of the employer penalty in January 2015 coincides with a
sudden slowdown in the post-recession recovery in aggregate work hours per capita, with
2016 national employment about 800,000 below the trend prior to the implementation of
the employer penalty (Mulligan 2016). This paper’s estimates permit us to gauge the
aggregate importance of the 49er phenomenon, not counting the marginal employment
impact on non-ESI businesses that continue to employ 50 or more FTEs. If 250,000
positions were the aggregate employment effect of 49ers (see the equilibrium caveat
above), that would be about one third of the recovery slowdown. 33 Perhaps more
important would be the social value of those positions, given that employment and
income are substantially taxed by payroll, income, and sales taxes even without the ACA
thereby creating a wedge between the positions’ social and private values. If that wedge
were $20,000 annually, that would be $5 billion of lost annual social value, plus the usual
A recent empirical paper by Duggan, Goda and Jackson (2017) concludes that “labor market
outcomes in the aggregate were not significantly affected” by the ACA. The paper focuses on
comparisons of geographic areas, such as states with and without the ACA’s Medicaid expansion,
but these areas are no different in terms of the implementation of the employer mandate or the
number of 49ers that resulted (see Appendix III). In other words, the DGJ paper is not designed
to measure the labor market effects of the employer mandate.
33

23

Harberger triangle, which is 38,327 businesses in the quantity dimension and up to
$68,987 annually in the price dimension (about $1 billion annually).

24

Appendix I. Further characteristics of the Mercatus-Mulligan
sample
The sampling approach
Table 8 shows the frequency of the various sampling criteria that caused a
respondent’s survey to be terminated. From a sampling perspective, Hanover did not
sample small businesses but rather (specific types of) employees at small businesses. 34
As compared to a sample of small businesses (say, by sampling from IRS tax returns), the
Mercatus-Mulligan (MM) sample is more likely to include the larger of the small
businesses. Conversely, a business-based sample is less likely to include an employee
from the larger of the small businesses. Neither approach is “right” or “wrong”, but the
distinction must be acknowledged so that point estimates are properly weighted and that
statistical confidence/credible intervals are calculated properly.
When the statistic of interest is the fraction of small-business employees in a
given situation (e.g., employed by a business offering health insurance coverage), an
employee-based sample like ours requires no weighting as long as it is representative of
the employee population of interest. In contrast, a business-based sample would require
weighting each business by the number of employees.
When the statistic of interest is the fraction of small businesses in a given
situation (e.g., offering health insurance coverage), an employee-based sample like ours
needs to be weighted by the inverse of the number of employees. A business-based
sample would require no weighting, as long as it was representative of the business
population of interest. The United States Census Bureau tracks all U.S. employers with
Employer Identification Numbers, from which it calculates its “Statistics of U.S.
Businesses (SUSB).” The SUSB is a good national benchmark for the MM sample,
although its most recent release is for 2014. Figures 2 and 4b display the distribution of
employees in businesses with 5-199 employees by size and industry, respectively,
calculated from SUSB and from the MM sample.

34

Figure 4a displays the job titles of the survey respondents.

25

As noted, unweighted shares in the MM sample represent employment-weighted
shares of the small-business population. In order to project national employment totals
from the MM sample shares, I follow the procedure from Table 5. Specifically, I first
obtain the MM shares of businesses sized 5-199, in order to correspond with CensusBureau size categories. I then multiply those shares by 2014 aggregate employment in
businesses sized 5-199 (row (3) of Table 5), and then rescale to 2016 using national
payroll employment in the two years (rows (4) and (5) of Table 5).
The national number of businesses is the ratio of the national number of
employees to average business size. Average business size can be calculated from an
employee-based sample like MM by calculating sample-average business size, weighted
by the inverse of the size of the business (row (8) of Table 5 is an example).

Summary statistics
Table 3 displays the MM sample averages of offering and changing coverage.
Table 5 row (2) shows the average propensity to have 30-49 FTEs in 2016. Table 9
displays additional sample summary statistics.

Participation in SHOP and the small business health care credit
The ACA created a health insurance marketplace for small businesses called the
Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP). A business with fewer than 25 FTEs
and participating in SHOP is potentially eligible for a tax credit for health insurance
premiums paid on behalf of employees. 35 Measuring nationwide SHOP participation has
proven difficult because SHOP enrollment can occur outside healthcare.gov. The recent
35

United States Internal Revenue Service (2017). There are exceptions for Iowa and Wisconsin:
“For calendar year 2015, SHOP Marketplaces in certain counties of Iowa did not have qualified
health plans available for employers to offer to employees. Transition relief allows employers
with a principal business address in the counties listed below to claim the credit for their tax year
beginning in 2015. Certain employers with a 2015 health plan year that continues into 2016 can
claim the credit for part of their tax year beginning in 2016… For calendar year 2016, SHOP
Marketplaces in certain counties of Wisconsin will not have qualified health plans available for
employers to offer to employees. Transition relief allows employers with a principal business
address in the counties listed below to claim the credit for their tax year beginning in 2016.”

26

Mercatus-Mulligan survey of small businesses in early 2017, projected to nationwide
totals, shows about 150,000 businesses participating in SHOP with about 100,000 of
them receiving the tax credit. Compare the 100,000 to more than 5 million businesses
nationwide that have fewer than 25 employees. 36
The United States Government Accountability Office (2016) reported 181,000
businesses claiming the tax credit in tax year 2014. Note that participation is expected to
be less after 2015 because a business’ eligibility is limited to two years; tax year 2016
was the first year that a small business could find itself ineligible for the credit solely
because of participation in prior years.37

36

Also note that adding an indicator for having the small business health credit as a regressor in
Table 4’s column (2) ESI regression has no effect on the coefficient estimated on the probability
variable (0.267).
37
See also U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis (2015, 2016), showing a sharp
drop in the aggregate amount of the credit between fiscal years 2015 and 2016.

27

ACA IMPACT ON SMALL
BUSINESS SURVEY
Prepared for Mercatus Center

May 2017

In the following survey design, Hanover Research seeks to
uncover how hiring and benefits practices have changed among
small businesses in the United States since the implementation
of the Affordable Care Act in 2014.

Hanover Research | May 2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Survey questionnaire ....................................................................................................... 3
SCREENERS ................................................................................................................................3
FORMER EMPLOYEES ...................................................................................................................7
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT OFFERINGS ......................................................................................................7
NEW AND FORMER EMPLOYEE HEALTHCARE OFFERINGS...................................................................13
ACA FAMILIARITY AND EXPERIENCE ..............................................................................................14
SHOP MARKETPLACE ................................................................................................................20
EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EDUCATION ...................................................................................21
COMPETITOR OFFERINGS ............................................................................................................22
FINAL QUESTIONS .....................................................................................................................23

© 2016 Hanover Research

2

Hanover Research | May 2017

SURVEY QUESTIONNAIRE

SCREENERS
Hanover Research is conducting a brief survey of business decision-makers. This survey will
take about 10-15 minutes to complete and your responses will remain strictly confidential.
Hanover Research is an independent market research firm based in Washington, D.C., and is
in no way affiliated with any other entity or organization.
Please click below when you are ready to begin.
Q1.1 What is your employment status?
Terminate if not Full-time
 Full-time (30+ hrs/week)
 Part-time (Less than 30 hrs/week)
 Self-employed
 Unemployed
 Retired
 Student
 Other

© 2016 Hanover Research

3

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q1.2 In which of the following industries do you work?
 Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
 Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas Extraction
 Utilities
 Construction
 Manufacturing
 Wholesale Trade
 Retail Trade
 Transportation and Warehousing
 Information
 Finance and Insurance
 Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
 Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services
 Management of Companies and Enterprises
 Administrative and Support and Waste Management and Remediation Services
 Educational Services
 Health Care and Social Assistance
 Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation
 Accommodation and Food Services
 Other Services
Q1.3 Which of the following comes closest to your title?
 Business Owner or President
 C-Level (CEO, COO, CFO, etc.)
 Vice President or equivalent
 Director or equivalent
 Manager or equivalent
 Administrative support Terminate
 Other
Q1.6 In which of the following years was your company started?
 2017 Terminate
 2016
 2014
 2013
 2012
 2011
 2010 or earlier

© 2016 Hanover Research

4

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q1.7 In the following two questions, we ask you to think about full-time employees. For the
purposes of this survey, full-time employees are those who work, on average, at least 30
hours a week.
Q1.8 In total, how many full-time employees does your company currently employ?
 Just myself Terminate
 2-4
 5-9
 10-14
 15-19
 20-24
 25-29
 30-34
 35-39
 40-49
 50-74
 75-99
 100-149
 150-199
 200+ employees Terminate
Q1.9 On average, how many full-time employees did your company employ in the year of
2016?
 Just myself Terminate
 2-4
 5-9
 10-14
 15-19
 20-24
 25-29
 30-34
 35-39
 40-49
 50-74
 75-99
 100-149
 150-199
 200+ employees Terminate

© 2016 Hanover Research

5

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q1.10 On average, how many part-time employees did your company employ in the year
of 2016?
 None
 1-4
 5-9
 10-14
 15-19
 20-24
 25-29
 30-34
 35-39
 40-49
 50-74
 75-99
 100-149
 150-199
 200+ employees
Q1.11 What is your role in making decisions regarding employee hiring and benefits?
 I have no role in this process Terminate
 I have a limited role in this process Terminate
 I help influence decisions regarding employee hiring practices and employee benefits
 I am part of a team that makes decisions regarding employee hiring practices and
employee benefits
 I am solely responsible for making decisions regarding employee hiring practices and
employee benefits
Q1.12 How long have you been in a position at your current organization where you have
had at least some influence over decisions regarding hiring practices and employee
benefits?
 Less than 6 months
 6 months to 1 year
 1 to 2 years
 3 to 5 years
 Longer than 5 years
Q1.13 Approximately what is the median annual salary of a typical non-management fulltime employee? Your best guess is fine. Please note that the scale is from $0-$100,000.
______ Annual Salary ($000s)

© 2016 Hanover Research

6

Hanover Research | May 2017

FORMER EMPLOYEES
Q2.1 Has your current organization hired any employees in the past 24 months?
 Yes
 No
Q2.2 Have you had any employees leave your current organization in the past 24 months?
This includes employees who were fired, resigned, or retired from your company.
 Yes
 No
If Q2.2 = “Yes”
Q2.3 Thinking of those former employees who have left your company in the past 24
months who left for other employment opportunities, approximately what percentage
went to the following types of employers? Please enter a percentage in each of the
following boxes, making sure they add up to 100%. Please enter your best estimate for each
of the following sources.
______ Small business competitors (those with fewer than 50 employees)
______ Medium business competitors (those with 50 to 199 employees)
______ Large business competitors (those with over 200 employees)
______ Non-competitive industries
______ Other (please specify)
______ I don't know

Skip if 2.3 “I don’t know” = 100%
Q2.4 Thinking about the employers that your former employees went to, to the best of your
knowledge, how many of these employers provide health insurance to their employees?
None of Some of Most of
All of
I don't
them
them
them
them
know
Display all options with 1% or more
from Q2.3











EMPLOYEE BENEFIT OFFERINGS
Q3.1 Now we'd like to ask you a few questions regarding your company's employee benefits
structure. Please answer all questions truthfully and to the best of your ability; however,
please do not hesitate to indicate if you do not know the answer to a specific question.

© 2016 Hanover Research

7

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q3.2 Which of the following does your company currently provide as part of its employee
benefits structure? Please select all that apply.
 Employer 401K matching
 Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer
 Employer-sponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange
 Vision insurance
 Dental insurance
 Paid maternity/paternity leave
 Short-term disability
 Long-term disability
 Life insurance
 Commuter benefits
 Childcare benefits
 Other (Please specify) ____________________

If Q3.2 “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” AND “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange” are NOT selected
Q3.3 How do employees at your organization primarily obtain health insurance?
 Through the local exchange
 Privately purchased individual health insurance
 Through a spouse or family member’s employer
 Through Medicare or Medicaid
 Other (please specify) ____________________
If Q3.2 “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” AND “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange” are NOT selected
Q3.4 Has your company ever sponsored health insurance for its employees?
 Yes, within the last year
 Yes, one to two years ago
 Yes, three to five years ago
 Yes, more than five years ago
 No

© 2016 Hanover Research

8

Hanover Research | May 2017

If Q3.3 = “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.5 How long ago did your company begin offering employer-sponsored health insurance
to its employees?
Respondents do not see options which conflict with Q1.6
 Less than 6 months ago
 6 to 12 months ago
 Between 1 and 2 years ago
 Between 2 and 3 years ago
 Between 3 and 5 years ago
 Over 5 years ago

Q3.6 Thinking about your own employer and its benefits offerings, which of the following
influenced your organization's decision to offer these benefits, outside of any legal
requirement to do so?
Staying
A sense of
Other
No reason
competitive
responsibility
factors other than a
with other
towards
legal
companies
employees
requirement
which offer
to provide it
similar benefits
Carry
forward
selected




responses
from Q3.2
If Q3.6 = “Other” for “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer”
Q3.7 You indicated that other factors influenced your company to offer employersponsored health insurance. Please describe those other factors.
If Q3.6 = “Other” for “Employer-sponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.8 You indicated that other factors influenced your company to offer employee subsidies
for health insurance through the SHOP exchange. Please describe those other factors.
If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.9 How many times has your company changed its health insurance plan offered to
employees in the past three years?
Respondents do not see options that conflict with Q1.6 OR Q3.5
 Once
 Twice

© 2016 Hanover Research

9

Hanover Research | May 2017

 Three times
 More than three times
 Have not changed health insurance plan offered to employees in the last three years
See if 3.5 = “3 to 5 years ago” OR “Over 5 years ago” and If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored
health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employer-sponsored health insurance
through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.10 Is that more often, less often, or the same frequency that your company changed its
health insurance plan offered to employees prior to the last three years?
 More often
 Less often
 The same
 Not sure

See if 3.5 = “3 to 5 years ago” OR “Over 5 years ago” and If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored
health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employer-sponsored health insurance
through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.11 In the last three years, what change have you noticed in the percentage of new hires
enrolling in your company's employer-sponsored health insurance plans?
The percentage of new hires enrolling is...
 Increasing by a lot
 Increasing by a little
 Decreasing by a little
 Decreasing by a lot
 I have not noticed any change
See if 3.5 = “3 to 5 years ago” OR “Over 5 years ago” and If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored
health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employer-sponsored health insurance
through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.12 In the last three years, what change have you noticed in the percentage of current
employees re-enrolling in your company's employee-sponsored health insurance plans?
The percentage of employees re-enrolling is...
 Increasing by a lot
 Increasing by a little
 Decreasing by a little
 Decreasing by a lot
 I have not noticed any change

© 2016 Hanover Research

10

Hanover Research | May 2017

See if 3.5 = “3 to 5 years ago” OR “Over 5 years ago” and If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored
health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employer-sponsored health insurance
through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.13 In the last three years, what change have you noticed in the percentage of new hires
and current employees enrolling their spouses and/or families in your company's
employee-sponsored health insurance plans?
The percentage of employees enrolling their spouses and/or families is...
 Increasing by a lot
 Increasing by a little
 Decreasing by a little
 Decreasing by a lot
 I have not noticed any change
See if Q3.11 – Q3.13 = “Increasing by a lot” OR “Increasing by a little”
Q3.14 Please describe the impact this increase in enrollment rates has had on your company
in your own words.
See if Q3.11 – Q3.13 = “Increasing by a lot” OR “Increasing by a little”
Q3.15 You indicated increased enrollment in your company's employee-sponsored health
insurance plan. What kind of impact has this increase in enrollment rates had on your
company's operating budgets?
 Very Negative
 Negative
 Neither Negative nor Positive
 Positive
 Very Positive
See if Q3.14 = “Very Negative” OR “Negative”
Q3.16 You indicated that increased enrollment in your organization's employee-sponsored
health insurance plan has had a negative impact on your organization's budget. Which of

© 2016 Hanover Research

11

Hanover Research | May 2017

the following has your organization done to overcome this negative impact? Please select
all that apply.
 Switched to a lower cost plan with fewer benefits
 Required employees to pay more towards their health insurance
 Dropped group coverage
 Raised prices for your goods or services
 Cut employee bonuses
 Cut wages for new employees
 Cut wages for existing employees
 Cut other benefits (please specify) ____________________
 Other (Please specify) ____________________
 Nothing
Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q3.17 What percentage of your organization's employees are insured through your
company's health insurance?
______ % Enrolled (Slider scale, 0% to 100%)

Ask if Q3.17 is <100%
Q3.18 Thinking about those employees who are not currently insured through your
company's health insurance, approximately what percentage are insured through other
sources?
 % insured privately ____________________
 % insured through Medicare ____________________
 % insured through Medicaid ____________________
 None
 I don't know
Seen if currently employ 20 or more employees and If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored health
insurance through a private insurer” or “Employer-sponsored health insurance through the
SHOP exchange”
Q3.19 Have any former employees at your company qualified for a continuation of their
health benefits through your company? This could be due to retiring employees or
those qualified through the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA).
 Yes
 No
 I don't know

© 2016 Hanover Research

12

Hanover Research | May 2017

If Q3.19 = “Yes”
Q3.20 How many of those former employees who are qualified for a continuation of their
health insurance choose to continue using your company's health insurance?
 25% or less
 26% to 50%
 51% to 75%
 76 to 100%

If Q3.19 = “Yes”
Q3.21 What type of change have you noticed in the rate at which former employees
continue with your company's insurance in the last 3 years?
___________________________

NEW AND FORMER EMPLOYEE HEALTHCARE OFFERINGS
Q4.1 Thinking about your company's recruiting and hiring process, please indicate how
heavily you rely upon the following sources for potential applicants to your company.
Never
Rarely
Occasionally
Moderately
Rely on a
rely on
rely on
rely on
rely on
great deal
External job-positing
websites (e.g. Indeed,
Monster,
CareerBuilder, etc.)











LinkedIn











Glassdoor











Campus recruiting











Referrals











Q4.2 What percentage of your new hires over the past 2 years have come from the following
sources? Please enter a percentage in each of the following boxes, making sure they add up
to 100%. Please enter your best estimate for each of the following sources.
______ Local competitors
______ National competitors
______ Non-competing industries
______ Graduate programs
______ Undergraduate schools
______ Other

© 2016 Hanover Research

13

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q4.3 Thinking about only those employees that your company has hired since you've been
in your current position, how knowledgeable are you about their previous health insurance
coverage?
 Not at All knowledgeable
 Slightly knowledgeable
 Moderately knowledgeable
 Very knowledgeable
 Extremely knowledgeable

Hide if Q4.3 = “Not at All knowledgeable”
Q4.4 Please describe your employees' previous health insurance coverage. Be as detailed
in your description as possible.
___________________________

ACA FAMILIARITY AND EXPERIENCE
Q5.1 How familiar do you consider yourself to be with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), also
known as Obamacare, as it applies to your company’s employer healthcare plan offerings?
 Not at All Familiar
 Slightly Familiar
 Moderately Familiar
 Very Familiar
 Extremely Familiar

Q5.2 In your own words, please describe the ways in which the ACA affects your employer
healthcare plan.
___________________________

Q5.3 The Affordable Care Act (ACA) is a federal law passed in 2010. While there are many
components to the ACA, this survey will focus mainly on two aspects: The Employer
Mandate and the Health Insurance Exchange System.
Q5.4 How much research did you or your company do in order to determine how this law
would affect your company?
 None at all
 Very little
 A moderate amount
 A lot

© 2016 Hanover Research

14

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q5.5 Did your company hire an external advisor, separate from your benefits provider or
broker, to help ensure it was complying with ACA regulations?
 Yes
 No
 I don't know
Hide if Q5.4 = “None at all”
Q5.6 For how long, prior to when the ACA took much of its effect in 2014, did you or your
company research how this law would affect your company?
 Less than 3 months
 3 to 6 months
 7 to 12 months
 Over a year
Hide if Q5.4 = “None at all”
Q5.7 Which of the following resources did you or your company use while researching the
ACA and how it would affect your company? Please select all that apply.
 Healthcare.gov
 Other government websites
 Non-governmental websites
 News providers (including newspapers, TV news programs, and news magazines)
 Other HR professionals
 Benefits provider/broker
 Other (please specify) ____________________
 I don't remember

Q5.8 Which resource did you or your company find most educational?
 Healthcare.gov
 Other government websites
 Non-governmental websites
 News providers (including newspapers, TV news programs, and news magazines)
 Other HR professionals
 Benefits provider/broker
 Other (please specify) ____________________

© 2016 Hanover Research

15

Hanover Research | May 2017

Seen if Health Insurance Offerings changed in past 3 years in Q3.7
Q5.9 You previously stated that you have changed your health insurance offerings in the
past 3 years, to what degree was this update motivated by the new laws surrounding the
ACA?
 Wholly motivated
 Mostly motivated
 Partially motivated
 Not at all motivated

If Q5.9 = “Partially motivated” OR “Mostly motivated” OR “Not at all motivated”
Q5.10 Please tell us what else motivated your company to change your health insurance
offerings, if not the new laws surrounding the ACA.

See if Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored healthcare”
Q5.11 How have your company's health insurance premiums changed since the ACA took
full effect?
 They have decreased a lot
 They have decreased slightly
 They have increased slightly
 They have increased a lot
 No change
See if Q5.11 ≠ “No change”
Q5.12 How much do you attribute that change to the ACA? Please indicate your response
in terms of percent with 0% meaning you attribute none of your health insurance premium
change to the ACA and 100% meaning you attribute all of your health insurance premium
change to the ACA.
______ % of change attributed to ACA (Slider scale, 0% to 100%)

© 2016 Hanover Research

16

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q5.13 Have employment practices changed at your company as a result of the ACA?
 Yes, we are hiring fewer employees
 Yes, we have lowered salaries for new employees
 Yes, we are hiring more employees
 Yes, we have increased salaries for new employees
 Yes, we are reducing hours for new employees
 Yes, we are reducing hours for existing employees
 Yes, we are hiring more employees at part-time status rather than full-time status
 No
 I don't know

See if Q5.13 = "Yes, we are reducing hour for new employees”
Q5.14 You indicated that you are reducing hours for new employees; how often do you
reduce new employees hours to under 30 hrs/week?
 Never
 Rarely
 Sometimes
 Often
 Always
See if Q5.13 = "Yes, we are reducing hours for existing employees”
Q5.15 You indicated that you are reducing hours for existing employees; how often do you
reduce existing employees hours to under 30 hrs/week?
 Never
 Rarely
 Sometimes
 Often
 Always

Q5.16 Please briefly describe how your company’s hiring practices have changed.
___________________________

© 2016 Hanover Research

17

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q5.17 In which of the following ways have your employee healthcare benefits been
changed as a result of the ACA? Please select all that apply.
 Spousal coverage has been dropped
 Plan offerings have been limited
 Lower cost plans with fewer benefits are now exclusively offered
 Employees are required to pay more towards their health insurance
 Wages have been raised to enable employees to purchase a plan from the state
exchange
 Group coverage has been dropped
 Employee bonuses have been cut
 New employee wages have been cut
 Existing employee wages have been cut
 Other (please specify) ____________________
 Our healthcare benefits have not changed as a result of the ACA

If Q3.2 = “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” or “Employersponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q5.18 To the best of your knowledge, did your company ever consider eliminating its
employer-sponsored health insurance to, instead, increase wages to enable individuals to
purchase a plan on the exchange in their state?
 Yes, our company plans to eliminate its employer-provided insurance in the next 12
months
 Yes, this option was strongly considered
 Yes, there was some consideration of this option
 No, this option was not considered
 I don't know

If Q5.18 = “Yes, our company plans to eliminate its employer-provided insurance in the next
12 months” OR “Yes, this option was strongly considered” OR “Yes, there was some
consideration of this option”
Q5.19 Is this something you discussed with your employees?
 Yes
 No

© 2016 Hanover Research

18

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q5.20 To the best of your knowledge, have you noticed any change in the rate at which
candidates accept job offers from your firm since the passing of the ACA?
 Candidates are accepting offers for our firm much less frequently
 Candidates are accepting offers for our firm somewhat less frequently
 Candidates are accepting offers for our firm somewhat more frequently
 Candidates are accepting offers for our firm much more frequently
 I have not noticed any change
See if Q5.20 ≠ “I have not noticed any change”
Q5.21 To what degree do you think the changes your company has made in response to the
ACA have impacted this change in offer acceptance rate?
 No impact on the change in acceptance rate
 A very minor impact
 A slight impact
 A moderate impact
 A large impact
Seen if Average Business Size in 2016 was 100+
Q5.22 Has your company been subjected to a monetary penalty as a result of the Employer
Mandate enforced through the ACA?
 Yes
 No
 I don't know
If Q5.22 = “Yes”
Q5.23 Please describe to the best of your ability the penalty you received and why your
company was subjected to it as a result of the Employer Mandate enforced through the
ACA.
If Q5.22 = “Yes”
Q5.24 Has your company made changes to avoid any future monetary penalties?
 Yes
 No
 I don't know
If Q5.24 = “No” OR “I don’t know”
Q5.25 Please briefly describe what has prevented your company from making changes.
____________________

© 2016 Hanover Research

19

Hanover Research | May 2017

Seen if Average Business Size in 2016 was fewer than 50
Q5.26 These next questions will ask you about the Small Business Tax Credit, a component
of the ACA which financially compensates small businesses that provide health insurance
to their employees. To qualify for this tax credit, companies must employ less than 25 fulltime (30 hrs or more/week) employees, the average annual wages of these employees must
be under $50,000 a year, and offers health insurance to its employees. Through the Small
Business Tax Credit, the government pays for at least 50% of the cost of premium,
employer-provided health insurance uniformly across all employees.
Seen if Average Business Size in 2016 was fewer than 50
Q5.27 After reading the description above, does your company qualify for the Small
Business Tax Credit provided through the ACA?
 Yes
 No
 I don't know
If Q5.27 = “Yes”
Q5.28 Has your company ever applied for the Small Business Tax Credit?
 Yes, this year
 Yes, in previous years but not this year
 No, never
If Q5.28 = “Yes, in previous years but not this year”
Q5.29 Why did your company choose not to apply for the Small Business Tax Credit this
year?
If Q5.28 = “No, never”
Q5.30 Why has your company never chosen to apply for the Small Business Tax Credit,
despite being eligible?
If Q5.28 = “Yes, this year”
Q5.31 Financially speaking, how helpful has the Small Business Tax Credit been for your
company?
 Not at All Helpful
 Slightly Helpful
 Moderately Helpful
 Very Helpful
 Extremely Helpful

SHOP MARKETPLACE
This section is only asked among companies with fewer than 100 Employees

© 2016 Hanover Research

20

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q6.1 How familiar are you with the Small Business Health Options Program (SHOP)
marketplace available for small businesses with fewer than 100 employees?
 Not at All Familiar
 Slightly Familiar
 Moderately Familiar
 Very Familiar
 Extremely Familiar
Q6.2 The SHOP Marketplace (Small Business Health Options Program) provides qualified
employers with lower costs on group plans and claim tax credits. As of 2016, employers
with less than 50 full-time equivalent workers can use the SHOP. In 2016, the SHOP has
opened for businesses with 100 or fewer full-time equivalent workers. Please keep in mind
that employees who work on average 30 hours a week qualify as full-time workers.
Q6.3 After reading the description above, has your company considered entering into the
SHOP marketplace?
 Yes, we have already entered the SHOP marketplace
 Yes, we plan on entering the SHOP marketplace in the next 12 months
 Yes, we have strongly considered this option but decided against it
 Yes, we have somewhat considered this option but decided against it
 No, we have never considered this option
 I don't know

EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EDUCATION
Q7.1 In what ways does your company educate employees in any way about their health
insurance options? Please select all that apply.
 We provide educational material about their healthcare options
 We conduct workshops educating employees on their healthcare options
 We provide information regarding health insurance options as part of our employee
training process
 Other (Please specify) ____________________
 We do not provide any resources educating employees on their healthcare options

© 2016 Hanover Research

21

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q7.2 How frequently do your fellow employees come to you with questions regarding the
ACA?
 Never
 Less than once a month
 Once a month
 2-3 times a month
 Once a week
 2-3 times a week
 Daily
See if Q3.2 ≠ “Employer-sponsored health insurance through a private insurer” or
“Employer-sponsored health insurance through the SHOP exchange”
Q7.3 Do your fellow employees come to you if they have issues signing up for health
insurance coverage on the exchange?
 Yes
 No
 Not applicable
See if Q7.3 = “Yes”
Q7.4 Please provide a brief description of the issues outlined by these employees.

COMPETITOR OFFERINGS
Q8.1 How knowledgeable are you about your competitors' health insurance offerings?
 Not at All Knowledgeable
 Slightly Knowledgeable
 Moderately Knowledgeable
 Very Knowledgeable
 Extremely Knowledgeable
Q8.2 Thinking about only those competitors who employ fewer than 50 employees, how
many of them offer their employees employer-sponsored health insurance? Please answer
to the best of your ability.
 None that I know of
 Some of these competitors
 A moderate amount of these competitors
 Most of these competitors
 All of these competitors
 I don’t know

© 2016 Hanover Research

22

Hanover Research | May 2017

FINAL QUESTIONS
Q9.1 We just have a few more questions for you, and we thank you in advance for
completing this survey in full.

Q9.2 How concerned is your organization about future additional requirements for ACA
compliance?
 Not at All Concerned
 Slightly Concerned
 Moderately Concerned
 Very Concerned
 Extremely Concerned
Q9.3 How would your organization be affected if the ACA is repealed?
 It would be much worse off
 It would be somewhat worse off
 It would not be better or worse off
 It would be somewhat better off
 It would be much better off

Q9.4 Are you registered to vote as a Republic, Democrat, Independent, or something else?
 Republican
 Democrat
 Independent but more frequently vote Democrat
 Independent but more frequently vote Republican
 Other (please specify) ____________________
 I am not registered to vote
 I prefer not to say

© 2016 Hanover Research

23

Hanover Research | May 2017

Q9.5 Do you consider yourself to be conservative, moderate, or liberal when thinking about
politics?
 Conservative
 Lean conservative
 Moderate
 Lean liberal
 Liberal
 Undecided
 Other (please specify) ____________________
 I prefer not to say
Q9.6 Thank you for your time. Your responses to this survey are greatly appreciated.

© 2016 Hanover Research

24

Appendix II. Assigning Each Respondent a Probability of 30-49
FTEs
I assigned each business a probability of having 30-49 FTEs based on their
brackets for full- and part-time employment.

A sample respondent’s probability

assignment is done in three steps: (i) assigning a probability of each integer number of
full-time employees 10, 11, … 199 from the reported bracket and assuming that size is
distributed Pareto within brackets, (ii) assigning a probability of each integer number of
part-time employees 0, 1, … 249 from the reported bracket and assuming that size is
distributed Pareto within brackets, (iii) forming a joint distribution by assuming withinbracket independence between full- and part-time employment. Assuming each part-time
employee is 2/3 FTE, the joint distribution assigns each sample respondent a probability
of FTEs in the interval [30,50).
Figure 5a shows the MM full-time data and the Pareto model fit to it (shape
parameter 0.067). Sample respondents reporting 2-9 full-time employees are assigned a
probability of zero because all of them report fewer than 40 part-time employees. Figure
5b shows the MM part-time data and the Pareto model fit to it (shape parameter 0.136).
Note that the Pareto models are used only to distribute respondents among the integers
within its reported size category.

28

Appendix III. The Duggan-Goda-Jackson approach to measuring
labor market effects of the ACA
A recent empirical paper by Duggan, Goda and Jackson (2017, hereafter, DGJ)
concludes that “labor market outcomes in the aggregate were not significantly affected”
by the ACA. It also claims (p. 11) to capture the ACA’s effects on labor demand and that
“lower income individuals worked more” because of the ACA (p. 5). However, their
regional-comparison strategy fails to construct comparisons related to the size of the
employer penalty.

By taxing employment, the employer penalty probably reduces

employment, especially in low-income areas where the penalty is the equivalent of 50-60
work days per year. By design, the DGJ study does not measure employment effects of
the employer mandate, regardless of how large they might be.
Assuming that the ACA does more to affect work in Medicaid-expansion states
than in states that did not expand, DGJ emphasize differences between those two types of
states. But I am not aware of any evidence that the employer mandate is much different
in Medicaid-expansion states.

Both the MEPS-IC data and the Mercatus-Mulligan

survey show a nationwide change in the size distribution of businesses, with essentially
no difference between the two types of states. Figure 6 is the same as Figure 1, except
that the two types of states are also shown separately: the two series coincide both before
and after the mandate’s implementation.
The Mercatus-Mulligan sample can also be divided into the two types based on
the state of the respondent’s internet-service provider (ISP).38 The two subsamples have
essentially the same propensity of respondents to have FTEs between 30 and 49. 39
It is also difficult to believe that penalizing an employer the equivalent of $3,449
per full-time employee (recall Table 1) would do anything but reduce employment of
low-skill workers. Figure 7, which reproduces Figure 6 except with states distinguished
by their average poverty rate 2009-13 (measured in the American Community Survey; 24

38

508 (234) respondents have ISP in Medicaid expansion (nonexpansion) states, respectively.
Three respondents must be omitted because their ISPs were not in the 50 states or DC. Medicaid
expansion status is taken as of early 2016 and applies to 30 states and DC.
39
The subsample means differ by only eight percent. The t-statistic corresponding to the
hypothesis that the two subsamples have the same average propensity is 0.40.

29

states plus DC are in the high-poverty group), is consistent with this prior because most
of the apparent business-size distortion occurs in the high poverty states.
More generally, it is the size of tax wedges – both from penalties and from
subsidies – that are the basis of economic hypotheses that the ACA would distort the
labor market. It is therefore remarkable that the DGJ paper makes no attempt to measure
the size of the tax wedges created by the ACA, or to utilize tax-wedge measures
published elsewhere (Mulligan 2015b, 2015a). Without such measures, it is difficult to
confirm that DGJ are making comparisons between geographic areas that are sufficiently
different in terms of their ACA wedges to detect the behavioral effects of those wedges.
We therefore have no confirmation that the DGJ study has a decent chance of detecting
the distortions that are of such concern.
An important instance would be to measure the tax wedges for a hypothetical
geographic area (hereafter, HFIA) that, prior to the ACA, had nobody uninsured below
400% of the federal poverty line. By construction, DGJ can find only the effects of the
ACA that exceed those of the HFIA. Yet Mulligan (2015a) shows particularly large tax
wedges for near-elderly insured people, who presumably are among the residents of a
HFIA. Moreover, the employer mandate is a tax on full-time employment, even in places
where the entire population had been insured prior to the ACA.
Even if the labor market effects of the ACA could, as DGJ assert, be measured by
comparing geographic areas with the HFIA, they show an aggregate negative effect of the
ACA on labor force participation (sic). See the first two rows of column (1) of their
Table 4, where the “post” coefficient in the Out-of-the-Labor-Force (OLF) model is
negative according to the prevalence of uninsured poor people and positive according to
the prevalence of uninsured middle-class (roughly, the poverty line up to 400% of
poverty) people, with the two coefficients having essentially the same magnitude.
Because the middle class outnumbers the poor, the negative effect associated with the
middle class dominates (from an aggregate perspective) the positive effect associated
with the poor. Specifically, if we use that regression to project the ACA’s impact on the

30

number of people OLF in the HFIA in 2016, it would be 349,190 less than the U.S.
aggregate ACA impact.40
As DGJ interpret their comparisons with the HFIA, 349,190 is therefore the
ACA’s “effect” on the nationwide number of people OLF. As I explained above, the
ACA effect from their paper is more appropriately understood as 349,190 plus the ACA’s
effect in the HFIA that, judging from the tax wedges, is itself positive. Perhaps the
349,190 is statistically indistinguishable from zero, but it is not economically
insignificant especially when combined with the ACA’s effect in the HFIA.

The

statistical results in the DGJ paper in no way contradict this paper’s finding that the ACA
rather vividly distorts the labor market by, among other things, inducing between 28,000
and 50,000 businesses to cut their payrolls sharply enough to avoid being designated as
large businesses.

To quantify this, it is necessary to have the population-weighted sample means of DGJ’s M*
and E*, which are not reported in the paper. I found 349,190 as [.073*(.0847)+.086*(.0962)]
times the working age population in 2016 (St. Louis Federal Reserve FRED series
LFWA64TTUSA647N minus BLS series LNU00024887Q). The 0.073 and 0.086 are the
unweighted averages reported on page 11 of their paper.
40

31

Table 1. The salary equivalent of the 2017 employer penalty
Scenario:
Expense items
Penalty imposed Salary raised
2017 ACA penalty
2,265
0
Salaries
0
3,449
Payroll tax
0
264
Business income taxes
0
-1,448
Net result for employer expenses including taxes:
$2,265
$2,265

7.65% rate
39% rate

Table 2. Estimates of Threshold Crossings from Total-employment Data
Before-after estimates
MM/Census
49er businesses with fewer than 50 employees
Aggregate post-mandate employment
636,842
Number at 40 employees per business
15,921
Number at 45 employees per business
14,152
49er businesses with 50 or more employees
Aggregate employees eliminated - Assumption A
Number at 10 positions eliminated per business - Assumption A
Aggregate employees eliminated - Assumption B
Number at 10 positions eliminated per business - Assumption B
Total number of 49er businesses
Assumption B, with 45 average employment below 50
Assumption A, with 40 average employment below 50

NA
NA

NA
NA

MEPS-IC
401,242
10,031
8,916

399,158
39,916
192,657
19,266

28,182
49,947

Notes
MM/Census uses brackets 40-49 and 50-74. MEPS-IC uses 25-49 and 50-99.
MM/Census uses the years 2012 and 2016. MEPS-IC uses 2013-14 and 2015-16.
Assumption A: Employment per business would have grown the same 50-99 as for the entire labor market (2.3%)
Assumption B: Employment per business among 50-99 would have been the same as in 2013-14.

Table 3. The propensity to offer ESI in various subsamples

Timeframe and subsample of small businesses
In March 2017, among the entire sample
In March 2017, among those not offering in 2013
In 2013, among those not offering in March 2017
In 2013, among the entire sample

ESI change
Dropped ESI in the past 6 months
Added ESI in the past 6 months

Percentage of
2016 employees at
businesses offering
businesses offering
64
74
45
71
44
67
63
70
Percentage of
2016 employees at
small businesses
small businesses
5
6
<1
<1

Note: a small business is defined as any business having 2-199 full-time employees.

Table 4. The propensity to offer ESI by employer size
From the March 2017 Mercatus-Mulligan survey. Dependent variable is an indicator for offering ESI.

Regressor

OLS

Probability of having 30-49 FTEs in 2016
Have 30-34 full-time employees at the
time of the survey
Have 34-39 full-time employees at the
time of the survey
Have 40-49 full-time employees at the
time of the survey

-0.14
(0.10)
-0.20
(0.12)
-0.12
(0.06)

Number of other fringe benefits offered
(Italics means that dental is excluded)
A dental benefit is offered

0.05
(0.01)

Median annual salary of full-time
nonsupervisory employees ($10,000s)
19 industry indicators
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.00
(0.01)
Yes
0.089
745

TSLS3

Drop ESI
ESI in 2013
in 2017
TSLS1 TSLS3
TSLS1

-0.079
(0.095)

0.075
(0.100)

0.011
(0.097)

0.168
(0.056)

0.05
(0.01)

0.05
(0.01)

0.06
(0.01)

0.06
(0.01)

0.00
(0.00)

0.00
(0.01)
Yes
0.065
745

0.00
(0.01)
Yes
0.079
745

0.00
(0.01)
Yes
0.106
745

0.00
(0.01)
Yes
0.110
745

0.01
(0.00)
Yes
-0.027
745

ESI at the time of the survey
TSLS1 TSLS1 TSLS1 TSLS2
Size Regressors
-0.267
-0.256
-0.288
-0.176
(0.099) (0.100) (0.098) (0.083)

Other Regressors
0.05
0.05
0.03
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
0.20
(0.04)
0.00
0.00
0.00
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
Yes
Yes
Yes
0.043
0.030
0.058
745
745
745

Note: The TSLS1 specification treats the probability variable as an endogenous variable, instrumenting it with the three time-of-survey size
indicators (as well as the other regressors shown). TSLS2 is the same, except also using 2016 size indicators. TSLS3 excludes the time-ofsurvey size indicators. An employer is coded as having ESI in 2013 if and only if it (a) did not have ESI at the interview (March 2017), but
had discontinued it recently or (b) it had ESI at the interview and had it for at least 3 years. OLS standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 5. The nationwide prevalence of 49er businesses

(1)
(2)

(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

Statistic
"Excess ESI" conditional on 30-49 FTEs in 2016
Probability of having 30-49 FTEs in 2016, among
businesses having total employment between 5
and 199, employment weighted
2014 national employment by businesses 5-199
2014 national payroll employment
2016 national payroll employment
2016 national employment at businesses with 3049 FTEs
Employment at the businesses with "excess ESI"
Average employment at businesses with 30-49
FTEs in 2016
Number of 49er businesses in 2016

Note: Row (9) is varies proportionally with row (1).

Source
Table 4

Mercatus survey, simple average
Census Bureau
BLS
BLS
(2)*(3)*(5)/(4)
(1)*(6)
Mercatus survey, average weighted
by probability/(total employment)
-(7)/(8)

Value
-0.267

0.141
42,679,871
138,958,000
144,306,000
6,227,595
-1,664,523
43.4
38,327

Table 6. Employer Reports of the ACA's Impact, by employer size
From the March 2017 Mercatus-Mulligan survey.
Dependent variable counts responses for reducing hours and reduced hiring "as a result of the ACA."

Regressor
Probability of having 30-49 FTEs in 2016
Have 30-34 full-time employees at the
time of the survey
Have 34-39 full-time employees at the
time of the survey
Have 40-49 full-time employees at the
time of the survey
Number of other fringe benefits offered

Counting variable
OLS TSLS1 TSLS2 TSLS3
Size Regressors
0.421
0.303
0.243
(0.169) (0.142) (0.163)
0.55
(0.16)
-0.19
(0.21)
0.22
(0.11)
Other Regressors
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)
(0.01)

Indicator variable
TSLS1 TSLS2 TSLS3
0.264
(0.109)

0.187
(0.092)

0.156
(0.105)

0.01
(0.01)

0.01
(0.01)

0.02
(0.01)

0.03
(0.01)
Yes
0.016
745

0.03
(0.01)
Yes
0.025
745

0.03
(0.01)
Yes
0.027
745

A dental benefit is offered
Median annual salary of full-time
nonsupervisory employees ($10,000s)
19 industry indicators
Adjusted R-squared
Observations

0.04
(0.01)
Yes
0.046
745

0.04
(0.01)
Yes
0.006
745

0.04
(0.01)
Yes
0.019
745

0.04
(0.01)
Yes
0.024
745

Note: The TSLS1 specification treats the probability variable as an endogenous variable, instrumenting it with the three
time-of-survey size indicators (as well as the other regressors shown). TSLS2 is the same, except also using 2016 size
indicators. TSLS3 excludes the time-of-survey size indicators. The indicator variable counts each respondent at most
once, even if they replied both reducing hours and hiring. OLS standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 7. Positions absent from the 38,327 49er businesses
Average number of FTEs eliminated/not
created in order to keep FTEs below 50,
conditional on positive
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12

National number of positions absent
FTE
FT + PT
114,981
123,029
153,307
164,039
191,634
205,049
229,961
246,058
268,288
287,068
306,615
328,078
344,942
369,087
383,268
410,097
421,595
451,107
459,922
492,117

Note: 1.07 positions (full- and part-time combined) are assumed for each FTE.

Table 8. Termination points in the Hanover Survey
Question
number
1
3
4
5
6
8

Answer resulting in survey termination
Not employed full time
Title is not at manager level or higher
Company only started in 2017
Number of full-time employees currently is <2 or 200+
Average number of full-time employees in 2016 was <2 or 200+
"No" or "limited" role in regards to deciding employee hiring and benefits
Total survey terminations

Number terminated here
140
62
14
140
18
197
571

Table 9. Summary Statistics
for the March 2017 Mercatus-Mulligan survey.
Variable
Observations
Number of fringe benefits offered (not
counting ESI)
745
Offer dental plan
745
Median annual salary of a typical nonmanagement full-time employee
745
See also Tables 3 and 5.

Mean

Median Std. dev.

3.07
0.55

3
1

2.23
0.50

52,195

48,000

23,148

Min.

Max.

0
0

9
1

0 100,000

Figure 1. Employees in 25-49 firms,
as a share of employees in 25-99 firms

0.51

(private sector MEPS-IC; FT and PT counted equally)
First year of large-employer determination
without transition relief applicable in the
subsequent (i.e., coverage) year

0.50

0.49

0.48

0.47
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Figure 2. The Size Distribution of Employers
5-199
0.25

2014 (Census Bureau)

2016 (Mercatus-Mulligan)

Fraction of employees

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

5-9

10-14

15-19

20-24

25-29

30-39

Total employment

40-74

75-99

100-149

150-199

Figure 3. Non-ESI firms stay below 50

1

.5

Share offering ESI
.6
.7
.8

2
3
4
Avg number of other fringes

.9

ESI firms do not

2-4

5-9

10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-49 50-74 75-99 100-49150-99

Number of full-time employees
Share offering ESI

Avg number of other fringes

Figure 4a. Which of the following comes closest to your title?

Vice President or equivalent
Other
Business Owner or President

Manager or equivalent
C-Level (CEO, COO, CFO, etc.)

Director or equivalent

Administrative support was also an option. It results in survey termination.

Figure 4b. The industry distribution of small-business employment
5-199
Accommodation and Food Services
Administrative and Support and Waste…
Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting
Arts, Entertainment, and Recreation

Construction
Educational Services

Finance and Insurance
Health Care and Social Assistance

Information

2016 (Mercatus-Mulligan)

Management of Companies and Enterprises

2014 (Census Bureau)

Manufacturing
Mining, Quarrying, and Oil and Gas…
Other Services (except Public Administration)
Professional, Scientific, and Technical…
Real Estate and Rental and Leasing
Retail Trade
Transportation and Warehousing
Utilities
Wholesale Trade
0.00

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.10

0.12

Share of small-business employment

0.14

0.16

0.18

Figure 5a. Full time last year
0.14
0.12

Data
Pareto model with shape 0.067

0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00

10-14 15-19 20-24 25-29 30-34 35-39 40-49 50-74 75-99 100-149150-199

Figure 5b. Part time last year

0.30

0.25

0.20
Data
Pareto model with shape 0.136

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

1-4

5-9

10-14

15-19

20-24

25-29

30-34

35-39

40-49

50-74

75-99 100-149 150-199 200-249

Figure 6. Employees in 25-49 firms, as a share of those in 25-99,
separately by Medicaid expansion status

0.51

(private sector MEPS-IC; FT and PT counted equally)
0.50

Expanding states
Nonexpanding states
0.49

0.48

0.47

0.46
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Figure 7. Employees in 25-49 firms, as a share of those in 25-99,
separately by poverty status

0.51

(private sector MEPS-IC; FT and PT counted equally)
0.50

States with poverty rate >= 0.15

States with poverty rate < 0.15
0.49

0.48

0.47

0.46
2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

2016

Bibliography
Agency for Healthcare Research Quality. "MEPS-IC Sample Size." Medical Panel
Expenditure Survey. July 14, 2017.
https://meps.ahrq.gov/mepsweb/survey_comp/ic_sample_size.jsp (accessed
Ocotber 25, 2017).
Bachas, Pierre, and Anders Jensen. "Optimal Self-Employment Income Tax
Enforcement: Global Evidence." manuscript, Princeton University, 2017.
Bigio, Saki, and Eduardo Zilberman. "Optimal Self-Employment Income Tax
Enforcement." Journal of Public Economics 95, no. 9-10 (October 2011): 102135.
Duggan, Mark, Gopi Shah Goda, and Emilie Jackson. "The Effects of the Affordable
Care Act on Health Insurance Coverage and Labor Market Outcomes." NBER
working paper, no. 23607 (2017).
Einav, Liran, Dan Knoepfle, Jonathan Levin, and Neel Sundaresan. "Sales Taxes and
Internet Commerce." American Economic Review 104, no. 1 (January 2014): 126.
Gallen, Trevor S. "Size Provisions in the Affordable Care Act." manuscript, University of
Chicago, 2013.
Gallen, Trevor S., and Casey B. Mulligan. "Wedges, Labor Market Behavior, and Health
Insurance Coverage." NBER working paper, December 2013.
Garicano, Luis, Claire Lelarge, and John Van Reenen. "Firm Size Distortions and the
Productivity Distribution: Evidence from France." American Economic Review
106, no. 11 (November 2016): 3439-3479.
Gërxhani, Klarita. "The Informal Sector in Developed and Less Developed Countries: A
Literature Survey." Public Choice 120, no. 3 (2004): 267-300.
Gourio, Francois, and Nicolas Roys. "Size-Dependent Regulations, Firm Size
Distribution, and Reallocation." Quantitative Economics 5, no. 2 (July 2014):
377-416.
Handel, Benjamin R., and Jonathan T. Kolstad. "Health Insurance for 'Humans':
Information Frictions, Plan Choice, and Consumer Welfare." American Economic
Review 105, no. 8 (August 2015): 2449-2500.
Henry J. Kaiser Foundation and Health Research & Educational Trust. Employer Benefits
Survey: 2012 Annual Survey. Menlo Park, CA: Henry J. Kaiser Foundation, 2012.
Mulligan, Casey B. "Issues 2016: Has Obamacare Been Good for the Economy?"
manhattan-institute.org. June 27, 2016. https://www.manhattaninstitute.org/html/issues-2016-has-obamacare-been-good-economy-9022.html.
—. Side Effects and Complications: The Economic Consequences of Health-care Reform.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2015b.
Mulligan, Casey B. "The New Full-time Employment Taxes." Tax Policy and the
Economy 29 (2015a): 89-132.
U.S. Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service. "Instructions for Forms 1094-C
and 1095-C (2016)." irs.gov. September 11, 2017.
https://www.irs.gov/instructions/i109495c#d0e911 (accessed October 25, 2017).
U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis. "Tax Expenditures, Fiscal Year
2017." November 2015.
U.S. Department of Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis. "Tax Expenditures, Fiscal Year
2018." September 2016.
32

United States Government Accountability Office. Small Employer Health Tax Credit:
Factors Contributing to Low Use and Complexity. Report to Congressional
Requesters, Washington, DC: United States Government Accountability Office,
2012.
United States Government Accounting Office. Small Employer Health Tax Credit:
Limited Use Continues Due to Multiple Reasons . Testimony Before the
Subcommittee on Economic Growth, Tax and Capital Access, Committee on
Small Business, House of Representatives, Washington, DC: Government
Accounting Office, 2016.
United States Internal Revenue Service. "Small Business Health Care Tax Credit and the
SHOP Marketplace." irs.gov. Januart 26, 2017. https://www.irs.gov/affordablecare-act/employers/small-business-health-care-tax-credit-and-the-shopmarketplace (accessed July 12, 2017).
Viner, Jacob. "Cost Curves and Supply Curves." Zeitschrift für Nationalökonomie 3, no.
1 (February 1932): 23-46.

33

