                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              TRADE IN RISKY ASSETS




                                Lars E.O. Svensson




                             Working Paper No. 2403




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1987




I am very grateful for comments by Alan Deardorff, Avinash Dixit, Jeremy Greenwood,
Boyan Jovanovic, Peter Howitt, Hal Varian, Sweder van Wijnbergen, two anonymous
referees (in particular one with an exptremely thorough and constructive report),
and participants in seminars at University of Western Ontario, University of Michigan,
World Bank, NBER Summer Institute, and lIES. Remaining errors and obscurities
are my own responsibility. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                   NBER Working Paper #2403
                                                   October 1987




                           Trade in Risky Assets




                                  ABSTRACT



     This paper develops a theory of the international trade pattern in

risky assets by applying the law of comparative advantage to asset trade.

According to this law there is a tendency for a country to import assets that

have relatively high autarky prices. The autarky price of an asset is high

if the autarky real interest rate is low, or if the assetts autarky risk

measure (the product of the risk premium and the asset price) is low. It is

examined how autarky interest rates and risk measures are affected by

international differences in (i) stochastic properties of output/endowments,

(ii) the rate of time preference, (iii) the degree of risk aversion, and (iv)

subjective beliefs, and how such differences predict overall capital account

deficits or surpluses as well as the composition of the capital account into

trade in arbitrary risky assets and the special cases of sure indexed bonds,

stocks (claims to output), and Arrow-Debreu securities.




                                                   Lars E.0. Svensson
                                                   Institute for International
                                                     Economic Studies
                                                   University of Stockholm
                                                   S-106 91 Stockholm
                                                   SWEDEN
                                      1




1. Introduction

      This paper develops a simple but general theory of the determinants of

the international pattern of trade in risky assets. The importance of

international trade in risky assets is obvious, with increased liberalization

of international capital movements, and with the observation that in practice

all assets are risky in the sense that their real returns are uncertain.1

Yet it seems that there is much less research done on the pattern of trade in

explicitly risky assets than on the pattern of trade in goods.

      The theory is developed by borrowing from and synthesizing several

strands of literature. We start from the modern formulations of standard

international trade theory, more precisely the general law of comparative

advantage as developed by Deardorff (1980) and Dixit and Norman (1980).

According to the law of comparative advantage there is a positive correlation

between a country's net import of goods and the country's autarky prices

relative to world prices (or relative to autarky prices in the rest of the

world), such that on average a country is a net importer of goods for which

autarky prices are relatively high. With only two goods, the law of

comparative advantage provides an exact relation between the trade pattern

and relative autarky prices. With more than two goods, it provides only a

correlation between the vectors of net import and relative autarky prices,

and it does not provide an exact relation for each individual good.

      It is well known that the standard trade theory can be extended to an




1     Stocks and equities are obviously risky assets, but so are all nominal
bonds in any currency since there is exchange rate and price level risk.
Exchange rate risk makes even very short-term bank deposits risky. A
non-risky asset would be a hypothetical appropriately indexed (to some
consumer price index, say) short-term deposit. Even such an asset is not
sure in utility terms (see footnote 16).
                                      2




intertemporal theory of international borrowing and lending, by interpreting

commodities as dated goods. The law of comparative advantage then implies

that a country will on average have a trade surplus in periods for which the

autarky present value of goods is relatively high, that is, for which autarky

interest rates are relatively low.2 It is also clear that the standard trade

theory can be extended to the case with uncertainty, where goods are

distinguished by the state of the world in which they occur.3 The principle

of comparative advantage then says that a country will on average import

goods in states for which the autarky prices for Arrow-Debreu securities,

that is, state-contingent deliveries, are relatively high.

      A special case of trade in risky assets has received considerable

interest. This is trade in claims to firms' profits, equity. After

pioneering work by Helpman and Razin (1978), a number of papers have recently

examined the effects on trade in equities on welfare, resource allocation,

and the goods trade pattern.4

      Here we will reformulate the law of comparative advantage so as to

cover the case of trade in any arbitrarily specified set of assets, complete

or incomplete.5 This will allow us to include as special cases trade in sure




2     For an explicit statement of the intertemporal extension of the
standard trade theory, see Persson and Stockman (1987).
3     See Pomery (1984), Helpinan (1985a), and Persson and Stockman (1987).
      See for instance Pomery (1984) and  later work by Helpman (1985a,b) and
Grossman and Razin (1984, 1985). Cole (1986) examines the effect of trade in
different kinds of assets (ex post securities, Arrow-Debreu state-contingent
deliveries, and Helprnan-Razin equities) on variance and covariance of key
real variables, like output, consumption, arid trade balance.
5     The set of assets is complete (incomplete) in the usual sense of having
at least as many (fewer) linearly independant assets as (than) the number of
states of the world.
                                       3




 indexed bonds, trade in Arrow-Debreu securities, and trade in equities, or

rather claims to firmst output (we shall make a simplifying assumption of

exogenous stochastic outputs/endowments and no inputs, so as to be able to

disregard the effect of trade in assets on production decisions, in which

case claims to profit and claims to output coincide).

      In standard trade theory, there are basically two approaches to examine

the determinants of the trade pattern. One, the comparative advantage

approach, is to start from the law of comparative advantage and its emphasis

on autarky price differences, and then to go behind the autarky price

differences and explain how these are caused by underlying differences

between countries with respect to technology, endowments, preferences, or

other characteristics. The other, the "direct" approach, is to look directly

at trade equilibria without any reference to autarky prices, and infer how

differences between countries directly determine the trade patter. Whereas

the autarky prices approach was common in the early work on the goods trade

pattern,6 the direct approach has more recently been the dominant one, both

in standard trade theory and in the literature on trade in equities referred

to above.7

      There is, however, a special reason for basing a theory of the trade

pattern for risky assets on relative autarky prices. The reason is that we

can borrow from the general-equilibrium asset-pricing theory developed by




6     See for instance the classic paper by Jones (1956).
7
      For examples of use of the direct approach to the determinants of the
pattern of trade, see Deardorff (1982), the survey by Ethier (1984), Dixit
and Woodland (1982) and Markusen and Svensson (1985) for trade in goods, and
Svensson (1984) and Ethier and Svensson (1986) for trade in goods and
factors.
                                      4




Lucas (1978), Breeden (1979), and others. It turns out to be very convenient.

to use this theory in order to express autarky asset prices in terms of

autarky real interest rates and risk premia. Our work is hence closely

related to international applications of this asset pricing theory, for

instance Lucas (1982), Stulz (1981, 1984), Svensson (1985) and Stockman and

Svensson (1987). That literature has focused on the determinants of prices

on internationally traded risky assets, but not examined the trade pattern in

risky assets in itself. In the typical set-up, as in Lucas (1982), there is

trade in the outside assets, namely claims to output (equities), currencies

and claims to government transfers. Since representative consumers with

identical preferences are assumed, there is no trade in other, inside assets

(which does not prevent any arbitrary inside asset to be priced, however).

Furthermore, the trade pattern in the existing outside assets is trivial,

since a perfectly pooled equilibrium is assumed, in which all investors hold

the same portfolio.8 In our analysis, equilibria will




8
      That is, relative to autarky each country (in a two-country world)
exports half of its assets and imports half of the other country's assets.
Still, capital movements, and correlations between key macro variables like
investment, the current account, output, etc., can be studied, as in Stockman
and Svensson (1987), but any current and capital account movements are due
exclusively to revaluation of domestically based assets relative to foreign
based assets, not to changes in the ownershiD of assets.
      Dumas (1986) considers a model whith two investors with different
degrees of risk aversion where the investors' portfolios are revised over
time and asset trades between them occur. Stockman and Dellas (1986) and
Stulz (1986) consider international asset pricing models with nontraded
goods, where consumers do not have perfectly pooled equilibria but hold a
larger share of domestic assets. Their focus is exclusively on equilibrium
asset price and exchange rate determination and variability. Stockman and
Hernandez (1986) utilize an international asset pricing model to demonstrate
that the effect on policy like capital controls depends crucially on whether
the private sector can hedge against the policy by trading in risky assets
(in their case Arrow-Debreu securities). Gordon and Varian (1986) discuss
welfare effects of taxes on internationally traded risky assets in a CAPM
model and examine the analog to the optimum tariff result for trade in goods.
                                      5




generally not be perfectly pooled.

      We mentioned that our theory is general in the sense of covering any

arbitrary complete or incomplete set of assets, including as special cases

sure indexed bonds, equities and claims on output (stocks), and Arrow-Debreu

securities. Also, our theory includes the determinants of the aggregate

current account and capital account, hence aggregate international borrowing

and lending, as well as the composition of the capital account, the trade in

individual assets (subject to the qualification that when there are many

assets results are in the form of correlations and hold on average, but not

exactly for each individual asset).

      The first step in our method is to express the autarky asset price for

a given asset in terms of the autarky real interest rate and the autarky risk

measure (the risk measure is the product of the risk premium and the asset

price). Differences in countries' autarky real interest rates affect the

autarky prices of and trade in all assets, and are related to whether a

country has an overall capital account deficit or surplus and hence is a net

lender or borrower. A country with a relatively low autarky real interest

rate has a tendency to have an overall capital account deficit and be a net

lender. Differences in autarky risk measures are specific to individual

assets and are related to the trade in individual assets. A country with a

relatively low autarky risk measure for an asset (that is, for which an asset

is relatively less risky) has a tendency to import that asset.

      The second step is to examine what determines the differences between

countries' autarky real interest rates and risk measures. We will look at

the effect on autarky real interest rates and risk measures of differences

between countries with respect to technology, endowments and preferences, or
                                         6




more precisely (i) the stochastic properties of output/endowments, (ii) the

rate of time preference, (iii) the degree of risk aversion, and (iv)

expectations (subjective probability beliefs).

      The paper is organized as follows. Sections 2 and 3 deal with

preliminaries and can be skimmed by readers not interested in the standard

derivation of the law of comparative advantage. Section 2 describes the

model, the equilibrium for a single country, and demonstrates gains from

trade in risky assets. Section 3 describes a world equilibrium with two

countries and derives the law of comparative advantage for trade in risky

assets. Section 4, the core of the paper, discusses the determination of

autarky asset prices, derives the effect of cross-country differences in

technology/endowments and preferences on autarky real interest rates and risk

measures, and finds the trade pattern for arbitrary assets as well as the

special cases of sure bonds, stocks, and Arrow-Debreu securities. Section 5

concludes.

      The results are summarized in a highlighted paragraph at the end of

each subsection of section 4. Reading just those paragraphs gives an

overview of the results.

2. Equilibrium in a Single Country and Gains from Asset Trade

      We consider a situation with one good and two periods. There are two

countries, home and foreign, in the world. Period 1 outputs in the home and

foreign country, y1 and y*l are exogenous, and deterministic. Period 2

outputs in the two countries, y2 and y2, are also exogenous, but stochastic.

We call the vector s =   (y2,y*2)   the state of the world in period 2. Goods

are perishable and there is no storage or other investment technology.

      There is a given set J of J different assets. (We let J denote both

the set and the number of elements of the set.) These assets are traded on a
                                               7




world asset market in period 1, before the uncertainty about the state of the

world in period 2 is resolved. Each asset j E J is characterized by a given

(gross real) return function R(s) which expresses the gross real returns

paid in the one good as a function of state s in period 2. Returns are not

necessarily positive in all states.

          Let us look at some special assets. First, the sure bond pays one unit

of the good in each state. It is identified with j = 0 and is defined by

(2.la)          R0(s) = 1 for for all s.

A second special case is trade in stocks. Let us identify home and foreign

stocks (claims to home and foreign period 2 output, respectively) as assets

j =   h   and j =   f,   defined by the return functions

(2.lb)          Rh(s) = y2 and ltf(s) =     y2   for all

Third, the Arrow-Debreu securities are the set of assets that each pay one

unit of the good in one specific state only. We identify the Arrow-Debreu

security for state s with j =         s, for all s. It is defined by
(2.lc)          R5(o-) = 1 for q   = s,   R5(o) = 0 for all c   s.

          Let S be the (finite or infinite) number of different states of the

world. In standard terminology, the asset market is said to be complete if

the set J of assets is such that there are S linearly independent assets

(that is, there are S linearly independent return functions). Then agents

can   reach   the same consumption bundle across states via trade in the

available assets as they can via trade in the S Arrow-Debreu securities. If

there are fewer than S linearly independent assets, the asset market is said

to be incomplete. Our analysis does not presume that the asset market is

complete or that trade in Arrow-Debreu securities is feasible, but

incorporates these possibilities as special cases. Below, we shall sometimes

assume that the state of the world is bivariate normally distributed. Then,
                                                8



whenever the number of assets is finite, the asset market is incomplete.

         Let us now consider the home country. It has a representative consumer

who is entitled to home output in the two periods. The consumer has a

subjective probability distribution function F(s) over the states of the

world. The consumer has preferences over period 1 consumption, c1, and

state-dependant period 2 consumption, c2(s). The preferences can be

represented by the additively separable expected utility function

(2.2)            U(c1) +

where U(.) is a standard increasing concave sufficiently differentiable von

Neumann-Morgenstern utility function, fi >           0 is is the subjective discount

factor, and E[x] denotes the subjective expected value Jx(s)dF(s).9

         Let m denote (net) import of period 1 goods, and let the J-vector

z =              denote (net) import of the J assets from the world asset market
       (zj)jEJ
in period 1. Then period 1 consumption and period 2 consumption in state s

are given by'°

(2.3a)           c1 = y1 +   m       and

(2.3b)           c2(s) =         +

It is practical to define preferences directly over import of period 1 goods

and assets. Substitution of (2.3) into (2.2) allows us to define the trade

utility function U(m,z) by

(2.4)            U(m,z)    U(y1 + m) +     flE{U(y2 +
Let p and q =
                   (cI)j denote the price of period 1 goods and the J- vector of
9     As is well known, representing preferences by an additively separable
expected utility function does not allow a separation between risk aversion
and intertemporal substitution in consumption (see Selden (1978, 1979)).
When    discussing differences in risk aversion, we shall actually use Selden's
formulation      to separate risk aversion from intertemporal substitution.
10      We disregard bankruptcy issues, by not restricting consumption to be
non- negative.
                                           9




asset prices. It is convenient to define the balance-of-payments (deficit)

function B(p,q,u) as the minimum expenditure on import of goods and assets

required to reach a given utility level. That is,

(2.5)          B(p,q,u) = min{pm + qz U(m,z)     u},
where qz denotes the inner product                  (The balance-of-payments

fullction is simply the standard expenditure function minus the value of

period 1 output.)'1

         In the rest of the paper we will take period 1 goods to be the

nuineraire, p =      1, and hence express asset prices q in terms of period 1

goods.

         It is now easy to represent a trade equilibrium for the economy, an

equilibrium in which the economy faces a given vector of asset prices q on

the world asset market. It is simply given by the equations

(2.6)          B(1,qt,ut) =   0,
(2.7a)         m =                  and
                     B(1,qt,ut)
(2.7b)         z =
                     Bq(1,qt,Ut).
Equation (2.6) says that the balance of payments is zero in equilibrium,

whereas equations (2.7a) and (2.7b) express import of goods and assets as the

derivative of the balance-of-payments function with respect to the price of

period 1 goods and asset prices respectively, exploiting standard properties

of expenditure functions. For given world asset prices qt, equations (2.6)

and (2.7) can be solved for the corresponding home utility level u and the




11    This function occurs in the literature under a variety of names. See
Lloyd and Schweinberger (1986) for references to its use in previous
literature.
                                        10




import m and z of goods and assets.12

         An autarky eiuilibrium, an equilibrium without access to the world

asset market, is given by the equations (2.6) and

(2.8)          Bq(l,q,u) = 0,

the latter stating that the import of assets is zero. (Import of period 1

goods is then also zero, B(1,q,u) =     0,   but by Wairas's Law that equation is

redundant.) Equations (2.6) and (2.8) can be solved for the autarky asset

prices q and the autarky utility level u.

         It follows that the gains-from-trade theorem holds: Let ut be the

utility level associated with a trade equilibrium, and let u be the utility

level in an autarky equilibrium. Then we have

(2.9)          11t   u.

         The proof is as in the standard trade model (see for instance Dixit and

Norman (1980) or Woodland (1982)). First, we have

(2.10)         B(1,qt,ut) = 0 = ma + qtza > B(1,qt,u).

The balance of payments in the trade equilibrium is zero (the first equality

in (2.10). This trivially equals the value at trade asset prices qt of the

autarky import a and za of period 1 goods and assets, since these are zero

(the second equality in (2.10)). Zero import gives autarky utility level u.

The minimum import expenditure at trade prices required to reach utility

level u cannot be larger, and will be less if there is some substitution and

trade prices differ from autarky prices (the inequality in (2.10)). Second,




12    If the balance-of-payments function is not differentiable in p or q,
goods and asset imports are not unique. We can then interpret B and Bq as
correspondances. Our results below on the trade pattern do not depend on
whether goods and asset imports are unique or not. For comparative statics
of the Dixit and Woodland (1982) type, it is necessary that the
balance- of- payments function is differentiable.
                                      11




since the balance-of-payments function is increasing in utility, (2.9)

follows from (2.10).

      We note that the gains-from-trade theorem implies that trade in

complete or incomplete asset markets is better than autarky. However, in

analogy with the case with goods trade only, it does not follow that trade in

more assets is better than in fewer, unless the prices of all previously
traded assets remain unchanged. The usual terms-of-trade qualification

applies: if the prices of assets previously imported (exported) increase

(decrease) when trade in additional assets is opened up, the negative

terms-of-trade effect may outweigh the gains from trade.

3. World Equilibrium and the Law of Comparative Advantage

      Next we shall consider a world equilibrium with trade between the home

and foreign countries. The foreign country has access to a world market with

the same set J of assets as the home country, a representative consumer

entitled to foreign output in the two periods and with a subjective

probability distribution function F*(s), a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility

function U*(.), a subjective discount factor fl*   > 0,   and a trade utility

function over period 1 goods (net) import m* and asset (net) import z,

U*(m*,z*), defined by the analog to (2.4). We can then represent the foreign

country by a balance-of-payments function B*(p,q,u*) defined by the analog of

(2.5). A trade equilibrium for the foreign country is then, for given asset

prices qt relative to period 1 goods, the utility level uL and the import m*

and z of period 1 goods and assets that solve the equations analog to (2.6)

and (2.7). An autarky equilibrium for the foreign country is an autarky

asset price vector q* and a utility level u that fulfill the analogs of

(2.6) and (2.8).
                                       12




         A world eciuilibrium is a vector (qt;mzut;m*,z*,u*t) such that

(qtm,z,ut) and (qt,m*,z*,u*t) are trade equilibria for the home and the

foreign country, respectively, and such that the world asset market and

period 1 goods market are in equilibrium,

(3.la)         z+z*=O,and
(3.lb)         m + m =

(The world market for period 1 goods is in equilibrium whenever the asset
market is in equilibrium, given the budget constraint (2.6) for the home

country and the analog for the foreign country.)

         Let m and z be the home country's import of period 1 goods and assets

in a world equilibrium, and let q and q* be home and foreign autarky asset

prices relative to. period 1 goods. Then the law of comparative advantage can

be written on the form

(3.2)          (q_q*)z   0.

It states that on the average, the home country will import assets whose

autarky prices are higher in the home country than in the foreign country.

If only one asset is traded we have an exact relation between autarky asset

prices and the trade pattern: The asset will be imported (and period 1 goods

will be exported) if and only if the autarky price of the asset is higher in

the home country than in the foreign country. If more than one asset is

traded, the law of comparative advantage provides a "tendency" for a

particular asset to be imported if its autarky price is relatively high,
                                         13




rather than an exact relation for import in any individual asset.'3

         The proof of the law of comparative advantage is as in the standard

trade model (see Deardorff (1980), Dixit and Norman (1980), or Woodland

(1982)). We have

(3.3)          m + qz   B(1,q,ut)   B(1,q,u) =      0.

The first inequality follows since import (m,z) gives utility 11 but is not

necessarily the combination of net import of goods and assets that minimize

expenditure at autarky prices. The second inequality follows since we know

from the gains-from-trade theorem that the home country's utility level ut in

any trade equilibrium cannot fall short of the utility level in autarky u,

and the balance-of-payments function is increasing in utility. The equality

follows from the budget constraint (2.6). An analogous argument for the




13       As Deardorff (1980) emphasizes, a positive inner product xy =
     0 does not exactly provide a positive correlation between the J- vectors x =
        and y    (y), unless either      = 0 or Ey = 0. This is so, since the
(xi)
sample correlation coefficient cor(x,y) is proportional to the sample
covariance cov(x,y) and the latter fulfills cov(x,y) = xy -
Deardorff shows how one can construct correlations in two ways. One way is
to exploit the balance-of-payments constraint. Let qt be the asset prices in
terms of goods in the world equilibrium. Then (3.2) is equivalent to the
statement that the (J+1)-vectors (O,((q-q)/q)) and (m,(qz)) are

positively correlated, since m + qtz = 0. The other way is to restrict the
vector of goods and asset prices to be in the unit simplex. Let (p,q) and
(p*,q*) be the home and foreign autarky prices of period 1 goods and assets.
The proof in the next paragraph of the text gives (pp*,qq)(m,z) 0.
Restricting (p,q) and (p*,q*) to be in the unit simplex then implies that the
(J+1)-vectors ((1,q)/(1÷Jq) - (1,q*)/(1+Eq)) and (m,z) are positively
correlated.
      For our purpose it is sufficient to interprete (3.2) as stating that
there is tendency for asset j to be imported into the home country (z > 0)
when its home autarky price (measured in oods) is higher than its foreign
autarky price (measured in goods) (q >        q).
                                            14




foreign country gives

(3.4)           + q**      0,

which we by (3.1) can write as

(3.5)
                -
                    q*    0.


Addition of (3.3) and (3.5) gives (3.2).

        When discussing the the determinants of the trade pattern, one can

either examine the world equilibrium directly, or rely on the law of

comparative advantage. In the former case, one discusses how differences

between countries directly determine the trade pattern, without looking at

the autarky prices. In the latter case, one looks at how differences between

countries determine relative autarky prices, and then from that indirectly

infers the determinants of the trade pattern. In recent discussions of the

trade pattern of goods and factors in the standard trade model, the former

route has usually been chosen (see references mentioned in the Introduction).

In our case, it is convenient to choose the latter route, since we can then

directly apply a standard theory of asset pricing.

4. The Pattern of Trade in Risky Assets

        a. The current account and the capital account

        Let us state the balance-of-payments relation for the home country in a

trade equilibrium. We can write it as

                                       =   0,
(4.1)         m + qtz =   B(1,qt,ut)
stating that the sum of the current account deficit (net import of goods m)

and the capital account deficit (the value of net import of assets qz) is

zero.14 Hence what is being determined in a trade equilibrium is not only




14    Since there is no initial international debt, the trade balance and the
current account coincide.
                                      15




the aggregate current and capital account deficits, that is, whether the home

country is a net borrower or lender (the intertemporal trade pattern), but

also the components of the capital account, the disaggregate trade pattern in

individual assets (the interstate trade pattern).

      If we would like to concentrate on the intertemporal trade pattern, we

could simplify the model by considering trade in oniy one asset, and even

disregard the effect of uncertainty and incomplete markets by then assuming

that there is no uncertainty and only one state in period 2. This gives us

the simplest possible model to discuss international borrowing and lending.

If we would like to concentrate exclusively on the trade pattern in risky

assets, we could eliminate the first period, and assume that assets are

traded before uncertainty is resolved. This then abstracts from

intertemporal trade and gives us the simplest possible model of trade in

risky assets, "interstate" trade.

      As we shall see, in the more general model intertemporal trade and

interstate trade are not independent, and, for instance, the available assets

affect a country's current account. Therefore, we choose to keep the

two-period framework. This also has the advantage that the expressions for

asset prices to be derived are similar to those used in the asset-pricing

literature.

      b. Autarky asset prices

      The home autarky asset price q of a particular asset j with return

vector Ri(s) is simply given by the marginal rate of substitution between

asset j and period 1 goods of the trade utility function (2.4) at zero import

of goods and assets,                   where    and U denote the partial with

respect to z and in.   It follows front (2.4) that the autarky asset price will

fulfill
                                              16




                  =
(4.2)

the   familiar expression of the discounted expected utility of period 2

returns over the marginal utility of period 1 consumption.

        It is practical to relate the price of an asset to the real interest

rate on a sure bond, and to the risk measure for the asset. First, define

the autarky real interest rate, r, from the autarky asset price of the sure

bond,
                                 =
(4.3)         q0 =     1/(1+r)
where we have substituted (2.la) in (4.2). Second, let us define the autarky

risk measure for asset j, Hi, as

(4.4)         11.i =
                       -Cov[U(y2)RJ/E[U(y2)].
Third, use the rule E[xy] =           E[xJE[y] + Cov[x,y] to rewrite (4.2), and apply
the definitions (4.3) and (4.4). This gives,
                                 -
(4.5)         q = {E[R]              II}/(l+r).
We see that the asset price can be written as the present value of the

difference between its expected return and its risk measure.

        The risk measure is proportional to the negative of the covariance

between the marginal utility of period 2 consumption U(y2(s)) and the

returns Ri(s).15 Hence it is positive or negative depending upon whether

period 2 marginal utilities and returns are negatively or positively




15    The risk premium can be defined as the difference between the expected
gross rate of return,           and the gross real rate of interest, l÷p.
Then the risk premium is equa' to ll/q and fulfills        =

                                     and is hence the negative of the covariance
between the marginal rates of substitution and the ex post rates of return

R (s)/.
                                          17




correlated. The risk measure for an asset can be interpreted as a measure of

how risky that asset is relative to the sure bond. If the risk measure is

positive, the asset is riskier than the sure bond. If it is negative, the

asset is less risky than the sure bond.16

      It is clear from (4.5) that autarky prices for a given asset may differ

across countries because autarky interest rates, autarky risk measures, or

both, differ across countries. If the subjective beliefs, the subjective

probability distributions over states of the world, differ across countries,

autarky asset prices may differ also because the expected return for a given

asset differs. The analysis below consequently examines the underlying

determinants of differences in autarky interest rates, risk measures, and

expected returns.

      c. Trade in risky assets

      We shall examine the difference between the home and foreign countries'

autarky asset prices of a given asset j E J. We will look for conditions

under which the home country's autarky asset price exceeds the foreign

country's autarky asset price, and hence under which there will be a tendency

in a world equilibrium for asset j to be imported by the home country and

exported by the foreign country. In the special case where asset j is the

only traded asset we will know for sure that asset j will be imported.

      The home autarky asset price of asset j is given by expression (4.2) or

(4.5). The foreign autarky asset price is given by an analogous expression,




16    Note that the sure bond has a sure return, but that the utility value
of the return is risky, since marginal utility itself is risky. Hence there
is nothin paradoxical with assets that are less risky than the sure bond. A
sure-utility bond (in autarky) (j = u) would have returns R11(s) fulfilling

                1,   hence R11(s) =             for all s.
U(y2)R11(s) =                         1/U(y2)
                                           18




with a *   denoting foreign output and preferences. Let us now assume that the
subjective probability distribution is the same in the home and foreign

country,

(4.6)        F(s) =   F*(s)   for all s,

so the expected return for a given asset j      is   the same in both countries,

(4.7)        E[R] =       E*[R].
(Below we shall discuss also the case when the subjective probability

distribution differs across countries and (4.7) does not hold.) Let us also

restrict the discussion to assets with positive expected return,

(4.8)         E{R] > 0.
(If the expected return is negative, we can simply redefine the asset by

changing the sign of its returns.)

        If the countries are identical in all respects, the autarky asset

prices will be identical, there is no basis for trade, and zero trade will be

a trade equilibrium. Hence, trade here arises because of differences between

the countries. The countries can differ either with regard to their outputs,

or with regard to their preferences, including their subjective probability

distributions. Let us first consider a situation when the only difference

between the countries is with regard to their outputs.
•
        (i) Differences in output

        Thus, we assume that the foreign country is identical to the home
                                                                   *   on the foreign
country in all respects except the outputs, and we drop the

countryt s preferences.

        Let us first look for conditions under which the home autarky interest

rate is lower than the foreign one,

(4.9)         r <   r*.
A lower home autarky interest rate implies by (4.5) that for all assets,
                                            19




which do not have higher autarky risk measures at borne than abroad, home

autarky prices will be higher, and there is a tendency for the home country

to import all such assets. For assets with a higher autarky risk measure at

home, a lower home autarky real interest rate implies a higher autarky price

but not necessarily higher than the foreign autarky price. Nevertheless, we

may state that a lower home autarky real interest rate contributes to a

tendency to import all assets into the home country, to run a home capital

account deficit, and hence for the home country to be a net lender. This is

true also if the sure bond does not exist. If the only asset traded is the

sure bond, we have an exact result and know for sure that the the home

country will import the sure bond and be a net lender.

      We can examine this by looking at the difference in autarky prices of

the sure bond. The difference is given by

(4.10)      q0 -   q=    [1/(1+r)   -
                                        1/(1+r*)]
                     =                           -
                         /3E[(U(y2)/U(y1))           (Uc(y*2)/Uc(y*l))].
We would like to know under what conditions this difference is positive. Let

us first assume that the countries differ only with respect to period 1

output. We then have

(4.11)
               -
                   q = /3E{U(y2)]/[1/U(y')           -


Since the marginal utility of consumption is decreasing, it follows directly
that the home autarky price of the sure bond is higher, and the home autarky

interest rate lower, if the home country has a higher period 1 output,

(4.12)      y1 >   y1.
This is a standard consumption smoothing result (across countries, though,
                                              20




not across time).'7 The home country has relatively more output in period 1,

and it will export goods in period 1 and import goods in period 2, by being a

net lender in period 1.

         Let us next assume that period 1 output is the same in the two

countries, but that period 2 output is different. Then we have

(4.13)         q0 -    q = flE{U(y2)   -
                                           Uc(y*2)]/Uc(yl).
         Since the marginal utility of consumption is decreasing, it follows

(see Theorem 1 in Lippman and McCall (1981)) that a sufficient condition for

(4.13) to be positive is that home period 2 output is stochastically smaller

than foreign period 2 output, that is, home period 2 output is first-order

stochastically dominated by foreign period 2 output, denoted

(4.14)            <1

First-order stochastic dominance of home output by foreign output implies

that the expected value of home output is smaller,

(4.15)         Ey2 <

and can be understood as a generalization of that property.18

         This result can also be interpreted as a straight-forward consumption

smoothing result. If the home country has lower expected period 2 output

than the foreign country, it will export goods in period 1 and import goods




17    If both countries have less period 1 output than period 2 output
(average or for each state of the world), home consumption becomes more
unevenly divided over time with trade in the sure bond than in autarky.
18    Let C(.) and G*(.) denote the cumulative distribution functions for the
random variables y and y, respectively. We say that y is stochastically
larger than y, written y >1 y, or G* >1 G, if and and only if G(x) - G*(x)
 0 for all x. Equivalently, we say that y* stochastically dominates y to
the first order. See Lippman and McCall (1981).
                                        21




in period 2, by being a net lender in period 1.

         Under the assumption that preferences exhibit non-increasing absolute

risk aversion the third-order derivative Uccc of the von Neumann-Morgenstern

utility function is positive,'9

(4.16)         Uccc >   0,
and the marginally utility of consumption is a convex function of

consumption. Then, another sufficient condition for (4.13) to be positive

(see Theorem 2 in Lippman and McCall (1981)) is that home period 2 output is

more risky than foreign period 2 output, that is, home period 2 output is

second-order stochastically dominated by foreign period 2 output, denoted

(4.17)        Y <2 Y
A special case of this is when home and foreign period 2 output have the same

mean but home output has a larger variance,

(4.18)        Var[y2] > Var [y*2],

or when home period 2 output is a mean-preserving spread of foreign period 2

output. Second-order stochastic dominance can be understood as a

generalization of those special cases.2°




19       The measure of local absolut risk aversion is -U/U. We have

(d/dc)(-Ucc(c)/Uc(c)) =      Uccc/Uc + (U/U)2 0, which implies
Uccc      (U)2/U > 0.
20    Let G(.) and G*(.) denote the cumulative distribution functions for the
random variables y and y, respectively. We say that y is less risky than
y, written y" >2 " or G >2 G, if and and only if Jx[G(z) -      G*(z)]dz 0
for all x. Equivalently, we say that y' stochastically dominates y to the
second order. See Lippman and McCall (1981).
                                    22




      Intuitively we can understand this result the following way. If

marginal utility is a convex function of consumption, Jensents inequality

implies that increased variance in consumption increases expected marginal

utility, which increases the price of the sure bond and decreases the

interest rate. If the third-order derivative is negative, the opposite

result holds. This is an example of the ambiguity of the effect on saving on

increased riskiness of future income (see the survey by Sandmo (1974)). In

the literature there is general agreement that non-increasing absolute risk

aversion and hence a positive third-order derivative of the von

Neumann-Morgenstern utility function is the most relevant case. Thus, the

country with the riskier period 2 output will have a tendency to import the

sure bond, and having the riskier period 2 outputs contributes to a tendency

to import all assets and be a net lender.

      The results above for the sure bond are summarized in Table 1, row (i),

first column.

      Let us next turn to differences in the risk measures. From (4.5) we

see that, for a home autarky real interest not higher than the foreign one, a

lower risk measure at home for asset j implies a higher home autarky asset

price and hence a tendency for asset j to be imported into the home country.

For a home autarky interest rate higher than the foreign one, a lower home

autarky risk measure implies a higher autarky asset price, but not

necessarily higher than in the foreign country. Risk measures are specific

to individual assets and depend on the individual risk characteristics of the

assets. Hence a difference in risk measures for a given asset gives

information about trade in that specific asset; a difference in autarky real

interest rates affect autarky asset prices for all assets and hence gives

information about aggregate asset trade, the capital account.
                                           23




         Let us assume that autarky interest rates are the same, in order to

focus on differences in autarky risk measures alone. Let us look at

conditions for the home autarky risk measure for asset j to be lower than the

foreign one,

(4.19)         ll <   ll.
We assume that period 1 output is the same in both countries. From (4.3) and

equal autarky interest rates it follows that E{Uc(y2)]     E[Uc(y*2)]. Then,
from (4.4) we see the home autarky risk measure then is lower if and only if

(4.20)         Cov[U(y2) R] > Cov[Uc(y*2) RI
that is, if the return is more positively correlated with home marginal

utility of consumption than with foreign marginal utility of consumption.

         Since marginal utility of consumption is decreasing in consumption, we

might believe that (4.20) is equivalent to the simple condition that the

return should be more negatively correlated with home period 2 output than

with foreign period 2 output,

(4.21)         Cov[y2,R] <   Cov[y*2,R].
This is so only in special cases, though. One interesting special case is

when the von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function has constant absolute risk

aversion, that is, when

(4.22)        U(c) =

with   the constant 'i' =        > 0 being Arrow-Pratt's measure of absolute
risk aversion. If in addition period 2 outputs and asset return are all

jointly normally distributed,2' it is easy to apply a theorem by Rubinstein




21    Note that, as usual, the assumption of a normal distribution of outputs
is problematic, since it implies that outputs can take negative values with
positive probability.
                                            24




(1976)22 and show that the risk measure is simply given by

(4.23)         11 =
                         7Cov[y2,R].
Then, for      =   7*,   Hi < 11 is equivalent to (4.21).23

         We conclude that, under the assumption of equal autarky interest rates,

the condition is simply that the return should be more negatively correlated

with home period 2 output than with foreign period 2 output. Then asset j is

less risky in the home country, its autarky risk measure is lower, its

autarky asset price is higher, and there is a tendency that the asset will be

imported by the home country. This result is reported in Table 1, row (1),

the second column.

         Let us next consider trade in home and foreign stocks. Because of

symmetry we need only look at foreign stocks. Trade in foreign stocks is of

course affected by differences in autarky interest rates, since these affect

trade in all assets. Suppose now that autarky interest rates are the same.

Then the autarky risk measure is the only source of differences in autarky

asset prices. The condition for the home autarky risk measure for the

foreign stocks to be low, and thus for a tendency for the home country to

import foreign stocks, is, from (4.21),

(4.24)         Cov[y2,y*2] < Cov[y*2,y*2] =      Var[y*2].
We know that Cov[y2,y*2]         (Var[y2]Var[y*2])h/2. If we assume that home and

foreign period 2 output has the same variance, which from our previous

discussion is in accordance with the assumption of equal autarky interest

rates, we get that a sufficient condition for (4.29) is that home and foreign



22    The theorem says that, if x and y are bivariate normal, under some mild
regularity conditions, Cov[f(x) ,y] = E[f(x)]Cov[x,y].
23    Other cases when (4.20) and (4.21) are approximately equivalent are
discussed in a previous Working Paper version of this paper.
                                             25




outputs are less than perfectly positively correlated. Thus, there is a

tendency for the home country to import foreign stocks if the two period 2

outputs are not perfectly correlated. By symmetry, there will be a tendency

for the home country to export home stocks, if home and foreign period 2

outputs are less than perfectly correlated. These results are summarized in

Table 1, row (i), third column.

         Let us finally consider Arrow-Debreu securities. Let f(s) denote

either the probability of state s (if the probability distribution is

discrete) or the probability density for state s (if the probability

distribution is absolute-continuous). From (2.lc) and (4.2) the home autarky

price of Arrow-Debreu security s, for all s, will then be

(4.25)           q5 =   flf(s)U(y2)/U(y1).
When the countries' period 1 outputs are equal, it follows directly that

there is a tendency for Arrow-Debreu security s to be imported if home period

2 output    in   state s is lower than that of the foreign country,

(4.26)           y2 <   y2.
That is, trade in Arrow-Debreu securities is simply related to the relative

scarcity of period 2 output.

         Summary: Table 1, row (i), summarizes the results on output

differences and asset trade. First, in general a low home autarky interest

rate contributes to a tendency for the home country to import all assets and

be a net lender. If the oniy traded asset is a sure bond, it will definitely

be imported by the home country. The home autarky interest rate is low if

home period 1 output is high, or if home period 2 output is stochastically

smaller than foreign period 2 output. The home autarky interest is also low

if preferences exhibit non-increasing absolute risk aversion, and if home

period 2 output is riskier than foreign period 2 output. Second, in general
                                     26




a low autarky risk measure for an asset (the product of the risk premium and

the asset price) contributes to a tendency for the home country to import the

asset. The autarky risk measure is low if the asset's returns are more

positively correlated with home autarky period 2 marginal utility than with

foreign autarky period 2 marginal utility If autarky interest rates are

equal, under some restrictions there is a more specific result: If the joint

probability distributions between returns and period 2 outputs are normal and

there is constant absolute risk aversion, the autarky risk measure is low if

the asset's return is more negatively correlated with home output than with

foreign output. Third, if autarky interest rates are equal, there is a

tendency for the home country to import foreign stocks, and export home

stocks, if home and foreign outputs are less than perfectly positively

correlated. Fourth, there is a tendency to import an Arrow- Debreu security

for a particular state if home period 2 output in that state is lower than in

the foreign country.

      Next, we assume that outputs are identical in the two countries, but

that preferences differ.24 We shall consider differences in the rate of time

preference (the subjective discount factor), the degree of risk aversion, and

the subjective probability distribution.

      (ii) Differences in the rate of time preference

      The effect of differences in the rate of time preference is easy to

see. Consider the situation when the home country has a lower rate of time

preference than the foreign country. That is, the home subjective discount



24    We assume y2 =   y2,that is, home and foreign period 2 output are
identical and hence perfectly correlated. This is of course not equivalent
to assuming that home and foreign output are i.i.d. In the former case,
claims to home and foreign output are perfect substitutes. In the latter
case, they are not.
                                                27




factor is larger,

(4.27)         /3   >   /3*


It follows directly from the definition of the autarky asset price (4.2) that

home autarky asset prices will be higher for all assets (with positive asset

prices) 25

         Summary: When the home country has a lower rate of time pref.erence,

there is a tendency for all assets to be imported into the home country, and

for the home country to be a net lender.

         (iii) Differences in risk aversion

         We would like to consider differences in risk aversion across

countries. This is a bit problematic with expected utility preferences like

(2.2), since in that formulation attitudes towards risk cannot be separated

from intertemporal substitution. Therefore, we choose to use a formulation

according to Selden (1978), which allows such a separation. More precisely,

we assume that there are intertemporal preferences over period 1 consumption,

c1, and certainty equivalent period 2 consumption, c2, according to the

intertemporal utility function

(4.28)         U(c1) + /3IJ(c2)

Attitudes towards risk are represented by the risk utility function V(c2), by

which the certainty equivalent period 2 consumption is defined according to

(4.29)         V(c2) =        E[V(c2(s))],   or c2 =   V{E[V(c2(s))]}.26



25    We realize from (4.5) that assuming that expected dividends are
positive, (4.10), is not the same thing as assuming that the asset price is
positive, since the risk term may positive and larger than the present value
of the expected return.
26       Note that when the interteinporal utility function is identical to the
risk utility function, U() =            V(),
                                        (4.28) and (4.22) imply the expected
utility preferences (2.2).
                                                 28




         We restrict preferences to have constant absolute risk aversion, that

is,


(4.30)         V(c2)       e7C2
         The trade utility function is defined by U(m,z) = U(y1+m) +

/3U{V{E[V(y2     +                           It can then be shown that autarky asset
                      EjfJR(s))J}}.
prices q =
               Uj(OO)/Um(OO)
                                       can   still   be written as in (4.5), with the risk

measure defined by (4.4). With the risk utility function fulfilling (4.30),

and under the assumption that period 2 output and asset returns are jointly

normally distributed, the risk measure is indeed given by (4.23). The

difference is that the autarky price of sure bonds and the autarky real

interest rate are given by

                       1/(1+r)    =
(4.31)         q0 =                   flU(y2)/U(y1),
where the certainty equivalent period 2 output is given by27
                2 =           -
(4.32)                E[y2]       Var[y2]/2.
         We now assume that the countries differ only with respect to the

measure of absolute risk aversion, and that the home country is more risk
                                             -


averse,

(433)            > 7*

         First, we examine interest rates. We see immediately front (4.32) that

when the home country is more risk averse, the home certainty equivalent

period 2 output, y ,       will   be lower than the foreign one, y         =     2
                                                                               E[y   ]
                                                                                         -
7*Var[y2]/2    (although home and        foreign     period 2 outputs are identical).

Therefore, the home autarky price of the sure bond will be higher and the

real interest rate will be lower,




27       We use that for x normally distributed, E{eX] =              (E[x]-a Var[x]/2)
                                                     29




(4.34)              r >     r*.
This contributes to a tendency for the more risk averse home country to

import all assets.

         Next, we look at the autarky risk measures for a given asset j. In

order to ensure that differences in autarky risk measures are the only reason

for trade, we assume that autarky real interest rates are equal. Since, as

we have seen above, autarky real interest rates differ between the countries,

when the home country is more risk averse and their intertemporal preferences

are identical, we now assume that the subjective discount factors differ so

as to equalize the autarky real interest rates.

         The difference in the autarky risk measures equals, by (4.23),

(4.35)              II. -
                             ll   =   (7.7*)Cov[y2,R.].
It follows from (4.33) that the condition for the home autarky risk measure

to be lower, and for a tendency for asset j to be imported into the home

country, is

(4.36)              COV[Y2R] < 0.
The return should be negatively correlated with period 2 output. From (4.23)

and (4.36) this also implies that the risk measure should be negative,

(4.37)              I1 <     0.
Since the sure bond has a zero risk measure, this means that the asset should

be less risky than the sure bond. Thus there is a tendency for the more

risk-averse home country to import assets which are less risky than the sure

bond.

         Consider also trade in stocks (claims to period 2 output, Rh(s) =

         =   y2).     Since period 2 output is positively correlated with itself, it
Rf(s)
follows directly from the above analysis that there is a tendency for stocks

to be exported by the more risk-averse home country, since they have a
                                          30



positive risk measure and are risker than the sure bond.

         Let us finally consider the special case of Arrow-Debreu securities.

From (2.lc) and the definition of the trade utility function it follows that

the home autarky price of a particular Arrow-Debreu security s = y2 (since

home and foreign period 2 outputs are now identical, the state can simply be

identified with the period 2 output i each country) is given by

(4.38)         q5 =   [f(y2)V(y2)/V(;2)]/(1+r).
Assuming that autarky interest rates are equal and using (4.30) and (4.32)

and some algebra gives the ratio between home and foreign autarky prices of

the security,
                                                 -
                      = e    7*)[y2 -   (E(y2)       (7+7*)Var(y2)/2)]
(4.39)

It follows that there is a tendency for the security to be imported for

states for which period 2 output falls short of a given level of period 2
        2      2        *      2
output y = E(y ) - (-i-y )Var(y )/2. When period 2 output is sufficiently
low, marginal utility in the home country is higher since a higher risk

aversion means that marginal utility decreases more rapidly with consumption.

         Summary: The results under the assumption that the home country has a

higher constant absolute risk aversion than the foreign country are

summarized in Table 1, row (iii). First, when home and foreign intertemporal

preferences are identical, the home autarky interest rate is lower, which

contributes to a tendency for the home country to import all assets and be a

net lender. Second, when also subjective discount factors differ so as to

make autarky real interest rates equal, there is a tendency for the more

risk-averse home country to import assets with negative risk measures, that

is, assets that are negatively correlated with period 2 output and less risky

than the sure bond. Third, there is then a tendency for the home country to
                                            31




export stocks, since they are assets which are more risky than the sure bond.

Fourth, there is a tendency for the home country to import Arrow-Debreu

securities for states with sufficiently low period 2 output.

         (iv) Differences in subjective beliefs

         Finally, we consider the case when countries differ only with respect

to their subjective probability distributions, their beliefs. That is, their

subjective probability distributions are no longer identical,

(4.40)         F(s)     F*(s).

For a given asset j with returns Ri(s) it is no longer true that that

E[R(s)] =                   is equal to E*[R(s)] =                   Therefore, the
              JR(s)dF(s)                              JR(s)dF*(s).
previous method of expressing the asset price in terms of the real interest

rate and the risk measure is not applicable. It is no longer true that a low

autarky interest rate increases the relative autarky price for all assets.

Hence it is no longer true that a low autarky interest rate contribute to a

tendency for all assets to be imported. A low autarky interest rate implies

only that there is a tendency for the sure bond to be imported.

         Assume that preferences are again represented by the expected utility

function (2.2).28 From (4.2) if follows that the difference between the

autarky prices of the sure bond is

(4.41)        q0 -
                      q = fl{E[U(y2)]   -
                                            E*[Uc(y2)J}/Uc(yl).
We can directly apply our results on the autarky interest rates for

differences in period 2 output. First, since marginal utility of consumption

is decreasing, as sufficient condition for a lower home autarky interest rate

is that the home subjective probability distribution over (both countries')

period 2 output, F(y2), (recall that s = y2) is first-order dominated by the


28    That is, the risk utility function in (4.28) is assumed to be identical
to the intertemporal utility function in (4.29).
                                             32




foreign subjective probability distribution over (both countries') period 2

output, F*(y2), that is,

(4.42)        F <1 F*.

Put differently, the home country has more pessimistic beliefs about both

countries' period 2 output than the foreign country. Second, if the von

Neumann-Morgenstern utility function has non-increasing absolute risk

aversion, marginal utility is convex, and a sufficient condition for a lower

home autarky interest rate is that the home subjective probability

distribution over (both countries') period 2 output is second-order dominated

by the foreign subjective probability distribution over (both countries')

period 2 output, that is,

(4.43)        F <2 F*.

Put differently, the home country believes that both countries' period 2

output is more risky than the foreign country believes.

         For an arbitrary asset j, the difference between the home and foreign

autarky price of asset j is

(4.44)         q. -   q = f3J(f(y2)..f*(y2))U(y2)R.(y2)dy2/U(yl)
(when the distributions are absolute-continuous; the analog for discrete

distributions is obvious). Expression (4.44) states that there is a tendency

for asset j to be imported into the home country if the probability density

differences, f(s) -      f*(s),   are positively correlated with the

marginal-utility weighted returns, (U(y2)Rj(s)).29 Thus, we have the rather

obvious result that the home country has a tendency to import an asset when

it assigns higher probabilities than the foreign country to the states where


29       We note that (4.44) being positive is equivalent to a positive
correlation between the f(s) -       f*(s)   and Uc(Y2)Rj(s) since
J(f(s)f*(s))ds = 0 (cf. footnote 13 above).
                                                    33




the assets pays well (where paying well means that the product of marginal

utility of consumption and returns is large).

         For stocks, the autarky price difference is

                  -        =                    -
(4.45)                qj       13{E[Uc(y2)y2]
Let   us consider the case with constant relative risk aversion p (and

intertemporal elasticity of substitution i/p),3°

(4.46)        U(c) =       c1/(1-p),    p > 0.

We have that the product of marginal utility and output is U(y2)y2 =

(y2)1P.     This product is increasing or decreasing depending upon whether the

degree of relative risk aversion is below or above unity.

         Let us consider the case when the degree of relative risk aversion is

above unity (p > 1). Then the product of marginal utility and output is

decreasing and convex, and we have the same two sufficient conditions for a

tendency for the home country to import stocks as we have stated above for

the tendency to import the sure bond, namely that the home country has more

pessimistic beliefs about both countries' period 2 output than the foreign

country ((4.42)), or that home country believes that both countries' period 2

output is more risky than the foreign country believes ((4.43)).

         If the degree of relative risk aversion is below unity (p < 1), the

product of marginal utility and output is increasing and concave. Then the

two sufficient conditions are reversed. The home country should have more

optimistic beliefs about both countries' period 2 output than the foreign

country, that is,

(4.47)        F >1 F*,

or the home country should believe that both countries' period 2 output is


30    In terms of Selden's formulation, V(.) and U(•) are identical and given
by (4.46).
                                          34




less risky than the foreign country believes, that is,

(4.48)         F >2 F*.

         For the special case of Arrow-Debreu securities, the difference in

autarky prices for security s = y2 is simply

(4.49)         q - q* =     fl(f(y2)f*(y2))u(y2)/u(yl).
e see that there is a tendency to import Arrow-Debreu securities for states

that are assigned larger probability by the home country

(4.50)        f(y2) >     f*(y2).
         Summary: The results on differences in subjective beliefs are

summarized in Table 1, row (iv). First, the home autarky interest rate will

be low, and there will hence be a tendency for the home country to import the

sure bond, if the home country has more pessimistic beliefs about the two

countriest period 2 output than the foreign country, or (when preferences in

the two countries exhibit non-increasing absolute risk aversion) the home

country believes that both countries' period 2 output is more risky than the

foreign country believes. Counter to previous cases, a low home autarky

interest rate does not imply that home autarky prices for other assets are

low, and hence does not necessarily contribute to a tendency to import all

assets. Second, there is, rather obviously, a tendency for the home country

to import an arbitrary asset if the home country assigns higher probabilities

than the foreign country to states for which the marginal utility times

returns is high. Third, the tendency to import stocks (claims to period 2

output) depeilds on the degree of relative risk aversion. If the degree of

relative risk aversion is above (below) unity, there is a tendency for the

home country to import a claim to period 2 output if the home country has

more pessimistic (optimistic) beliefs about the two countries' period 2
                                       35




output than the foreign country, or if the home country believes the two

countries' period 2 output is more (less) risky than the foreign country.

Fourth, there is a tendency to import Arrow-Debreu securities for states

(period 2 output levels) that are assigned higher probabilities by the home

country than by the foreign country.

5. Conclusions

      We have presented a theory of the determinants of the trade pattern in

risky assets, by extending the law of comparative advantage according to

which trade is correlated with autarky price differences. Hence we have

looked at how differences between countries with regard to technology,

endowments and preferences determine autarky asset price differences and

consequently the trade pattern in risky assets. We have derived results on

the effect of differences in (i) output/endowments, (ii) rate of time

preferences, (iii) risk aversion, and (iv) subjective beliefs on the trade

pattern in arbitrary risky assets as well as the special cases of sure bonds,

stocks, and Arrow-Debreu securities. The results have been summarized in

highlighted paragraphs at the end of each subsection of section 4, and they

are also summarized in Table 1.

      We realize from our results that, when asset markets are incomplete,

overall capital account deficits or surpluses depend on what assets are

available for international trade. For instance, consider the case when

countries differ only with respect to the stochastic properties of their

output. If there is trade in claims to one country's output oniy, whether a

country is a net borrower or lender depends on whether it is claims to its

output or another country's output that is traded (as we saw above, a country

has a tendency to export claims to its own output and import claims to other

countries' output). It follows that in a monetary model with incomplete
                                     36




markets, it will matter for the capital flows what currency available assets

are nominated in, since the real return on the assets will be affected by

price level risk.

      The results derived have been interpreted in terms of trade in risky

assets between countries. Obviously, the model and its results can also be

interpreted in terms of trade in risky assets between individuals.31

      An important simplifying characteristic of our approach is that an

asset is defined in terms of an exogenously given vector of next period's

gross real returns across states of the world. We share this characteristic

with most of the finance literature. Most assets, however, have gross real

returns endogenously determined. For instance, the returns on equity, being

claims to profits, are clearly endogenously determined when production

decisions and goods and factor prices are endogenously determined. Even for

an asset with exogenously given returns in terms of a particular good, the

appropriate "real" return depends on endogenous relative goods prices when

there are many goods. With many periods, the gross return in next period on

a long-term asset is the sum of next period's endogenous asset price and the

"direct" return/dividend (which may or may not also be endogenous).

Generally, for most assets the stochastic properties of the gross real

returns are endogenously determined and part of the equilibrium, and the

stochastic properties differ between trade equilibria and autarky equilibria.




31    Varian (1987) analyzes the effect on the volume of asset trade of
differences of opinion between agents in a model with trade in Arrow- Debreu
securities, using what we have called in the Introduction the "direct"
approach. Our analysis of the effect of differences in subjective beliefs on
the trade pattern in risky assets, usin the law of comparative advantage,
can hence be seen as complementary to his.
                                         37




From the point of view of our approach, if an asset has one gross real return

vector in a trade equilibrium, and another gross real return vector in

autarky, it is actually two different assets.

       Hence, since most assets have endogenous gross returns, it may seem

that our approach with exogenously specified gross returns should have very

restricted applicability. We argue, however, that our approach can be used

also to predict the trade pattern for assets with endogenously determined

returns. The trick is to identify a particular asset's (endogenously

determined) gross real return vector across states of the world in a trade
equilibrium, and then ask how a hypothetical asset with such a gross real
return vector (taken to be exogenous and      hence held fixed) would be priced in

autarky.    The home and foreign autarky asset prices of the     hypothetical asset

will   then predict the   direction of trade in the particular asset considered.

       Taking   the above   into account, it is   possible to extend the analysis to
many goods and to more than two periods. As in the standard trade theory,
the predictions of the law of comparative advantage are weaker for individual

assets and goods, the more assets and goods there are.

       The analysis has been restricted to a barter model without any money.

It is clearly desirable to include the possibility of nominal assets and to

analyze also the trade pattern in such assets. Extending the model to

include money and other nominal assets raises several issues, though. One

issue, already mentioned above, is that the appropriate gross real returns in

trade equilibrium on any nominal asset considered have to be identified. We

have already mentioned that the real return on nominal assets will depend on

price level risk, which in turn will depend on countries' monetary policies.

For instance, different exchange rate regimes and corresponding different
                                     38




monetary policies will affect the trade pattern in nominal assets and hence

overall capital flows. Svensson (1987) discusses these issues and the

internatiollal trade pattern for nominal assets within the context of the law

of comparative advantage. Persson and Svensson (1987) examine the effect of

different exchange rate regimes and corresponding exchange rate variability

on capital movements within the direct approach to the determination of the

trade pattern in risky assets. Another issue is that the law of comparative

advantage uses the gains-from-trade theorem, which does not necessarily hold

if there are domestic distortions in autarky. Hence it will be crucial for

the analysis how money is modeled, more precisely whether money is modeled as

having real effects and possibly being distortionary, or whether money is

modeled as being neutral.
                                     39




References

Breeden, D.T., 1979, "An Interteinporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic

      Consumption and Investment Opportunities," Journal of Financial

      Economics 7, 265-296.

Cole, H., 1986, "Financial Structure and International Trade," mimeo.

Deardorff, A.V., 1980, "The General Validity of the Law of Comparative

     Advantage," Journal of Political Economy 88, 941-957.

Deardorff, A.V., 1982, "The General Validity of the Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem,t'

     American Economic Review 72, 683-694.

Dixit, A.K., and V. Norman, 1980, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge:

     Nisbet and Cambridge University Press.

Dixit, A.K., and A.D. Woodland, 1982, "The Relationship between Factor

     Endowments and Commodity Trade," Journal of International Economics 13,

      201- 214.

Dumas, B., 1986, "Two-Person Dynamic Equilibrium: Trading in the Capital

     Market," NBER Working Paper No. 2016.

Ether, W.J., 1984, "Higher Dimensional Issues in Trade Theory," Chapter 3 in

     R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics,

     Volume I, Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Ethier, W.J., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1986, "The Theorems of International Trade

     with Factor Mobility," Journal of International Economics 20, 21-42.

Cordon, R.H., and H.V. Varian, 1986, "Taxation of Asset Income in the Presence

     of a World Securities Market," NBER Working Paper No. 1994.

Grossman, G.M., and A. Razin, 1984, "International Capital Movements under

     Uncertainty," Journal of Political Economy 92, 286-306.
                                     40



Grossman, G.M., arid A. Razin, 1985, "The Pattern of Trade in a Ricardian Model

     with Country-Specific Uncertainty," International Economic Review 26,

     193-202.

Helpman, E., 1985a, "Comparative Advantage under Uncertainty," in H. Hesse,

     E. Streissler and G. Tichy, eds., Aussenwirtschaft bei Ungewissheit,

     Tubingen: J.C.B. Mohr (Paul Siebeck), 72-88.

Helpman, E., 1985b, "Trade Patterns under Uncertainty," Foerder Institute

     Working Paper No. 20-85, Tel-Aviv University.

Helpman, E., and A. Razin, 1978, A Theory of International Trade under

     Uncertainty, New York: Academic Press.

Jones, R.W., 1956, "Factor Proportions and the Heckscher-Ohlin Theorem,"

     Review of Economic Studies 24, 1-10.

Lippman, S.A., and J.J. McCall, 1981, "The Economics of Uncertainty: Selected

     Topics and Probabilistic Methods," Chapter 6 in K.J. Arrow and

     M.D. Intriligator, eds., Handbook of Mathematical Economics, Volume I,

     Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Lloyd, P.J., and A.G. Schweinberger, 1986, "Trade Expenditure Functions and

     the Gains from Trade," mimeo.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1978, "Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,"

     Econometrica 46, 1429-1445.

Lucas, R.E., Jr., 1982, "Interest Rates and Currency Prices in a Two-Country

     World," Journal of Monetary Economics 10, 335-359.

Markusen, J.R., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1985, "Trade in Goods and Factors with

     International Differences in Technology," International Economic

     Review 26, 193-202.

Persson, T., and A.C. Stockinan, 1987, Theory of International Financial

     Markets, in progress.
                                    41




Persson, T., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1987, "Exchange Rate Variability and Asset

     Trade," TIES, mimeo.

Pomery, J., 1984, "Uncertainty in Trade Models," Chapter 9 in R.W. Jones and

     P.B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Volume I,

     Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Pratt, J.W., 1964, "Risk Aversion in the Small and in the Large,"

     Econometrica 32, 122-136.

Rubinstein, M., 1976, "The Valuation of Uncertain Income Streams and the

     Pricing of Options," Bell Journal of Economics 7, 407-425.

Sandmo, A., 1974, "Two-Period Models of Consumption under Uncertainty: A

     Survey," Chapter 2 in J.H. Dreze, ed., Allocation under Uncertainty:

     Equilibrium and Optimality, New York and Toronto: Wiley.

Selden, L., 1978, "A New Representation of Preferences over 'Certain

     Uncertain' Consumption Pairs: The 'Ordinal Certainty Equivalent'

     Hypothesis," Econometrica 46, 1045- 1060.

Selden, L., 1979, "An OCE Analysis of the Effect of Uncertainty on Saving

     under Risk Preference Independence," Review of Economic Studies 46,

     73-82.

Stockman, A.C., and II. Dellas, 1986, "International Portfolio

     Nondiversification and Exchange Rate Variability," University of

     Rochester, mimeo.

Stockman, A.C., and A. Hernandez D., 1986, "Exchange Controls, Capital

     Controls, and International Financial Markets," University of Rochester,

     mimeo.

Stockman, A.C., and L.E.O. Svensson, 1987, "Capital Flows, Investment and

     Exchange Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics 19, 171-201.
                                       42




Stulz, R.M., 1981, "A Model of International Asset Pricing," Journal of

     Financial Economics 9, 383-406.

Stulz, R.M., 1984, "Currency Preferences, Purchasing Power Risks, and the

     Determination of Exchange Rates in an Optimizing Model," Journal of

     Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 302-316.

Stulz, R.M., 1986, "An Equilibrium Model of Exchange Rate Determination and

     Asset Pricing with Non-Traded Goods," Ohio State University, mimeo.

Svensson, L.E.0., 1984, "Factor Trade and Goods Trade," Journal of

     International Economics 16, 365-378.

Svensson, L.E.O., 1985, "Currency Prices, Terms of Trade and Interest Rates: A

     General Equilibrium Asset-Pricing Cash-in-Advance Approach," Journal of

     International Economics 18, 17-41.

Svensson, L.E.O., 1987, "Trade in Nominal Assets: Monetary Policy, and Price

     Level and Exchange Rate Risk," TIES Seminar Paper No. 392.

Varian, H.R., 1987, "Differences in Opinion in Financial Markets," University

     of Michigan, mimeo.

Woodland, A.D., 1982, International Trade and Resource Allocation, Amsterdam:

    North- Holland.
                                                         Table   1.    Summary of Results

                  (Import (yes or no (=      export),   or condition for import) of what asset under what difference.)


     Asset:                   Sure bond                     Arbitrary asset                                 Stocks                   Arrow-Debreu
                                                                           <   11
                              (r < r*)                           (II



 Differences in:


           (i)                y1 >      y1
     Output                             y2                             >                                    h:       No                     <
                              y2 <1
                                                  Cov[U(Y2)R]                                                                          y2       y2
                                                                           Cov[Uc(y*2),Rj]
                                                                       <                                    f:       Yes
                                   <2 y*2               Cov[Y2R]           Cov[y*2,R]
          (ii)

Time preference                    Yes                                 Yes                                   Yes                         Yes

    (/3   > /3*)


          (iii)

  Risk aversion                    Yes                                              < 0                          No                     y2 <
                                                            Cov[2R]
                                                                  fi
                                                                 <0
    (7>7*)
          (iv)                                                                                             p     >    1:
Subjective beliefs             F        F*                                                >   0   F        F* or F              F*
                                   <1                                                                 <1                   <2        f(s) >     f*(s)
                                                   f(f(s)f*()Uc(s)Rj(s)ds
    (F       F*)               F        F*                                                                       <    1:
                                   <2
                                                                                                  F        F* or F              F*
                                                                                                      >1                   >2
