                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             THE RISE AND FALL OF LOCAL ELECTIONS IN CHINA:
       THEORY AND EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE ON THE AUTOCRAT'S TRADE-OFF

                                    Monica Martinez-Bravo
                                    Gerard Padró I Miquel
                                         Nancy Qian
                                         Yang Yao

                                      Working Paper 24032
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24032


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2017




We are particularly grateful to Roger Myerson for his encouragment and insights, and to David
Austen-Smith, Tim Besley, Scott Ashworth, Ethan Bueno de Mesquita, Oeindrila Dube, Georgy
Egorov, Ruben Enikolopov, Ruixue Jia, Nicola Persico, Torsten Persson, Konstantin Sonin and
Fabrizio Zilibotti for useful comments. We thank seminar participants at Kellogg MEDS,
Princeton Contemporary China Center, and the Harvard Positive Political Economy. We thank
Zhili Liu for excellent research assistance. We acknowledge financial support from the National
Science Foundation Grant 0922087 and the European Union’s Seventh Framework Programme
(FP/2007-2013) / ERC Starting Grant Agreement no. 283837. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Monica Martinez-Bravo, Gerard Padró I Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Rise and Fall of Local Elections in China: Theory and Empirical Evidence on the Autocrat's
Trade-off
Monica Martinez-Bravo, Gerard Padró I Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao
NBER Working Paper No. 24032
November 2017
JEL No. O1,O2,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

We propose a simple informational theory to explain why autocratic regimes introduce local
elections. Because citizens have better information on local officials than the distant central
government, delegation of authority via local elections improves selection and performance of
local officials. However, local officials under elections have no incentive to implement unpopular
centrally mandated policies. The model makes several predictions: i) elections pose a trade-off
between performance and vertical control; ii) elections improve the selection of officials; and iii)
an increase in bureaucratic capacity reduces the desirability of elections for the autocrat. To test
(i) and (ii), we collect a large village-level panel dataset from rural China. Consistent with the
model, we find that elections improve (weaken) the implementation of popular (unpopular)
policies, and improve official selection. We provide a large body of qualitative and descriptive
evidence to support (iii). In doing so, we shed light on why the Chinese government has
systematically undermined village governments twenty years after they were introduced.

Monica Martinez-Bravo                            Nancy Qian
CEMFI                                            MEDS
Casado del Alisal, 5                             Kellogg SOM
28014 Madrid, Spain                              Northwestern University
mmb@cemfi.es                                     2001 Sheridan Rd.
                                                 Evanston, Il 60208
Gerard Padró I Miquel                            and NBER
STICERD                                          nancy.qian@kellogg.northwestern.edu
London School of Economics
Houghton Street                                  Yang Yao
London, WC2A 2AE                                 China Center for Economic Research
UNITED KINGDOM                                   Peking University
and NBER                                         Peking, China
g.padro@lse.ac.uk                                yyao@ccer.pku.edu.cn
1     Introduction
It has long been observed that many autocracies run national elections, and several theories have

been proposed to explain this regularity. The main thrust of these theories is that elections cement

the regime’s grip on power by helping to share spoils within the elite or to signal the mobilization

capacity of the regime.1 Less attention has been paid to the fact that several autocracies have in-

troduced elections at the local level, such as Indonesia under Suharto (1968-1998), Pakistan under

Zia (1977-88), China in the late 1980s and early 1990s, Saudi Arabia in 2005, Vietnam in 1998

and Yemen in 2001. The functions of these locally elected bodies are typically managerial or ad-

ministrative, with little political consequence. Hence existing theories that explain the presence of

elections at the elite level do not provide a good framework for understanding the presence of local

elections.2 Thus, the main goal of this paper is to address this gap in the literature and provide

a theory and empirical evidence on the conditions under which an autocratic regime would allow

local elections.

     A small number of studies in political science suggest that local elections may be useful to an

autocrat as they can improve the monitoring and selection of government officials.3 In this paper,

we focus on this idea and fully develop its implications in a formal model of local elections in

autocracies that is based on gaps in accountability due to local information. This theory has sharp

predictions on what should happen to specific policies when local elections are introduced and it

also suggests the circumstances that would lead an autocrat to introduce (or indeed later eliminate)

local elections. We then test and validate these predictions using a new dataset collected by the

authors that document the evolution of village governance in China during the 1980s, 1990s and

2000s.

     In our theory, the autocrat tasks local officials with implementing a series of policies in the
    1 See Geddes(2006) for a summary of the facts and a view of elections as deterring military and other insider rivals,
                                                                                                                        an
argument fully presented in Magaloni (2008). See also Myerson (2008), Boix and Svolik (2013) and Bidner et al. (2015)
for formal models on how electoral institutions allow efficient power-sharing among elites in weakly institutionalized
countries. Gandhi and Przeworski (2006) propose that elections allow for the cooperation of outsider elites. Miller (2015)
argues that through elections citizens can express dissatisfaction which allows the regime the information necessary to
react in time.Gandhi and Lust-Okar (2009) offers a literature review on elections in autocratic regimes.
    2 For a general overview of the global situation of local elections, see United Cities and Local Governments (2007)
    3 See Geddes (2005), Manion (2006) and Birney (2007).




                                                             1
village. The central government, however, has poor information regarding the quality of the official

and his activities, which limits his ability to control what happens in the village. In other words,

he has both a problem of adverse selection and of moral hazard. In contrast, local villagers enjoy

better information about the quality of the official as well his activities. By introducing elections,

the central government effectively delegates the monitoring of the official to the villagers, which

should improve both selection and incentives. At the same time, relative to appointment by the

regime, local elections introduce an important cost for the autocrat. Since the central government

and villagers do not have perfectly aligned preferences, and local officials are responsible for the

implementation of central directives that are often unpopular, a local official that is elected by(and

therefore accountable to) villagers has less incentive to implement unpopular policies.

    As a consequence, the model highlights a stark trade-off: elections should improve the perfor-

mance of local officials for congruent policies, where both citizens and government agree on what

they want. However, for incongruent policies, the local official should perform worse in the eyes

of the central government as elections make the official more accountable to citizens. We show

that this trade-off does not disappear even if the central government has the ability to manipulate

local elections – i.e., the central government has to suffer a reduction in control in order to increase

performance.

    In order to empirically test this trade-off we need a setting where we observe policies before and

after the introduction of local elections, and where local officials are responsible for implementing

both popular and unpopular policies. China provides such a context. During the 1980s and 1990s,

local elections were rolled out across all village governments, which govern the lives of around one

billion individuals. The debates that led to the electoral reforms are well documented and show that

elections were mainly supposed to address the poor performance of local officials in rural China.4

Moreover, village governments were responsible for a wide array of policies and had ample fiscal

autonomy. Hence, local officials were crucial for many policy outcomes, from the widely demanded

local public goods such as schools to the extremely unpopular One Child Policy.5
   4 In their description of the process that brought about village elections, O’Brien and Li (2000) conclude “the self-

government programme is best seen as an effort to rejuvenate village leadership by cleaning out incompetent, corrupt and
high-handed cadres.” For further discussion please see Section 2.
   5 For a summary of the responsibilities of this body see O’Brien (1994) as well as Section 2.



                                                           2
    We collect a new annual panel dataset of over 200 representative villages that span twenty years,

the Village Democracy Survey (VDS).6 The data include the timing and results of local elections,

the local government budgets, as well as several important policy variables. Specifically, we observe

examples of both congruent and incongruent policies. The uncontroversially congruent policies in

our data comprise expenditure on public goods and allocation to families of common property such

as land (as opposed to allocation to firms, a practice associated with corruption in our setting).

Similarly, the One Child Policy and collaboration with the upper-government in permanently ex-

propriating village land are widely viewed as extremely unpopular with villagers.7

    We exploit the staggered timing of the introduction of elections across villages to construct

a difference-in-differences estimate of the effect of the introduction of elections on congruent and

incongruent policies. We show that the introduction of village elections dramatically increased local

government public goods expenditure and reduced land excluded from family use. At the same time,

we find that elections weakened the enforcement of the One Child Policy and reduced (or delayed)

instances of land expropriation. These empirical results are consistent with the presence of the

trade-off predicted by the model.

    The model also makes four other predictions: i) elected officials who provide better outcomes

in congruent policies have a higher retention rate; ii) local elected officials are more competent than

their appointed counterparts; iii) the authoritarian government implements local elections that can

be easily influenced; iv) a large increase in bureaucratic capacity can lead to the return of appoint-

ment as a method of local governance. In the model, the autocrat has two alternative solutions to

the local governance problem. On the one hand, as discussed, it can delegate authority to villagers

via elections, but this entails a loss of control which is reflected in the fact that centrally mandated

unpopular policies are poorly implemented. On the other hand, it can improve bureaucratic capacity

and therefore vertical control. However, this is very costly in monetary terms as it requires expand-

ing the size and human and physical capital of the bureaucracy in order to better collect and process

information at the village level. Thus, when the autocrat has few resources, he is more likely to
   6 The villages were chosen in the early 1980s. Thus, they are representative of China in the early 1980s, with the
exception that Tibet is not in the sample due to the difficulty in collecting data from rural Tibet.
   7 Please see Section 4 for a full description of these policies.




                                                         3
choose local elections as a means to govern, whereas when he has more resources available, he is

more likely to build bureaucratic capacity to directly monitor the bureaucrat – i.e., centralize power.

    To validate the theory, we test each prediction to the extent that the data allow. We use the VDS

to examine (i) to (iii). We provide support for (i) with evidence that higher public goods expendi-

tures and weaker implementation of the One Child Policy are positively associated with re-election

probabilities. We confirm (ii) by showing that elections caused officials to become younger and

more educated.8 We provide rich descriptive evidence for (iii) by carefully documenting electoral

procedures and the organization of the village government in the VDS and showing that the cen-

tral government retained some control by controlling the nomination of candidates (until 1998),

maintaining the Communist Party Branch as a co-governing body in the village, and by allowing a

number of procedural aberrations in the conduct of elections throughout the period of analysis.

    Finally, we argue for (iv) by examining a large body of aggregate descriptive and qualitative

evidence. The qualitative evidence documents that cost-saving was one of the motivations for in-

troducing elections in the 1980s. The aggregate data show that as China grew economically from a

very poor country in the early reform era to a middle-income country by the 2000s, it dramatically

increased investment in the bureaucratic capacity of the central government. We also document that

the policies that have been introduced since the 2000s have systematically undermined the impor-

tance of elections by reducing the powers and necessity of the village official, and by increasing the

amount of central monitoring of local officials. Note that the effective weakening the autonomy of

village-level officials in recent years has been noted in other studies such as Oi et al. (2012).9 In

short, the broad patterns are consistent with the idea that elections were useful when bureaucratic ca-

pacity was limited by budgetary constraints and were dismissed when better tools of vertical control

became affordable.

    In summary, the simple model we propose provides a coherent rationale both for the introduction

of elections in the 1980s and 1990s, and for the recentralization that began in the 2000s. Our empir-

ical results validate the central trade-off in the model and shed light on a fundamental force driving
   8 For this, we use a similar difference-in-differences strategy as for analyzing the effect of elections on congruent and

incongruent policies.
   9 Elections were not removed in name, perhaps because such a move would have been very controversial. Instead,

they were undermined by making elected officials unimportant. See Section 4.3 for a more detailed discussion.


                                                             4
the internal organization of local institutions in autocracies, and therefore their capacity to provide

local public goods and services. More generally, the theory provides insights on the changing trade-

offs between local elections and more centralized power as an economy develops. The evidence,

taken together, also sheds light on an a priori puzzle. Why would the Chinese government in the

2000s systematically undermine local elections, which we document to have been effective in im-

proving local governance? Our study suggests a simple explanation: if the autocrat can afford better

direct control, then it does not need to suffer the policy costs associated with electoral monitoring.

    Our model of delegation contributes to the existing formal literature on the inner workings

of autocracies and weakly institutionalized polities (e.g. Padró i Miquel, 2007; Acemoglu et al.,

2008; Egorov and Sonin, 2011; Boix and Svolik, 2013; Francois et al., 2017).10 In these theories,

the main interest of the autocrat is regime survival. We shift the focus of interest from regime

survival to policy implementation.11 A related paper by Myerson (2015) highlights the commitment

difficulties that autocratic regimes face at the time of introducing sub-national elections. In common

with our paper, moral hazard of local officials is the main problem to be institutionally solved, but

the trade-off we emphasize is not present there. Despite differences in the details of the models, our

framework and conclusions are reminiscent of the delegation literature originated by Aghion and

Tirole (1997) in the context of organizations. In particular, this literature highlights that information

and delegation are closely linked, and that preference divergence is the crucial statistic determining

optimal institution design.

    We also add to the growing body of empirical studies on the role of local governance in de-

veloping countries, including China.12 To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to examine
  10 Gehlback   et al. (2016) provide a recent review of this literature.
  11 In democratic countries the central seat of power must also run an extensive bureaucracy to reach, control and provide

services to the population at large and the extensive literature on bureaucracy shows this is not an easy task Wilson
(1989). In autocratic countries, however, the control of these local officials is further complicated by the weakness
of established channels to receive feedback from citizens, such as an independent press or the freedom of association
to protest against abuses (see Besley and Burgess; 2002). In addition, the degree of preference divergence between
government and citizens, which our model highlights as determinant, should be larger in autocracies. For these reasons
our analysis is mostly relevant for the political economy of autocracies, although some insights could be relevant to the
fiscal federalism literature.
   12 In particular, we build on the increasing number of empirical studies on re-election incentives (e.g., Besley and Case,

1995; ?, 2008; de Janvry et al., 2010; Ferraz and Finan, 2011) and on the effect of information on electoral accountability
(e.g., Besley and Burgess, 2002; Ferraz and Finan, 2008; Bobonis et al., 2010; and Banerjee et al., 2010). The implication
that villagers are better than upper levels of government at monitoring village leaders is similar to the findings of Björkman



                                                               5
the trade-offs of local elections for the autocrat. Furthermore, existing studies have not examined

the effect of elections on central policies that are unpopular with citizens. A closely related study

is Suarez Serrato et al. (2017) which demonstrates the limits of vertical bureaucratic control, but

it does not examine institutional variation such as the introduction of elections. Our study is also

related to the recent works by Jia and Nie (2013) and Lorentzen (2013), which focus on different

ways in which the central government tries to gather information on local government performance,

and more generally to Meng et al. (2015) and Stromberg et al. (2017) who study other means of

information gathering by the autocrat.13 . Oi et al. (2012) and He and Wang (Forthcoming) provide

evidence regarding the different policies of effective recentralization pursued by China over the last

decade.14 Earlier studies of local elections in China have found that they improve public goods

provision (Zhang et al., 2004). Our study uses a larger dataset than earlier work and examines a

wider set of outcomes motivated by the model.

    Finally, this paper complements two companion papers using the same VDS data that attempt to

understand the extent to which social capital and heterogeneity help or hurt the ability of elections

to improve accountability (Martinez-Bravo et al., 2017, 2012). These papers focus exclusively on

the initial introduction of elections, examine only public goods as an outcome and do not consider

the autocrat’s problem.

    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 summarizes the political discourse

and implementation of local elections in China. Section 3 presents the model and derives empirical

predictions. Section 4 tests the main predictions with the data. The final section offers conclusions.
and Svensson (2009). For examples of studies of Chinese local elections, see Gan et al. (2007), Luo et al. (2010), Shen
and Yao (2008), Zhang et al. (2004).
   13 Jia and Nie (2013) studies the effect of political decentralization on coal mining accidents, and Lorentzen (2013)

studies the role of local protests. Meng et al. (2015)argues that rigid inflexible grain procurement during the 1950s and
60s were a response to underlying information frictions. Stromberg et al. (2017) argue that media is used by the Chinese
government as a monitoring device.
   14 Oi et al. (2012) argues that village councils, the locally elected bodies, have lost most de facto autonomy due to the

compounded centralizing effect of gradual reforms that started in the mid 2000s. He and Wang (Forthcoming) document
that the central government sends “loyal” college graduates to help elected rural officials enforce central policies.




                                                             6
2      Background

2.1      Motivation of Local Elections

China is a large and heterogeneous country. At the beginning of the reform era (1978-), there were

over 700,000 villages that contained around one billion people over a land mass roughly the size of

the United States. Regions differed in ethnicity, culture, religion, language and level of economic

development. For the autocratic central government in Beijing or its satellites in provincial capitals

and urban areas, local governance was always an enormous challenge. It was very difficult for the

central government to know the conditions of each locality: what was needed to enforce central

policies locally, what the citizens required in order to be satisfied with the regime, who was best to

lead in each locality. Meng et al. (2015) document that the founders of modern China were well

aware of these difficulties from as early as the 1940s. And the inability of the autocrat to address

these difficulties contributed to tens of millions of deaths during the Great Famine, 1959-61.

      Part of the difficulty in autocratic rule was due to the lack of communication infrastructure and

low bureaucratic capacity, as China was a very poor developing economy at the beginning of the

reform era. In 1978, there were very few highways, railroads did not reach most rural areas and

most villages did not have telephones. Communication between the central government and local

officials took time and was often transmitted through many intermediaries.

      The central government in the early reform era was fully aware of the fundamental information

difficulties they faced, and that these rendered local officials unaccountable. They were also aware

that poor local governance could cause political unrest, as many were already voicing dissatisfaction

with the regime. There were two prominent causes of discontent. The first was the extremely low

provision of local public goods. As the reform-era moved towards fiscal decentralization, villages

were mostly left to provide their own public goods. The consequence was that most villages did not

have any public goods, since provision required significant effort from the local leaders to determine

the object of investment and raise funds for it from villagers.15 The second point of discontent was

corruption. The first waves of economic reforms caused significant growth in rural areas, which also
    15 For   example, see Luo et al. (2010), 2007, 2010.



                                                           7
led to increased inequality. It was widely believed that the growth unfairly benefitted local officials

and their cronies.16

2.2     Debate over Village Elections

The comparative literature has studied the debate surrounding the introduction of village elections.17

It transpires from this work that the difficulties in controlling local officials were paramount in the

discussions leading to the introduction of elections. For instance, Peng Zhen, vice-chairman of

the NPC Standing Committee, stated at the chairmanship meeting of the Standing Committee of

the Sixth NPC (April 6, 1987) that they were unable to control the local officials, saying “Who

supervises rural cadres [local officials]? Can we supervise them? No, not even if we had 48 hours

a day....” (cited in O’Brien and Li;1999). In further work, O’Brien and Li (2000) writes that “Peng

went on to lament how relations between cadres and villagers had deteriorated over the years, noting

that some rural cadres ‘resorted to coercion and commandism’ while not a few had become corrupt

and high-handed ‘local emperors’ (tu huangdi).”

      The main argument that proponents of electoral reforms put forward was precisely that local

elections would improve governance because citizens had better information with which to monitor

performance and select the leader. Again, O’Brien and Li (2000) writes that “As the chief justifica-

tion for self-government, supporters of the Law argued that passing the bill would help curb arbitrary

and predatory behavior by rural cadres”, noting further that “In this context, the self-government

programme is best seen as an effort to rejuvenate village leadership by cleaning out incompetent,

corrupt and high-handed cadres, all for the purpose of consolidating the current regime.”

      At the same time, those against the reform worried that democratic elections would undermine

the power of the central government, especially since many of the central policies were very un-

popular with rural citizens. O’Brien and Li (2000) captures these concerns: “Speaking as long-time

administrators [in the countryside], many deputies openly doubted whether township guidance of

[local officials] would be enough to guarantee state interests in the countryside.” For example, the

One Child Policy (and its many variants of family planning policies) was extremely unpopular. Sim-
  16 Forexample, seeShen and Yao (2008), 2008.
  17 White (1992), Kelliher (1997) and O’Brien and Li (2000) provide rich summaries of the main issues in the policy
debate as well as descriptions of the implementation process of elections.


                                                         8
ilarly, economic growth and the development of urban areas and transportation infrastructure often

required the permanent expropriation of rural land. The execution of such eminent domain laws

was also extremely unpopular. Other unpopular policies included tax collection (part of the taxes

that rural residents pay was in the form of grain). In fact, O’Brien and Li (2000) directly points

to the trade-off we highlight in our theory: “[reform opponents] believed that without tight control

over [local officials] and an ability to issue direct commands, village cadres would be tempted to

ignore state interests and disregard township instructions. Elected [local officials] might, in a word,

be inclined to take their cues from below rather than above. This could interfere with tax collection,

grain procurement and enforcing the birth control policy, and might ultimately cripple township

authority.”

      A heated debate emerged at the highest level of government, which White (1992) summarizes:

“Advocates argued that the best way to stabilize the situation at the grass roots was to create insti-

tutions that would hold cadres directly accountable to the peasantry for their behavior in office...

opponents saw the proposed bodies as threats to the leading role of the Party, and feared that cadres

held accountable to fellow villages would be loathe to carry out unpopular directives.”

2.3     The Compromise

To understand the reform, it is important to keep in mind the status quo ex ante. Village governments

were first organized by the communist government during the early 1950s, with two groups of

leaders in each village. First, there was the village committee, which typically consisted of three to

five members and was led by the village chairman, henceforth VC. Second, there was the Chinese

Communist Party branch in the village. It was similar in size to the village committee and was led by

the village Party Secretary, henceforth PS. Before elections were introduced, all of these positions

were filled by appointment by the county government with input from the village Party branch.

      The result of the debate over village elections was a compromised policy: local villages would

elect half of their government, the village committee, which would continue to co-govern the village

with the village Communist Party branch. The Party branch was not subject to elections, and could

in principle have input in the choice of candidates for the village committee, as long as there were



                                                  9
more candidates than open seats. The law did not clarify the power relationship between the village

committee and the Party Branch, which remained ambiguous.18 Anecdotal evidence suggests that

the power arrangements between these two bodies were very heterogeneous across villages. For this

reason, we refer to village officials, which comprise both bodies, as the subject of village decision-

making.19 Rather than wholesale democratization, this reform is better understood as a marginal

change intended to make the local government more accountable to villagers. Ultimately, the main

change of the reform was to give villagers the power to select and to vote unsatisfactory VCs out of

office.

    Innovative provincial governments began experimenting with elections in the early 1980s and

elections were formally codified by the central government in the Organizational Law on Village

Committees (OLVC) in 1987. From this point onwards, all provinces were pushed to introduce

elections in all rural areas. A revision of the OLVC in 1998 required candidate nominations to be

open to all villagers. The decision to introduce elections at the province-level was the result of

political pressure and bargaining between the central government and the provincial leaders. How-

ever, implementation within provinces was mainly imposed top-down by bureaucratic fiat. Each

level of government would pilot the reform in a few select villages, and the reform would be widely

implemented once the procedures and logistics were tested (O’Brien and Li, 1999).

    In these elections, there are no political parties and no slates of candidates with common plat-

forms. Candidates are drawn from the village and are thus typically well-known by the villagers.

As a consequence, candidates typically run on well-understood issues and are probably selected for

qualities that have been long observed by their fellow villagers.20 It is also important to keep in

mind that these are not official positions in the state bureaucracy, so they are not stepping stones for

higher positions in the administration.
  18 Formore information, please see the discussion in Kelliher (1997).
  19 Later in the paper, we will provide some evidence that de facto power, as measured by signature rights, seems to
have shifted in favor of the Village Committee as elections were introduced.
  20 There are very few accounts of actual electoral campaigning. In many cases, elections were set up with only a few

days’ notice (Unger, 2002: p. 221).




                                                         10
3     The Model
Consider a model with three relevant actors: a government g, a village official o, and the villagers

v.21 There is a policy that the village official is responsible for implementing. The probability of

success (S = 1) in this policy is:

                                                      P(S = 1) = µe.

The probability of success depends linearly on effort, e ∈ [0, 1]. Expending effort e costs the official

c(e), which is increasing and convex and satisfies c(0) = c0 (0) = 0. The effect of effort on the

probability of success depends also on the competence of the village official, captured by µ ∈ {0, 1}.

The effort of an incompetent official (with µ = 0) is therefore useless.

     There are two types of policy to be implemented. The policy can be congruent (C = 1). In

this case, there is agreement between the government and the villagers and both want the policy to

be successful. For instance, both the government and the villagers want the official to efficiently

provide public goods. Otherwise, the policy is incongruent (C = 0). In this case, government and

villagers disagree. For instance, the villagers want to circumvent the One Child Policy instituted by

the government. The type of the policy is congruent with probability α ∈ (0, 1).22

     The preferences of the players are as follows:


                                                      Uv = S(−θ )1−C

                                                       Ug = S(θ )1−C

                                                       Uo = R − c(e).


θ > 0 captures the relative weight that players give to success in incongruent policies relative to

successes in congruent policies. If θ > 1 preferences over incongruent policies are stronger than

preferences over congruent policies. R are the rents that the official enjoys when retaining his posi-
  21 The focus of this model is the conflict of interest that exists between the upper government and the village official.

For this reason we abstract from possible conflicts between sets of villagers and treat villagers as a unitary actor. We also
focus on the tension between village officials and the rest of the government (which is itself multilayered).
  22 A natural alternative interpretation of this setup is that there is a portfolio of tasks the official is supposed to perform.

Then α ∈ (0, 1) would be the share of congruent policies if each policy has an equal probability of being drawn.



                                                               11
tion. This formulation captures in a simple fashion that the government wants a success regardless

of the type of policy, while villagers want a success if C = 1, and strictly prefer a failure if C = 0.

    We move now to the information structure of the game. Villagers know the competency type

of all candidates to the position of village official. Village officials know their own type. The

government, however, has less information on types and can only find a competent official (with

µ = 1) with probability π > 0. Both villagers and village officials perfectly observe the outcome of

the policy in the village. In contrast, the government obtains a signal I that is informative about the

success of the policy in the village: with probability λ , I = 1 and the government observes fully the

performance of the village official. With probability 1 − λ , I = 0 and the government does neither

observe the outcome nor the type of the policy.

    In this model, both λ and π capture the information-gathering capacity of the government re-

garding governance in the village. A natural interpretation of these parameters is the notion of

bureaucratic capacity of the government. A high capacity government should be able to collect

frequent and accurate information about what happens in the village, which maps into higher λ and

π. Higher bureaucratic capacity requires higher numbers and quality of bureaucrats, as well as the

deployment of appropriate organizational capital.

    The timing of the game is as follows.

   1. A village official is chosen.

   2. The character of the policy C ∈ {0, 1} is revealed to villagers and village official.

   3. The village official chooses effort e ∈ [0, 1].

   4. Success or failure of the policy is realized.

   5. With probability λ , the government observes C and performance; with prob. 1 − λ , the gov-

      ernment observes nothing.

   6. The official is retained or not.




                                                   12
3.1     Analysis: Centralizations versus Decentralization

We explore the predictions of this model under three different institutional environments. The first

two institutional environments we consider are the two polar arrangements which we call appoint-

ments and pure elections. Under appointments, the government has total control: it chooses the

village official at stage 1 of the game and decides whether to retain him or not at stage 6 of the

game. In direct contrast, under pure elections, the villagers both choose the village official and

decide whether to retain him. Note that appointment is conceptually very similar to a centralized

structure in which the central government holds all the power. Pure elections is a decentralized struc-

ture where such authority is delegated to the villagers. We assume that government and villagers

can commit to a retention decision as a function of observables.

      In an autocracy, full delegation of powers to villagers is difficult to implement as it requires the

autocrat to commit to abide by election results. Hence, given our substantive area of interest, we

consider a third institutional arrangement which we call elections with oversight. In this situation,

villagers have the ability to select and retain officials, but the government cannot commit to the full

delegation of power and hence it can refuse to implement the villagers’ will.

Appointment

We begin by analyzing the decision of the government under appointment. Due to lack of infor-

mation on officials’ types, the government picks one at random. Hence the appointed official is

competent with probability π. The retention decision is immediate: independently of C, keep the

official if the policy is a success (S = 1) and the government observes it.23

      Under this policy, the competent official chooses his effort according to maxe PA R − c(e), where

PA (e) = λ e + 1 − λ is the probability that the government keeps the village official. The effort level

induced under appointment is thus implicitly defined by c0 (eA ) = λ R if the official is competent

and 0 otherwise. The expected probability of success under appointment is therefore πeA and the
   23 This yields the strongest incentives to the village official since, conditional on receiving a signal, this policy maxi-

mizes the difference in payoffs between success and failure. If the government does not observe the outcome, its decision
is irrelevant for incentives. Hence, without loss of generality, we assume that the official is retained in this case. In a
dynamic version of the model, retention in case of no information would be strictly optimal as it magnifies future positive
payoffs.



                                                             13
expected utility of the government under this arrangement is


                                           UAG = πeA (α + (1 − α)θ ).                                               (1)


Pure Elections

Now consider the case in which authority over the official is transferred to the villagers through the

introduction of local elections. Assume for now that villagers will pick a competent official if one

is available and, for simplicity, let us assume that there is always at least one competent candidate

available.24

     The retention decision is simple. To induce the effort that villagers’ desire from the local official,

villagers retain the official if he obtains a success in a congruent policy or if he obtains a failure in an

incongruent policy. Under this retention strategy, the official chooses effort according to c0 (eE ) = R

if C = 1. If C = 0, the official exerts 0 effort.

     Under this arrangement, the expected probability of success if C = 1 is eE , and if C = 0, the

probability of success is 0. It follows that the expected utility of the government under pure elections

is simply UEG = αeE .

     Note that the expected utility of villagers under a competent official, αeE , is higher than the

utility obtained under an incompetent official, which is 0 as no success is possible when µ = 0.

Hence villagers always select a competent official, as conjectured above.

Elections with Oversight

Finally, we consider a case in which the delegation of authority to the villagers is not complete. This

case is important in the context of autocracy as full delegation might not be desirable from the point

of view of the autocrat, and it may not even be possible as it requires the autocrat to refrain from

intervening when results are undesirable from his point of view. To capture this reality we assume

that the government can impose its desired retention decision when it disagrees with the villagers,

either by manipulating the conduct of elections so as to obtain its desired outcome or by completely
  24 If
     there are N candidates and π captures the share of competent candidates, the probability that there is at least one
competent candidate is 1 − (1 − π)N , which rapidly converges to 1 as N increases.




                                                          14
disregarding the result of elections. It is important to note that for the government to disagree with

the villagers, the government must be able to observe the type and outcome of the policy. Recall

that this information is only available to the government with probability λ .

    Applying backwards induction, we first examine the retention decision. First note that govern-

ment and villagers are in agreement when C = 1. Villagers always observe the outcome and hence

when C = 1 the official will only be retained if he obtains a success. Therefore the village official

exerts effort eE if C = 1, as in the case of pure elections.

    However, when C = 0, the government wants to retain the official if there is a success, but

villagers only want to retain him if there is a failure. The disagreement in retention is complete.

Therefore, if C = 0, retention will depend on whether the government obtains information on what

happens in the village. With probability λ the government observes the outcome and retains the

official in case of a success. With probability 1 − λ the villagers are free to retain the official only if

he obtains a failure. The objective function of the official is thus


                              maxeO {λ eO + (1 − λ )(1 − eO )}R − c(eO ),


subject to eO ∈ [0, 1]. This program yields


                                     c0 (eO ) = max {0, (2λ − 1)R} ,                                   (2)


where eO is the effort exerted by the local official under elections with oversight when C = 0.

Expression (2) implies that the ability of the government to know what happens in the village is

important when imperfect elections are introduced. If λ ≤ 21 , the official exerts no effort (eO = 0)

as the villagers decide on his retention most of the time, and they want a failure. In contrast, if the

ability of the government to examine what is happening in the village is good enough (in particular,

λ > 21 ), they can obtain positive effort, as the official understands that the government can keep him

in place with high enough probability that it is worth risking the chance of incurring the villagers’

wrath.

    This discussion suggests the following empirical prediction that will be tested in Section 4.


                                                    15
Prediction 1 Under elections with oversight, local officials who provide better outcomes in con-

gruent policies have a higher retention rate. Those who better implement incongruent policies only

have a higher retention rate if bureaucratic capacity is high.

    In the discussion so far, we have assumed that the villagers select a competent official, as in the

case with pure elections. However, this is not universally the case when elections can be ignored.

In particular, because when λ is high enough eO is positive, villagers run the risk of picking a

competent official that will be working against villagers’ interest if C = 0. To see this tension, note

that if villagers pick a competent official their expected welfare is


                                      V
                                     Uµ=1 = αeE − (1 − α)θ eO ,


                                                                           V
while the expected welfare if they pick an incompetent official is simply Uµ=0 = 0. Noting that eO

is increasing in λ and converges to eE as λ converges to 1, we have the following proposition.

                              (1−α)θ
Proposition 1. Define Φ ≡        α   .   If Φ > 1, there is a Λ(Φ) ∈ ( 12 , 1) such that for all λ > Λ(Φ),

villagers select incompetent village officials under elections with oversight. Λ(Φ) is a decreasing

function with Λ(1) = 1.

    The proposition says that when disagreement is strong and bureaucratic capacity is high, vil-

lagers select incompetent officials. The potential for negative selection is important, as it eliminates

all possible benefits of elections from the point of view of the government. To understand this result,

note that when bureaucratic capacity is high, the government observes often what happens in the

village. As a consequence, the local official exerts positive effort to implement incongruent policies.

In effect, high bureaucratic capacity makes the official more accountable to the government than to

villagers. Given this, if villagers care enough about avoiding incongruent policies, they pick an

incompetent official in order to ensure failure.

    Note that this intuition requires villagers to care more about incongruent policies than they do

about congruent policies, since choosing an incompetent official sabotages both types of policies.

This trade-off is captured by Φ ≡ (1−α)θ
                                     α   , the degree of expected disagreement between villagers and

government. When Φ > 1, in expectation incongruent policies matter more than congruent policies

                                                     16
– therefore this condition in necessary for negative selection. The stronger the disagreement, the

harder it is for villagers to accept the risk of successful incongruent policies. Hence, Λ(Φ) is

decreasing and the stronger the disagreement, the lower the level of bureaucratic capacity at which

negative selection occurs.

3.2     The Effects of Introducing Elections

We now proceed to compare the performance of local officials under these institutional arrange-

ments. Since we do this exercise to guide the subsequent empirical analysis, and because we show

in the next subsection that pure elections are never optimal from the point of view of the government,

we limit the comparison to appointment versus elections with oversight. The following proposition

compares success rates for congruent and incongruent policies.

Proposition 2. If λ < Λ(Φ), starting from a situation of appointment, the introduction of elections

with oversight

      i. Increases success rates for congruent policies;

      ii. Decreases success rates for incongruent policies if λ ≤ 12 ; If λ > 12 , there is a π̄ ∈ (0, 1) such

that the success rate for incongruent policies decreases if π > π̄;

      iii. Increases the competence of local officials relative to under appointments.

      This proposition captures the main trade-off that the government faces when deciding whether

to introduce elections. Point (i) and (iii) capture the benefits of introducing elections. Elections

delegate both choice and accountability of local officials to villagers, who have better information.

Both margins contribute to making elections attractive: under elections local officials are expected

to be more competent (as long as π < 1) and to work harder at the implementation of congruent

policies.

      The drawback from the point of view of the autocrat is that this is not the case for incongruent

policies. When government and villagers disagree (C = 0), if λ ≤ 12 , the government cannot overrule

the will of the villagers often enough to obtain positive effort from the village official, who will
                                                  1
cease to exert any effort. Even when λ >          2   and thus some positive effort can be extracted, it is

always below the effort the local official would exert under appointment (and thus under direct


                                                       17
accountability to the government).25

      Therefore, the model predicts that the autocrat faces a very clear trade-off between performance

and authority. On the one hand, officials accountable to villagers work harder and are better selected.

This is a clear benefit when the preferences of villagers and the government are aligned. On the other

hand, when government and villagers disagree, village officials under elections will exert little effort

towards implementing the aims of the government. Hence, increased performance comes at the cost

of an important loss of vertical control.

      This proposition generates two additional empirical predictions that we bring to the data in

Section 4.

Prediction 2 When elections are introduced, effort towards congruent policies increases, while

effort towards incongruent policies decreases.

Prediction 3 Local elected officials are more competent than their appointed counterparts.

3.3     Choosing Institutions

We can now explore the preferences of the government regarding village governance institutions.

We characterize the hierarchy of institutional arrangements as a function of bureaucratic capacity

(which as noted we capture with λ and π) and the degree of disagreement between government and
                                 (1−α)θ
villagers (captured by Φ =          α   ).

      We start with a simple point.

Lemma 1. If λ ≤ Λ(Φ), pure elections are always dominated by elections with oversight from the

point of view of the government.

      The intuition behind this lemma is clear. For congruent policies, elections with oversight are

as effective as pure elections. However, for incongruent policies, elections with oversight perform

weakly better, as the ability of the government to influence local elections can motivate the lo-

cal official to exert some effort in implementing them. Hence, an autocratic government does not

implement clean local elections.
   25 The only option for elections to obtain more effort than appointment for C = 0 is when λ is high but π < π̄. This

situation is not empirically plausible: λ and π should co-move as they capture similar dimensions of the government’s
bureaucratic capacity.


                                                         18
     We can now proceed to compare the appointment system and elections with oversight from the

point of view of the government.

Proposition 3. Denote by UAG the expected utility of the government under appointment and by UOG

the expected utility of the government under elections with oversight. We have that

     i. For all λ ∈ [0, 1), π ∈ [0, 1), there is a Φ                       e U G > U G;
                                                   e such that for all Φ < Φ,
                                                                              O     A

     ii. For all λ > Λ(Φ), and for all π ∈ (0, 1), UOG < UAG ;

     iii. For each Φ > 1, there is a non-empty set E ⊂ (0, Λ) × (0, 1) such that if (λ , π) ∈ E, then

UOG ≥ UAG ;

     iv. For each (λ , π) ∈ E, there is a (λ 0 , π 0 ) with λ ≤ λ 0 and π ≤ π 0 such that UOG (λ 0 , π 0 ) <

UAG (λ 0 , π 0 ).

     This proposition confirms that the optimal institutional structure from the point of view of the

government depends on the degree of disagreement between villagers and government and on the

bureaucratic capacity of the government. Point (i) states that when the degree of disagreement is

small, elections with oversight dominate appointments. This result is reminiscent of the delegation

literature.26 To put it in terms of this literature, the government is more likely to delegate control of

the official to the villagers if preferences between villagers and government are aligned. If the degree

of expected disagreement, Φ, is small, the benefits of the informational advantage of villagers, which

accrue when C = 1 in the form of higher success rates, are larger than the costs associated with C = 0

and therefore elections are preferred.

     Point (ii) of the proposition is a direct consequence of Proposition 1. If bureaucratic capacity is

so high that villagers negatively select local officials, then all benefits of elections disappear. In this

case, it is clear that appointment is better than elections with oversight, and this is reinforced by the

fact that performance under appointment is increasing in bureaucratic capacity. Note that this can

only happen for Φ > 1: as discussed in the context of Proposition 1, negative selection only occurs

in the context of substantial disagreement.

     Point (iii) states that even with strong disagreement, there are configurations of bureaucratic

capacity where elections with oversight dominate appointments. The reason for this is that perfor-
   26 See   for example Aghion and Tirole (1997) and Alonso et al. (2008).


                                                            19
mance under appointments is extremely poor when the government has little bureaucratic capacity.

In this case, delegation to villagers in the form of elections is optimal. Point (iv), however, states

that an increase in bureaucratic capacity can lead to appointments dominating elections. This is

due to one of two reasons. First, the increase in bureaucratic capacity can lead to λ > Λ(Φ), in

which case elections become completely useless (see Point ii). Second, with sufficient disagree-

ment, obtaining successes for incongruent policies becomes very valuable for the government and

appointments where the official exerts only a small amount of effort can dominate elections where

the official exerts no effort (when C = 0).

      Figure 1 shows an example of the optimal configuration of local governance as a function of

bureaucratic capacity and the degree of disagreement. This Figure 1 is created by assuming c(e) =
1 2
2e    and subsuming λ = π into a single dimension of bureaucratic capacity that ranges between

0 and 1. As it is clear in the figure, when disagreement is low (Φ < 1), elections with oversight

are the optimal arrangement as interests between villagers and the government are aligned. For

moderate disagreement (1 < Φ < 3), an increase in bureaucratic capacity can lead to a change from

elections to appointment as the line plotting Λ(Φ) may be crossed. Finally, when disagreement

is very strong (Φ > 3), appointment becomes optimal at much lower bureaucratic capacity since

successes in incongruent policies become extremely valuable to the government.

      Figure 1 also illustrates the results in Proposition 3. Keeping bureaucratic capacity constant,

a reduction in disagreement must ultimately lead to elections. Similarly, keeping disagreement

constant (at Φ > 1), an increase in bureaucratic capacity must eventually lead to an area where

appointment is optimal. Also note that for all Φ, it is possible to find configurations of bureaucratic

capacity that rationalize implementing elections with oversight.

      Lemma 1 and Proposition 3 inform the following two empirical predictions.

Prediction 4 The authoritarian government implements local elections that can be easily influ-

enced.

Prediction 5 From a status quo with local elections, a large increase in bureaucratic capacity can

lead to the return of appointment as a method of local governance.



                                                  20
4      Empirical Evidence
In this section, we investigate whether the predictions of our model are borne out by the data.

We first examine Predictions 1 to 3, for which we provide quantitative evidence from village-level

electoral and policy data. We then move on to Predictions 4 and 5, for which we provide suggestive

qualitative evidence.

4.1      The Effects of Elections

4.1.1         Data

The primary data on elections and policies come from the Village Democracy Survey (VDS), a

village-level survey conducted by the authors of this paper. The first wave of data collection,

conducted in 2006, records the history of electoral reforms, de facto leader power, public goods

expenditures, the sources of funds for public goods expenditures, and the enforcement of central

government policies. For public goods, the accounting methods, the categories for expenditure, and

the sources of financing are all determined by the Ministry of Agriculture. This ensures that the data

are easily comparable across villages.27 The second wave, conducted in 2011, records the names

and characteristics of all village leaders since 1982. To ensure accuracy of the historical data, the

VDS relies on administrative records for each village when possible. When village records are not

available, we rely on survey respondents, which include all current and former living village leaders

and elders (e.g., teachers) in each village. This applies to very few of our variables and we will

note them when relevant. The VDS forms a balanced panel of 217 villages for the years 1982-2005.

However, villages only began to record public goods data in 1986. Hence, the sample used in this

study effectively covers the period 1986-2005.28

      The villages we cover in the VDS are the same villages surveyed by the National Fixed-Point

Survey (NFS). The NFS is a detailed village- and household-level economic survey collected and
    27 This
         also means that the quality of the data are unlikely to change as a function of the introduction of elections.
    28 There
           are 31 provinces in China at the end of our sample period. The two excluded provinces are Tibet and
Chongqing. Tibet is excluded because it is subject to different political and economic policies. Chongqing is a city-
municipality that is excluded because it did not achieve provincial status until 1997. The three other city-municipalities
with provincial status (Beijing, Shanghai and Tianjin) are included in our data. Each contain a substantial rural popula-
tion (30% or higher). We control for whether a village is a suburb of a city later in the robustness checks in the Online
Appendix Section B.1 and show that our results are not influenced by their inclusion.


                                                           21
maintained by a research center of the Ministry of Agriculture of China. It is collected each year

beginning in 1986, with the exception of 1992 and 1994 due to administrative issues.29 The NFS

villages were chosen in 1986 to be nationally representative for rural China. It follows that the VDS

is also representative.

    To the best of our knowledge, the VDS is the longest and most comprehensive panel on village-

level reforms and policies that has ever been constructed for China. The data cover a period starting

in 1982, when modern villages were defined after the Household Responsibility Reforms. In addi-

tion to recording the history of electoral reforms, they also record the timing of other major rural

reforms, the occurrence of village mergers, and numerous other village-level characteristics. This

allows us to control for heterogeneity across villages more comprehensively than past studies, which

is particularly important given the underlying diversity across regions in China. The richness of the

data also allows us to provide a detailed analysis of the effect of elections on a range of outcomes, a

necessity in order to test the hypotheses generated by our model. Descriptive statistics are provided

in Appendix Table A.1.

4.1.2    Empirical Strategy

To estimate the effect of elections, we run a simple difference-in-differences specification, control-

ling for village and year fixed effects. This compares the evolution of outcomes in villages that

have had their first election to villages that have not yet implemented their first election.30 Village

fixed effects control for all time-invariant or slow-moving differences between villages, such as ge-

ographic characteristics (e.g., hilliness or distance from a city) or culture. Year fixed effects control

for changes over time that affect all villages similarly (e.g., national policy changes, macroeconomic

growth). In addition, we add province-time trends, which control for the widening differences across

regions brought about by unequal economic growth during the long time horizon of our study. The

baseline specification also controls for the second wave of reforms that opened the nomination of

candidates to villagers. This allows us to control for potential heterogeneity in the effect of elec-
  29 Within each village, approximately 25% of households were randomly selected in 1986 and followed over time; new

households were introduced over time to maintain representativeness. According to the Ministry of Agriculture, there is
very little attrition and households and villages are mainly added to adjust for gradual demographic changes.
  30 See Appendix Table A.2 for the timing of the rollout of elections and Appendix Section B for a detailed discussion.




                                                          22
tions.31

    The baseline equation that estimates the effect of elections is


                                 Yvpt = β E vpt + λ Ovpt + γ pt + δv + ρt + εvpt ,                                   (3)


where the policy outcome of village v in province p during calendar year t, Yvpt , is a function of: a

dummy variable, Evpt , that takes the value of one after the first election in village v has taken place;

a dummy variable, Ovpt , that takes the value of one after the first open nomination in village v has

taken place; province-year trends, γ pt; village fixed effects, δv ; and calendar-year fixed effects, ρt .

Since the timing of elections was largely decided at the province level, we cluster the standard errors

at the province-level. As we only have 29 provinces, we address the possibility of small sample

bias in the clustered standard errors by also presenting p-values derived from wild bootstraps as

recommended by Cameron et al. (2008).32 The main coefficient of interest is β .

    Interpreting β as the causal effect of introducing elections does not require us to assume that

election timing within provinces was random. Instead, it requires the much weaker assumption that

conditional on the baseline controls, the introduction of elections is not correlated with time-varying

village characteristics that affect the outcomes of interest through channels other than elections. In

the Online Appendix, we discuss in detail the timing of the introduction of elections across villages

and provide several pieces of evidence supporting this assumption. In particular we show that the

introduction of elections occurs in waves at the province level and that it is not correlated with any

of the pre-existing village-level policy, economic, geographic and demographic observables. This

suggests that the timing of elections is quasi-random within provinces but endogenously determined

at the province level. The province trends in (3) thus have the additional advantage of capturing a

significant amount of the cross-province variation. In addition, the Online Appendix contains a

large number of additional robustness and sensitivity checks which demonstrate that results are
  31 This improves the precision of our estimates, but does not affect the magnitude of estimated effects of the intro-
duction of elections. For brevity, we only report results where we control for the introduction of open nominations.
Results without these controls are very similar and are available upon request. Note that we do not control for other
procedural differences in elections because they are only observed after the introduction of elections and more likely to
be endogenous.
  32 The bootstraps are estimated using 500 repetitions.




                                                          23
very unlikely to be driven by factors other than the introduction of elections.

4.1.3    Effects on Congruent and Incongruent Policies

The main prediction of the model (Prediction 2) is that village elections present a trade-off for the

government: congruent policies improve with the introduction of elections but incongruent policies

become less well implemented. Since the preferences of voters and the autocrat are unobserved, we

rely on well-known examples of the two types of policies.

Congruent Policies The first policy we examine is local public goods provision. As we discussed

earlier, it was the responsibility of local officials to coordinate villagers, determine the object of

investment, and raise the funds from villagers. The most important public goods to the villages are

irrigation, schools, electricity, roads (within the village), sanitation and the environment. The level

of public good provision in the early reform era was extremely low everywhere and a cause for vocal

dissatisfaction from villagers. Hence, both the government and villagers wanted better performance

from local officials. The VDS collected data on public goods expenditures from each village and

year, as well as how the expenditure was financed. Our first measure of a congruent policy is total

annual village expenditure on public goods that is financed by village sources (e.g. those sources of

finance under the purview of the local official).

    The second dimension of local official behavior over which villagers and government agree

is corruption. Specifically, central government and villagers both prefer to reduce rent-seeking

behavior of local elites. Since corruption is unobservable, we proxy for it with the amount of land

that is rented out to enterprises that are managed by the village government – i.e., village enterprises.

In the post-reform era, local officials are responsible for the use and allocation of collectively owned

means of production. The most important such asset is arable land, all of which is publicly owned

in China. Most land is allocated to households for farming in long-term contracts.33 However,

a fraction of land, no more than fifteen percent according to national law, may be retained under

the direct control of the village government so that it can make small adjustments to household
  33 Rural households cannot sell their land rights in China and,
                                                                during the period of our study, were also prohibited from
renting out their land. In most cases rural households were also restricted from hiring laborers because households that
did not farm their own land would lose land rights. See Jacoby et al. (2002) for a related study about tenure security in
rural China.



                                                            24
allocations without implementing a large-scale reallocation for the entire village. During the 1980s

and 1990s, land retained by the village government was often leased to village enterprises, which

were very profitable. In principle, the profits from these enterprises were supposed to be equally

distributed amongst villagers since they collectively “own” the land. However, in practice, they were

widely believed to be captured by elites – in practice, the village leadership and its cronies. Indeed,

village leaders decided on employment (and hence on who obtained wage income from enterprises)

and investment (that is, how much of the profits were retained by the village government to be

reinvested). For example, in our data, we observe that only 25% of households in villages receive

any income from village enterprises on average. The inequality induced by the enterprises caused

much discontent amongst villagers.34

    Data for the use of village land is reported in the NFS. The villages in our sample use ap-

proximately 96% of arable land (approximately 51% of total village land) for household farming.

Approximately 75% of the remaining arable land is leased out to “enterprises”, a term which we use

for firms run by collectives or villagers. Land leased out to enterprises is therefore our second mea-

sure of a congruent policy. Since elections can only reduce the amount of land leased out to firms if

such land existed prior to the first election, for this outcome we restrict our analysis to villages that

ever used any arable land for non-household farming prior to the introduction of the first election.

This reduces the sample to 108 villages from 28 provinces.

Incongruent Policies The two most prominent and uncontroversial examples of policies over

which the villagers and the government strongly disagree, and which require the effort of the vil-

lage government are the One Child Policy and land expropriation. The One Child Policy, which

restricted households to one child was introduced to rural China in 1980. It was extremely unpop-

ular with citizens and enforcement was always problematic. To control fertility, birth quotas were

assigned top-down from the central government all the way down to local governments. The ulti-

mate enforcer of this policy was the village government. Village officials monitored pregnancies,

led women to abortion clinics and imposed fines and social pressure on parents who violated the
  34 Consistent  with this view, in a cross-sectional study Brandt and Turner (2007) find that redistributing collective land
to the direct control of villagers is positively correlated with re-election probabilities.




                                                            25
policy. Village officials were also allowed to give out exemptions. The most common exemption

permitted was for households that had a daughter as a first child. The central government approved

this possibility in 1984 in response to the rise in female infanticide amongst parents who strongly de-

sired a son. The national law was vague about which parents were eligible (amongst those who had

a female first child). In principle, the exemptions were only to be given in case the village official

suspected female infanticide would take place if the exemption was not granted (Qian, 2017). Since

village officials decided which household this risk applied to, they had significant discretion in the

allocation of exemptions. At the same time, these exemptions were costly to grant, as upper levels

of government put strong pressure in order to comply with the mandated fertility quotas.35 These

exemptions are recorded in village government records and therefore in the VDS. We interpret more

exemptions as a policy shift towards the preferences of the villagers.

    Land expropriation in this paper refers to the permanent expropriation of village land for uses

such as highway expansion, the construction of an airport, etc. This is extremely unpopular with

villagers since it is a permanent loss of land with compensation that is rarely equal to the net present

value of the future stream of production. Village officials are supposed to help implement these

expropriations by promoting and advertising the benefits of the new status (e.g., proximity to infras-

tructure) as well as ensuring a smooth removal of families and redistributing the village land that

is left. Thus, even though the village government has no direct authority over land expropriation,

which is decided by higher levels of government, their effort can affect the policy on the margin. In

practice, political scientists have observed that village officials and the villagers can stop or post-

pone land expropriation by protesting in the township or county seat, or by submitting petitions

(O’Brien, 1994).

    Instances of land expropriation are captured in the NFS. The data confirm that permanent expro-

priations are unpopular and rare events. In our sample, they only occur once every fifty village-year

observations. We interpret more expropriations as village officials better implementing centrally
  35 We note that decades later, these exemptions were given out much more freely. In 2016, the Chinese government

announced the end of the One Child Policy for parents who are both only children themselves. There are also other
exemptions such as to workers in dangerous occupations, minority groups, etc. We mention these additional features of
family planning in China to be comprehensive. However, they are less relevant in our context and thus not discussed
further in the study.



                                                         26
mandated policies.

Placebo Policies The focus of our model is on policies that are under the purview of the village

official. In particular, elections should only change the political economy (and therefore policies) at

the village-level. The introduction of elections should have no effect on policies that are not under

the direct control of the local village leaders. We test this approach by identifying two policies

that are autonomously decided and implemented at upper levels of government. The first is special

aid in the form of direct transfers to households beneath the poverty line, or other specially targeted

households mandated by the central government. The second policy is the transfer of funds from the

upper government in order to finance public goods expenditure (e.g., the upper government usually

pays for the construction of schools, whereas variable costs such as teacher salary are financed with

funds raised from villagers).

Results Table 1 presents the regression results of implementing specification (3) on the six policies

highlighted above. Column (1) shows that results for public goods expenditure financed by the

villagers, measured in 10,000 constant RMB.36 The estimates show that the introduction of elections

increased the expenditures by 160,800 RMB. To assess the magnitude, consider the normalized beta

coefficients presented beneath. It shows that an increase in the probability of the first election by one

standard deviation causes a 0.05 standard deviation increase in public goods expenditure. Thus, the

effect is notable, but plausibly moderate in magnitude. We present standard errors that are clustered

at the province level, and wild-bootstrapped clustered errors to address the concern of small sample

bias with only 29 clusters. Both estimates show that the result is statistically significant at the 5%

level.

    Column (2) shows that the introduction of elections reduced the amount of land leased to en-

terprises by 62 mu on average.37 Again, the normalized beta coefficient shows that the effect is

significant, but plausibly moderate in magnitude. The estimate is statistically significant at the 5%

level.

    These results support prediction 2 of the model: with the introduction of elections congruent
  36 During the period of our study, China had a fixed exchange rate and 1 RMB was roughly equation to 1/7 USD.
  37 1mu is 1/15th of a hectare. We keep the indigenous unit of measurement because average household land size is
very small.


                                                       27
policies experience better performance. In this case, both public goods provision determined by the

village official as well as our proxy for corruption move in a favorable direction.

    Moving on to incongruent policies, column (3) of Table 1 examines the number of One Child

Policy exemptions as the dependent variable. It shows that on average, elections increased the

number of exemptions by about one per every ten observations. This is notable since the sample

mean is approximately one per every two observations. The estimate is statistically significant at

the 10% level (the bootstrapped p-value is only slightly above 5%). Column (4) examines a dummy

variable indicating that some land was permanently expropriated from a village during a given year.

The estimate is negative and significant at the 10% levels. Again, these results are consistent with

prediction 2 of the model: incongruent policies are more often circumvented after elections are

implemented in those villages.

    Finally, Columns (5) and (6) of Table 1 look at placebo policies. Neither of the two upper gov-

ernment transfers are affected by the introduction of elections. The coefficients (and the normalized

beta coefficients) are small in magnitude and statistically insignificant. The results are particularly

striking if one compares column (6) – public goods financed by upper government transfers -- and

column (1) – public goods financed by the village. The latter reacts strongly to the introduction of

elections, while the former does not.38 These placebo results are consistent with our interpreting

the earlier results as reflecting an increase in accountability towards villagers.

    In summary, the results are consistent with the central tenet of the model. Introducing elections

presents the autocratic government with a clear trade-off. Congruent policies become better im-

plemented while incongruent policies move in the opposite direction. Meanwhile, policies that are

outside of the discretion of the village official are unaffected by the introduction of elections.

    As we mentioned in Section 4.1.2, the key assumption for the causal interpretation of our

difference-in-differences estimates is the parallel trends assumption. To provide support for this

assumption, we estimate an equation similar to equation (3), except that we replace the post-first-

election dummy variable with dummies for every year since the first election. The coefficients are
  38 Note  that the sample mean at the top of column (6) is half of the mean at the top of column (1), which means that
approximately one-thirds of local public goods are financed by the upper government. Therefore, the lack of finding an
effect in column (6) is not the result of these transfers being marginal.



                                                         28
plotted in Figure 2. They and their standard errors are presented in Appendix Table A.3. Note that

we can only conduct this exercise for public goods investment financed by villagers, public goods

investment financed by the upper levels of government and One Child Policy exemptions, because

the other outcomes are too infrequent to be cut so finely. Nevertheless, the results are reassuring.

Figure 2 shows that there is no pre-trend for any of the policies, and that the effect for public goods

investment financed by villagers and One Child Policy exemptions begin after elections are intro-

duced. These results support the parallel trends assumption. In the Appendix, we conduct further

robustness exercises. See Appendix Section B.1.39

4.1.4      Re-election Rates

Prediction 1 of the model contends that implementing the policies that villagers desire should im-

prove re-election probabilities when such policies are congruent. At the same time, implementing

policies that are incongruent should decrease re-election rates if bureaucratic capacity is low (that

is, if what is reflected in retention rates is the will of villagers rather than the interests of the gov-

ernment). To investigate this prediction, we examine the probability that the incumbent village

chairman remains in office as a function of the policies in the previous term. The sample size is now

much smaller since observations are at the village-term level (as opposed to village-year) and we

restrict our attention to after the introduction of the first election.

    Table 2 presents the results for the same six policies examined in the previous sub-section. The

dependent variable is a dummy for the incumbent remaining in office. The explanatory variable

is the average measure of the policy during the previous term (which is usually three years). The

results show that re-election probability statistically significantly increases with more public goods

expenditure and with more One Child Policy exemptions. The standardized beta coefficients show

that the magnitude of the effects are notable, especially for One Child Policy exemptions. A one

standard deviation increase in exemptions increases re-election probability by 0.17 standard devia-
  39 For example, we show that the timing of election is uncorrelated with observable characteristics, and that the results
on congruent and incongruent policies are quantitatively similar when controlling for the introduction of the first election
in the same province, province-year fixed effects, province-level income and growth, base year measures of the outcome
variables interacted with year fixed effects, being near an urban area interacted with year fixed effects, social capital
interacted with year fixed effects and the introduction of the Tax and Fee Reform. Similarly, the estimate are robust in
magnitude if we exclude early and late introducers of elections, or villages that experienced mergers with other villages
during our sample period. See the Appendix for details.


                                                            29
tion.

    The signs for the estimates for land leased out to enterprises and land expropriation are also

consistent with our prediction. However, those estimates are imprecise, most likely due to the small

sample size.40

    Reassuringly, we find no relationship between the implementation of the policies outside of the

village official’s discretion (columns 5 and 6) and re-election probabilities. The estimates are small

in magnitude and statistically insignificant.

    The results on the relationship between policies and re-election probabilities are consistent with

the prediction of the model. Villages will re-elect officials who better implement congruent policies

and punish those who implement incongruent policies. Meanwhile, voting will not respond to

policies outside the discretion of the village official.

4.1.5   The Effect on the Quality of Officials

According to Prediction 3 of the model, villagers select officials that are more often competent.

Since competence is unobservable, we look at age and education, the characteristics that are most

commonly used in the literature to proxy for quality.41 To examine the effect of elections on these

characteristics, we again estimate equation (3) using age and education of the village chairman as

dependent variables. Table 3 presents the results. Panel A shows that elections reduced the average

age of village chairmen by three years and increased their average educational attainment by more

than one-half of a year. Both estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level and economically

relevant. To the extent that youth and education are correlated with competence in our context, these

results are consistent with prediction 3 of the model.

    It is also interesting to examine whether village chairmen are more or less likely to be Party

members (upon entering office) after elections are introduced. Ex ante, the effects are ambiguous.

On the one hand, a Party member may be less likely chosen by elections relative to by appointment.

On the other hand, the Party, by and large, attempts to recruit able individuals. Thus, if villagers

choose higher quality officials, elections may increase the probability of a Party member being in
  40 Note that using a large cross-section of villages, Brandt and Turner (2007) find that reducing land leased out increases

re-election rates.
   41 See Martinez-Bravo (2017) and Besley et al. (2011) among other examples.



                                                            30
office. The coefficient in column (3), which captures the net effect of the two opposing forces, is

statistically zero.

      As a placebo exercise, we also examine the effect of elections on the age and education of the

village Party Secretary, who is not directly affected by elections and continued to be appointed

throughout. Panel B shows that indeed, elections had no effect on the age and education of the party

secretary. Note that we do not examine Party membership for the secretary since all secretaries are

Party members.

4.2     Elections with Oversight

According to Prediction 4, the autocrat introduces local elections that are easy to manipulate so that

they can influence the procedures and outcomes over pure elections. Several pieces of qualitative

and descriptive evidence support the prediction. First, recall that the Chinese government main-

tained some direct control over the village by leaving the Communist Party branch untouched to

co-govern with the elected village committee. In fact, the central government allowed the Party to

choose candidates until 1998, when it asked all villages to allow open nominations. However, the

VDS shows that as late as 2005, only around half of the villages in our sample (139 out of 217) had

actually implemented open elections (see Appendix Table A.2).

      In addition, there were few restrictions imposed on electoral procedures, which allowed some

degree of electoral manipulation. In the VDS, we collected data on the conduct of elections. We

find widespread evidence of practices that facilitate manipulation. For instance, in our sample of

elections, 60% had roving ballot boxes, 67% did not have anonymous ballots, and 67% allowed

voting by proxies. Figure 3 plots the percentage of villages with elections that have any of the

aforementioned procedural aberrations over time. It shows that while there are changes over time in

the types of aberrations, there is no systematic sign of improvement. For example, the prevalence

of non-anonymous voting declines over time, but the prevalence of voting by proxy increases over

time. Moreover, all villages have at least one aberration for the entire period. This is consistent with

the central government allowing (desiring) a certain degree of control over elections.

      At the same time, we note that the few specified rules were mostly followed – the Chairman



                                                  31
typically received more than 50% of votes and elections largely occurred every three years. Indeed,

the model shows it is in the interest of the government that elections are meaningful, since they

are introduced to solve a local governance problem. Results in Table 1 and 3 show that elections

were not pure exercises in window-dressing and that the village political economy changed. We

also provide evidence that elections seemed to have changed the de facto balance of power between

the village chairman and the party secretary, as the Chairman is more often the signatory of village

executive decision after elections are introduced.42 Table 4 presents the effect of the introduction

of elections on signature rights on important village policy issues: public goods investment (Panel

A), reimbursement from village funds (Panel B) and land reallocation (Panel C). The estimates in

column (1) shows that elections increased the probability that the VC was the sole signatory for

these policies. The individual estimates vary in precision. Panel D examines the joint significance

of all three estimates. They are statistically significantly different from zero at the 10% level. Sim-

ilarly, the estimate in Panel D column (3) show that elections reduced the probability that the party

secretary was the sole signatory of all three policies.

      Finally, we note that there was a 38% VC turnover rate for the first election, which is more than

twice as high as the average turnover rate in the sample (17%). This is also consistent with real

change in local governance.

      In summary, the evidence presented in this section is consistent with the model, which says that

the autocrat prefers elections that can be manipulated, but are still meaningful.

4.3     Central Bureaucratic Capacity and the Demise of Elections

Prediction 5 of the model states that elections might cease to be useful for the government if there

is a large increase in bureaucratic capacity. Here, we discuss how after the introduction of elections,

there was an increase in government revenues, which was accompanied by an increase in bureau-

cratic capacity in rural China that eventually led to the systematic undermining of elections. For this

discussion, it is important to recognize that elections were not removed in name, perhaps because

such a move would have been very controversial. Instead, they were undermined by making elected
   42 To document that the elected village chairman had de facto authority, we collected data on signature rights from each

village. See Appendix Section B.2 for a more detailed discussion.



                                                           32
officials unimportant.

    To illustrate the increase in bureaucratic capacity, we focus on statistics which make the follow-

ing points. First, government revenues increased dramatically, and specifically, the increases were

driven by revenue sources that did not rely on the effectiveness of village leaders. This is impor-

tant, because if government revenues relied on the effort of village leaders, then making the latter

unnecessary would curtail government revenues. Second, the government invested in increasing

bureaucratic capacity. Specifically, it enlarged central government administration and infrastructure

that lowered the costs of monitoring.

    From 1980 to 2015, per capita GDP in China increased by 989.86%, from 740.28 dollars to

8,068.04 dollars (all measured in constant 2015 USD). Government revenues also increased dra-

matically during this period. Total tax revenues increased by 2,117.91% from 90.43 billion dollars

in 1980 to 2005.69 billion dollars in 2015 (all measured in constant 2015 USD).43 This increase

was mostly driven by sources outside of rural regions. The most important source has been Value

Added Taxes, VAT, which was created in 1994 and now accounts for 24.9% of total tax revenues.

During 2000-2015, VAT revenues increased by 583.25%.44 The increase in tax revenues from non-

rural sources is an outcome of intentional government policy. Fan et al. (2017) documents that a

large part of the increase in VAT is due to the computerization of invoices. Similarly, Piketty and

Qian (2009) show that individual income tax, which only applies to urban workers in China, was

established in the 1990s in such as way as to rapidly grow the tax base and increase tax revenues.

    The government spent much of its new revenues on improving bureaucratic capacity. Expendi-

ture on the government bureaucracy increased by 291% from 10.56 billion dollars to 301.68 billion

dollars (all measured in constant 2015 USD) during 1980-2015.45 As a share of GDP, it increased

from 1.46% to 2.73%.46 Central government personnel (civil servants) increased from approxi-
  43 NBS   Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01 and BLS https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf
  44 NBS   Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01
   45 NBS      (National      Bureau     of    Statistics   of    the  People’s   Republic    of    China)     Year-
book       http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01       and    BLS     (Bureau    of     Labor     Statistics)
https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf.        China Statistical Yearbook 1981(pp.    397), Ministry of Finance of
the People’s Republic of China http://yss.mof.gov.cn/2015js/201607/t20160720_2365732.html, NBS Yearbook
http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01 and BLS https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf
   46 NBS Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01




                                                         33
mately one million in the mid-1980s to 7,167,000 in 2015, the growth of which far out-paced popu-

lation growth during this period.47 Consistent with the idea that the government wanted to increase

its ability to collect taxes without relying on the village government, this includes a 64% increase

in central tax personel in just fourteen years, from 528,368 in 1991 to 868,496 in 2015.48

    Similarly, the cost of communication and transportation from the central government to rural

areas decreased dramatically. National telephone (including mobile phone penetration) increased

from only 0.43% of the population in 1980 to 109.3% in 2015, the length of railways increased

by 127.02%, the length of highways increased by 41,067%, the number of civil airports increased

by 164.1% and the length of paved roads increased by 415.29%.49 Notably, the fraction of rural

counties with a highway increased from 0% to 99.87% during this period.50

    In other words, when rural elections were introduced in the mid 1980s and early 1990s, it was

extremely difficult for the central government to monitor villages, and they could not afford a large

expansion in the capacity of the local bureaucracy. Indeed, O’Brien (1994) notes that saving on

costs was one of the arguments from introducing local elections: “Advocates of more thorough de-

mocratization argued the opposite. Though equally committed to improved grass-roots governance,

they pointed out that the government could not afford to subsidize village cadres from its own cof-

fers”. Similarly, White (1992) contends that costs were another incentive behind the introduction of

elections: “Economic pressure to streamline administration, reduce personnel, and increase cadre

accountability led to political reforms as well”.
   47 Data    for government personell was released for the first time in 2015 by the Min-
istry     of    Human      Resources    and    Social    Security   of    the    People’s     Republic    of    China
http://www.mohrss.gov.cn/SYrlzyhshbzb/dongtaixinwen/buneiyaowen/201605/t20160530_240967.html.              The num-
ber of personell for the mid 1980s is an approximation provided by a central government official interviewed by the
authors.
   48 China Finance Yearbook (1992). China Taxation Yearbook (2016).
   49 Popularization Rate of Telephone (Include Mobile Telephone)(set/person) data are from the NBS Year-

book http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01, Penetration can exceed 100% because some households
have both mobile and landline phones.            Data on railways and highways are from the NBS Yearbook
http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C0, China Statistical Yearbook (1980, pp, 367) and China Statistical Year-
book (1981, pp. 320). Data on airports are reported by the NBS Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C0
and China Statistical Yearbook (1980, pp, 329).           Length of paved roads are reported by NBS Yearbook
http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01.
   50 In 1980, there were only few highways in urban areas.                   See the China Statistical Yearbook
(1980, 1981).          2015 data are from the Ministry of Transport of the People’s Republic of China
http://zizhan.mot.gov.cn/zfxxgk/bnssj/zhghs/201605/t20160506_2024006.html




                                                         34
    Besides the lack of manpower, the central government also had to grapple with the reality of

difficult communication. Almost no one in the village had a phone (often not even the village

government) and villages were essentially inaccessible from railways or major roads. In contrast,

two decades later, almost every rural household had access to a telephone and almost every village

could be reached by a major highway.

    According to our theory, such a large increase in bureaucratic monitoring capacity would reduce

the usefulness of elections for the government. The central government has not explicitly changed

or altered village elections, which were widely popular amongst citizens, but it has taken a series of

decision which undermine the position of village officials to the point of irrelevance.51

    A review of central-government policies since 2000 paints a consistent picture of the central

government removing de facto power from the elected village government. The village govern-

ment’s ability to raise funds for public goods was severely curbed by the Tax and Fee Reform,

which banned local taxation and was introduced in 2003.52 The central government compensated

this cut in revenue by increasing central transfers to rural areas for public goods projects such as

schools and roads. For example, the amount of central expenditure for rural schools increased by

685% in just a decade, from 14.38 billion dollars to 110.16 billion dollars during 1999-2011.53 For

transportation infrastructure, it increased by 32%, from 6.51 billion dollars to 8.58 billion dollars

during 1999-2011 for transportation infrastructure. For agricultural infrastructure, it increased by

166%, from 12.39 billion dollars to 31.63 billion dollars during 1999-2011 (all measured in constant

2015 USD).54 However, it is crucial to note that these transfers are not managed or implemented by
  51 This  makes it difficult to measure the “end” of elections with survey data. We do not observe measures that would
reflect a change in power from the VDS survey.
   52 Note that one of the robustness checks shown in the appendix demonstrates that the empirical results shown earlier

are not confounded by this policy, which occurs toward the end of our sample period.
   53 Our survey, the VDS, does not observe a statistically significant increase in government funding of public goods

because most of the increase occurred after the end of our sample (2005).
   54 Data    on      central     expenditure    on    rural    schools    are    reported    by     the   NBS     Year-
book          http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01,            BLS         https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf,
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/history/cpi_01142000.txt, https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid11av.pdf and the China
Educational Finance Statistical Yearbook (2000, pp. 4-5; 2012, pp. 26-27). Data on transportation expenditure are
reported by NBS Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01, BLS https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf,
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/history/cpi_01142000.txt, https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid11av.pdf and the China
Rural Statistical Yearbook (2000, pp. 81; 2012, pp. 83). Data on expenditure on agriculture is reported
by the NBS Yearbook http://data.stats.gov.cn/easyquery.htm?cn=C01, BLS https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid1512.pdf,
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/history/cpi_01142000.txt, https://www.bls.gov/cpi/cpid11av.pdf and the China Rural



                                                          35
the village-level official, but by upper levels in the rural bureaucracy.

    Thus, the central government simultaneously removed the ability of the village government to

raise money for public goods, therefore curtailing their autonomy, and increased the amount of

transfers from the central government to rural areas for these public goods so as to not increase

citizen dissatisfaction. In line with this, the abolition of agricultural taxes in 2005 as well as the

complete relaxation of the One Child Policy has removed the need for the government to obtain

significant effort from local officials.

    Consistent with this, Oi et al. (2011) provide evidence from a detailed review of recent fiscal

policies and data on transfers across the different levels of government to argue that the central

government has been centralizing fiscal and political control since the late 1990s. In fact, they show

that village officials have in effect lost control over village budgets and in some counties they need

explicit permission from upper levels of government to access funds.

    The government has also resorted to other practices of direct control: a recent study by He and

Wang (Forthcoming) examines a new practice of introducing urban college graduates to villages

for three-year terms after graduation. The explicit purpose of the program is to ensure that village

leaders obey and properly implement central commands – i.e., in the context of our model, to ensure

incongruent policies are followed. Good performance and loyalty to the central government from

the college graduates are incentivized with the promise of urban jobs and Party membership after

their service in rural areas.


5     Conclusion
This paper combines theory and empirical evidence to uncover the trade-offs that autocrats face

when deciding to introduce local elections. Specifically, we examine whether local elections, as an

instrument for improving local governance, are costly in terms of losses in control for the autocrat.

To this end, we develop a simple model which shows that while local elections can improve the

selection and monitoring of local bureaucrats, it can also undermine central government objectives

for policies over which the central government and citizens disagree.
Statistical Yearbook (2000, pp. 81; 2012, pp. 83).




                                                     36
    The empirical results in the context of village elections in China support the multiple predic-

tions of the model. Using a dataset that the authors of this paper collected, we show that elections

made local officials effectively accountable to the villagers, which means that the trade-off between

performance and control suggested by our model was real in this context. While congruent policies

improve dramatically with the implementation of elections, incongruent policies weaken. In addi-

tion, we uncover evidence that villagers reward officials who perform according to their preferences

and also that there are changes in the characteristics of officials elected, which suggests that there is

a selection margin at play behind our results.

    An interesting implication of the trade-off posed by the model and confirmed by the descrip-

tive and qualitative evidence is that the autocrat’s decision to implement local elections depends

on the bureaucratic capacity of the central government. From the point of view of the central gov-

ernment, the main benefit of elections is that villagers use their superior information in selection

and incentive-provision to local officials. The cost is that centrally mandated unpopular policies are

poorly implemented. Therefore local elections dominate central control if the quality of informa-

tion at the centre is poor, since with poor information neither kind of policy is well-implemented

under central control. However, the model shows that as the quality of information of the upper

government improves, central control might become the preferred institutional arrangement, since

it does not suffer from lack of control over unpopular policies. Thus, when the autocrat has little

resources, he is more likely to choose local elections as a means to govern, whereas when he has

more resources, he is more likely to eschew elections and build bureaucratic capacity to directly

monitor the bureaucrat – i.e., centralize power.

    The model thus suggests that there were two alternative solutions to fixing local governance in

China in the early 1980s (i) the introduction of elections or (ii) a large investment in the vertical

system of bureaucratic control in order to improve the quality of information flowing to the central

government. In the mid 1980s, the latter was not feasible since it required a costly buildup of the

bureaucracy, with a large increase in personnel, which was simply not affordable for the then-poor

country. However, after two decades of rapid growth, China was a much richer country. At that

point, recentralization was possible and became the dominant strategy. A review of the aggregate


                                                   37
statistics and the central policies undertaken since the early 2000s are consistent with this view.

    Our study provides important generalizable insights for other contexts. Governments typically

have several policy priorities that they want implemented, and the bureaucratic structure they choose

can be determined by the issues they face bringing their agenda to fruition. In this paper, we show

that the introduction of local elections in autocracies can be rationalized via a fundamental trade-

off between vertical control of officials and their performance. This is novel to the literature on

the political economy of autocracies that has focussed on regime survival rather than the regime’s

capacity to follow its policy agenda.

    There are several interesting avenues for future study. For example, the introduction of elections

may allow citizens to learn about elections and thus increase the demand for elections or more

democracy from the autocrat. This is an additional cost for the autocrat which we have not included

in our model, and likely to be important in the long-run.

    More generally, stepping away from the strict dichotomy of autocracies and democracies and

consider the role that quasi-democratic mechanisms can play within larger autocratic regimes is a

promising agenda for future research. As we discussed in the beginning of the introduction of the

paper, China is one of many autocracies that have introduced local elections. It is also interesting

to note that the a priori puzzling pattern of introducing elections and then re-centralizing control,

despite the fact that the elections have been found to be successful in improving local governance

and were popular amongst citizens, can be seen in Vietnam as well as China.55




  55 See   Malesky and Schuler (2013) for a study of Vietnam.


                                                          38
References
Acemoglu, Daron, Georgy Egorov, and Konstantin Sonin, “Coalition Formation in non-
  democracies,” Review of Economic Studies, 2008, 75 (4), 987–1009.
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole, “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations,” Journal of Po-
  litical Economy, 1997, 105 (1), 1–29.
Alonso, Ricardo, Wouter Dessein, and Niko Matouschek, “When does Coordination Require
  Centralization?,” American Economic Review, 2008, 98 (1), 145–79.
Banerjee, Abhijit V., Selvan Kumar, Rohini Pande, and Felix Su, “Do Informed Voters Make
  Better Choices? Experimental Evidence from Urban India,” Working Paper, MIT Working Paper
  2010.
Besley, Timothy and Anne Case, “Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic Policy
  Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1995,
  110 (3), 769–798.
   and Robin Burgess, “The Political Economy of Government Responsiveness: Theory and Evi-
  dence from India,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2002, 117 (4), 1415–1451.
  , Jose Montalvo, and Marta Reynal-Querol, “Do Educated Leaders Matter?,” Economic Jour-
  nal, 2011, 121, 205–227.
Bidner, Chris, Patrick Francois, and Francesco Trebbi, “A Theory of Minimalist Democracy,”
  2015. Working Paper.
Birney, Mayling, “Can local elections contribute to democratic progress in authoritarian regimes?”
  PhD dissertation, Yale University 2007.
Björkman, Martina and Jakob Svensson, “Power to the People: Evidence from a Random-
  ized Field Experiment on Community-Based Monitoring in Uganda,” Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 2009.
Bobonis, Gustavo, Luis R. Camara Fuentes, and Rainer Schwabe, “Does Exposing Corrupt
  Politicians Reduce Corruption?,” Working Paper, University of Toronto 2010.
Boix, Carles and Milan Svolik, “The foundations of limited authoritarian government: institutions
  and power-sharing in dictatorships,” Journal of Politics, 2013, 75 (2), 300–16.
Brandt, Loren and Matthew A. Turner, “The usefulness of imperfect elections: The case of
  village elections in rural China,” Economics & Politics, 2007, 19 (3), 453–480.
Cameron, A. Colin, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller, “Bootstrap-Based Improvements
  for Inference with Clustered Errors,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, August 2008, 90
  (3), 414–427.
de Janvry, Alain, Frederico Finan, and Elisabeth Sadoulet, “Local Electoral Incentives and
  Decentralized Program Performance,” Working Paper 16635, NBER 2010.
Egorov, Georgy and Konstantin Sonin, “Dcitators and their Viziers: endogenizing the loyalty-
  competence trade-off,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 2011, 9 (5), 903–30.
Fan, Haichao, Yu Liu, Nancy Qian, and Jaya Wen, “The Effect of Computerization on VAT in
  China,” Working Paper, Northwestern 2017.
Ferraz, Claudio and Frederico Finan, “Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Effects of Brazil’s
  Publicly Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2008, 123
  (2), 703–745.


                                               39
  and , “Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the Audits of Local Govern-
  ments,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101(4), 1274–1311.
Francois, Patrick, Francesco Trebbi, and Kairong Xiao, “Factions in Nondemocracies: Theory
  and Evidence from the Chinese Communist Party,” UBC working paper, 2017.
Gan, Li, Lixin Colin Xu, and Yang Yao, “Local Elections and Consumption Insurance: Evidence
 from Chinese Villages,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4205, 2007, pp. 1–28.
Gandhi, Jennifer and A. Przeworski, “Cooperation, Cooptation, and rebellion under dictator-
 ships,” Economics and Politics, 2006, 18 (1), 1–26.
  and Ellen Lust-Okar, “Elections Under Authoritarianism,” Annual Review of Political Science,
  2009, 12 (1), 403–422.
Geddes, Barbara, “Why Parties and Elections in Authoritarian Regimes?,” APSA Annual Meeting,
 2005.
Gehlback, Scott, Konstantin Sonin, and Milan Svolik, “Formal Models of Non-Democratic Pol-
 itics,” Annual Review of Political Science, 2016, 19, 565–84.
He, Guojun and Shaoda Wang, “Do College Graduates Serving as Village Officials Help Rural
 China?,” American Economic Journal: Applied, Forthcoming.
Jacoby, Hanan G., Guo Li, and Scott Rozelle, “Hazards of Expropriation: Tenure Insecurity and
  Investment in Rural China,” American Economic Review, 2002, 93 (5), 1420–1447.
Jia, Ruixue and Hua Nie, “Decentralization, Collusion and Coalmine Deaths,” Working Paper,
  University of California at San Diego 2013.
Kelliher, Daniel, “The Chinese debate over village self-government,” The China Journal, 1997,
  pp. 63–86.
Li, Han, “The Single Party as Source of Legitimacy: Theory and Evidence on Political Mobiliza-
  tion,” Working Paper, University of Science and Technology 2009.
Lorentzen, P.L., “Regularizing Rioting: Permitting Public Protest in an Authoritarian Regime,”
  Quartely Journal of Political Science, 2013, 8(2), 127–158.
Luo, Renfu, Linxiu Zhang, Jikun Huang, and Scott Rozelle, “Village Elections, Public Goods
  Investments and Pork Barrel Politics, Chinese-style,” Journal of Development Studies, 2010, 46
  (4), 662–684.
Magaloni, Beatriz, “Credible power-sharing and the longevity of Authoritarian rule,” Comparative
 Political Studies, 2008, 41 (4/5), 715–41.
Malesky, Edmund and Paul Schuler, “Star Search: Do Elections Help Nondemocratic Regimes
 Identify New Leaders?,” Journal of East Asian Studies, 2013, 13(1), 35–68.
Manion, Melanie, “Democracy, Community, Trust: The Impact of Elections in Rural China,” Com-
 parative Political Studies, 2006, 39 (3), 301–24.
Martinez-Bravo, Monica, “The Local Political Economy Effects of School Constuction in Indone-
 sia,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2017, 9 (2), 256–289.
  , Gerard Padro i Miquel, Nancy Qian, and Yang Yao, “Social Fragmentation, Public Goods
  and Elections: Evidence from China,” Working Paper 18633, National Bureau of Economic Re-
  search December 2012.
  , Gerard Padró i Miquel, Nancy Qian, Yiqing Xu, and Yang Yao, “Making Democracy Work:
  The Effect of Social Capital on Elections in China,” Northwestern Working Paper 2017.

                                              40
Meng, Xin, Nancy Qian, and Pierre Yared, “The Institutional Causes of China’s Great Famine,
 1959-61,” The Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (4), 1568–1611.
Miller, MK, “Elections, Information, and Policy Responsiveness in Autocratic Regimes,” Compar-
 ative Political Studies, 2015, 48 (6), 691–727.
Myerson, Roger, “The autocrat’s credibility problem and foundations of the constitutional state,”
 American Political Science Review, 2008, 102 (1), 125–39.
  , “Local Agency Costs of Political Centralization,” 2015. University of Chicago Working Paper.
O’Brien, Kevin J., “Implementing Political Reform in China’s Villages,” Australian Journal of
  Chinese Affairs, 1994, (32), 33 – 59.
  and Lianjiang Li, “The Struggle over Village Elections,” in Merle Goldman and Roderick Mac-
  Farquhar, eds., The paradox of China’s post-Mao reforms, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
  Press, 1999.
  and , “Accommodating "Democracy" in a One-Party State: Introducing Village Elections in
  China,” The China Quarterly, 2000, (126), 465–489.
Oi, Jean and Scott Rozelle, “Elections and power: The locus of decision-making in Chinese vil-
  lages,” The China Quarterly, 2000, 162, 513–539.
Oi, Jean C., Kim S. Babiarz, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, and Scott Rozelle, “Shifting Fiscal
  Control to Limit Cadre Power in China’s Townships and Villages,” The China Quarterly, 2012,
  211, 649–675.
Oi, Jean, Kim Singer Babiarz, Linxiu Zhang, Renfu Luo, and Scott Rozelle, “Shifting Fis-
  cal Control to Limit Cadre Power in China’s Townships and Villages,” The China Quarterly,
  September 2011, 211, 649–675.
Padró i Miquel, Gerard, “The Control of Politicians in Divided Societies: The Politics of Fear,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2007, 74 (4), 1259–74.
Piketty, Thomas and Nancy Qian, “Income Inequality and Progressive Income Taxation in China
  and India, 1986-2015,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, April 2009, 1 (2),
  53–63.
Qian, Nancy, “Quantity Quality and the One Child Advantage in China,” Working Paper, UNU
  2017.
Shen, Yan and Yang Yao, “Does grassroots democracy reduce income inequality in China?,” Jour-
  nal of Public Economics, 2008, 92(10-11) (10-11), 2182–2198.
Stromberg, David, Bei Qin, and Yanhui Wu, “Why does China allow freer social media? PProtest
  versus Surveillance and Propaganda,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2017, 31 (1), 117–140.
Suarez Serrato, Juan Carlos, Xiao Yu Wang, and Shuang Zhang, “The Limits of Meritocracy:
  Screening Bureaucrats Under Imperfect Verifiability,” Duke Working Paper, 2017.
Tsai, Lily Lee, Accountability without Democracy: Solidary Groups and Public Goods Provision
  in Rural China, New York, NY: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Unger, Jonathan, The transformation of rural China Asia and the Pacific, Cambridge, MA: M.E.
 Sharpe, 2002.
United Cities and Local Governments, “Decentralization and Local Democracy in the World,”
 Global Report 2007.
White, Tyrene, “Reforing the Countryside,” Current History, 1992, 91 (566), 273–277.

                                               41
Wilson, James Q., Bureaucracy, Basic Books, 1989.
Zhang, Xiaobo, Shenggen Fan, Linxiu Zhang, and Jikun Huang, “Local governance and public
  goods provision in rural China,” Journal of Public Economics, 2004, 88(12), 2857–2871.




                                            42
                                                              Figure 1: Optimal Local Governance

                1

                                                                                    Appointment
       Bureaucratic Capacity




                                            Elections with Oversight
                                                                                                            Appointment




                                             1                               3
                                                                                                            Disagreement




        Figure 2: The Effect of Elections on Congruent and Incongruent Policies Over Time
               5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40




                                                                                                                   .2
                                                                                                                   Coefficients (One Child Policy)
              Coefficients (Public Goods)




                                                                                                                   0      .05       .1      .15
            0




                                            -4   -3      -2    -1     0     1     2     3      4   5    6      7
                                                                    Years Since 1st Election

                                                      Public Goods from Villagers       Public Goods from Upper-Gov
                                                      One Child Policy Exemptions


Notes: The y-axis plots the coefficient for the indicator variable for the number of year since the
first election. Source: Authors’ estimation results. See Appendix Table A.3 for the coefficients and
standard errors.



                                                                              43
                                   Figure 3: Procedural Aberrations over Time
     1.2




       1




     0.8




     0.6




     0.4




     0.2




       0
           1982                  1987                      1992                    1997                  2002
                    Candidates<Positions   Roving Ballot Box       Not Anonymous      Proxy Voting   Any Aberration



Notes: The y-axis plots the fraction of villages within which aberrations occur. The x-axis plots the
calendar year. Source: Authors’ calculations, VDS.




                                                                  44
        Table 1: The Effect of Elections on Congruent and Incongruent Policies
                                                                   Dependent Variables
                                A. Concordant Policies            B. Discordant Policies             C. Placebo Policies

                              Public Good                                       Dummy for           Upper-
                                           Village Land         One Child                                     Public Good
                             Expenditures                                      Expropriation     Government
                                            Leased to            Policy                                        Exp from
                               (Villagers,                                      of Village        Special Aid
                                            Enterprises        Exemptions                                     Upper-Gov
                             10,000 RMB)                                           Land         (10,000 RMB)

                                  (1)             (2)               (3)             (4)               (5)             (6)

Dep. Var. Means                   9.46          111.01             0.55            0.02              1.49            4.28

Post 1st Election               16.080           -62.21            0.101           -0.013            -0.650          -0.672
                                (7.717)         (33.842)          (0.056)         (0.006)           (0.915)         (1.525)

Beta Coefficient                 0.051           -0.052            0.076          -0.034            -0.005          -0.004

Wild Bootstrap p-value          [0.044]         [0.048]           [0.052]         [0.072]           [0.527]         [0.818]

Observations                       4,340           1,957             4,340          4,340            4,340            4,340
R2                                 0.103           0.559             0.792          0.094            0.059            0.073
Number of Clusters                  29              27                29             29                29              29
Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, and village and year fixed effects.
Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are reported in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square
brackets. 1 mu =1/15 hectare. The sample is a balanced village-level panel of 217 villages for the years 1986-2005. Column
(2) has fewer observations because data on land leased is missing in some years, and also because we restrict the sample to
109 villages that ever leased land to enterprises.




                                                            45
                           Table 2: The Effect of Congruent and Incongruent Policies on Re-election Probabilities

                                                                   Dependent Variables: Dummy for VC re-election
                                           A. Concordant Policies              B. Discordant Policies                C. Placebo Policies
                                        Public Good                                                               Upper-
                                                       Village Land                          Dummy for
                                       Expenditures                      One Child Policy                      Government Public Good Exp
                                                         Leased to                        Expropriation of
                                         (Villagers,                       Exemptions                           Special Aid    from Upper-Gov
                                                         Enterprises                        Village Land
                                       10,000 RMB)                                                            (10,000 RMB)
                                             (1)             (2)               (3)               (4)                (5)               (6)

     Dep. Var. Means                        0.479              0.477                0.452             0.452                0.480              0.479
     Ind. Var. (Policy*) Mean               8.124              122.8                0.527             0.0154               0.138              3.340

     Policy (see column heading)*          0.00068            0.00005              0.17517            -0.08090            -0.00721           -0.00064
                                          (0.00016)          (0.00009)            (0.06261)          (0.24599)           (0.01121)          (0.00061)




46
     Beta Coefficient                       0.080              0.047                0.172             -0.012               -0.023             -0.039

     Wild Bootstrap p-value                [0.020]            [0.599]              [0.016]            [0.727]             [0.567]            [0.471]

     Observations                           1,173               566                 1,293              1,293               1,171              1,173
      2
     R                                       0.281              0.329              0.288               0.283               0.280              0.279
     Number of Clusters                        29                28                  29                  29                 29                  29
     Notes : All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, and village and year fixed effects. Standard errors,
     clustered at the province level, are reported in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The unit of observation is a
     village and year in which an election for village committee was held. *The independent variables are defined as the average value of the
     corresponding policy in the term before the election. Column (2) has fewer observations because data on land leased is missing in some years,
     and also because we restrict the sample to 109 villages that ever leased land to enterprises.
           Table 3: The Effect of Elections on the Quality of Local Officials

                                                        Dependent Variable
                                        Age             Years of Education    Party Member
                                        (1)                     (2)                 (3)
                                                     A. Village Chairman (VC)

Dependent Variable Mean                 42.10                  7.85                 0.80

Post 1st Election                       -3.042                0.694                 -0.029
                                       (1.121)               (0.213)               (0.047)

Wild Bootstrap p-value                 [0.012]               [0.004]               [0.563]

Obs                                     3,264                 3,264                 3,384
 2
R                                       0.409                  0.612                0.507
Number of Clusters                       136                    136                  141
                                                      B. Party Secretary (PS)

Dependent Variable Mean                 43.48                  8.28                   1

Post 1st Election                       -1.084                -0.048
                                       (0.792)               (0.167)

Wild Bootstrap p-value                 [0.168]               [0.874]

Obs                                     2,496                 4,176
 2
R                                       0.459                 0.570
Number of Clusters                       104                   174
Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, and
village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are reported in
parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The sample is a panel
of village-year observations for the years 1982-2005. The number of observations varies
across columns due to missing values in the outcome variables.




                                                47
        Table 4: The Effect of Elections on Signature Rights
                               Dependent Variable: Dummy Variable for Signature Right
                                     VC              VC & PS              PS
                                     (1)               (2)                (3)

                                  Panel A. Signature Right for Public Goods Investment

Dependent Variable Mean               0.18                0.67                0.16

Post 1st Election                     0.045              -0.027              -0.018
                                     (0.022)             (0.027)             (0.028)

Wild Bootstrap p-value               [0.048]             [0.355]             [0.555]

Observations                          4,296              4,296               4,296
R-squared                             0.773              0.805               0.772
Clusters                                27                 27                  27

                                       Panel B. Signature Right to be Reimbursed

Dependent Variable Mean               0.54                0.18                0.26

Post 1st Election                     0.052               0.012              -0.064
                                     (0.036)             (0.028)             (0.029)

Wild Bootstrap p-value               [0.220]             [0.615]             [0.016]

Observations                          4,296              4,296               4,296
R-squared                             0.765              0.688               0.821
Clusters                                27                 27                  27

                                      Panel C. Signature Right to Reallocate Land

Dependent Variable Mean               0.33                0.53                0.14

Post 1st Election                     0.049              -0.015              -0.035
                                     (0.039)             (0.038)             (0.030)

Wild Bootstrap p-value               [0.216]             [0.695]             [0.248]

Observations                          3,768              3,768               3,768
R-squared                             0.793              0.803               0.804
Clusters                                27                 27                  27

                                 Panel D. SUR Joint Significance for Panels A, B and C

Chi 2                                    6.863               3.279                8.364
p value                                 0.0764               0.351               0.0391
Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends,
and village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are
reported in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The
samples in Panels A and B are balanced panel of 179 villages for1982-2005; the sample in
Panel C is a balanced panel of 157 villages for 1982-2005. There are fewer villages than
the full sample (217) because of missing values for village leaders. Panel D reports the
joint significance of the estimates in Panels A, B and C for each column.




                                          48
Online Appendix

A    Proofs
                                      (1−α)θ
Proposition. (1) Denote by Φ ≡           α   .   If Φ > 1, there is a Λ(Φ) ∈ ( 12 , 1) such that for all

λ > Λ(Φ), villagers select incompetent village officials under elections with oversight. Λ(Φ) is

a decreasing function.

        V −U V      E            O  1 E      O
Proof. Uµ=1 µ=0 = αe − (1 − α)θ e = α (e − Φe ). This expression is strictly decreasing in

λ as eO is strictly increasing and eO = eE when λ = 1. So we have that eE − ΦeO (Λ) = 0 defines the
                                                                                                 1
threshold implicitly and this condition can only be true if Φ > 1 and it must be that Λ >        2   because

this can only be true if eO > 0.

Proposition. (2) If λ < Λ(Φ), starting from a situation of appointment, the introduction of elections

with oversight

    i. Increases success rates for congruent policies

    ii. Decreases success rates for incongruent policies if λ ≤ 21 . If λ > 12 , there is a π̄ ∈ (0, 1) such

that the success rate for incongruent policies decreases (increases) if π > (<)π̄

    iii. Local officials are more competent under elections with oversight than under appointment

Proof. Because λ < Λ(Φ), the level of effort under elections with oversight is eE when C = 1 and

it is defined by equation (2) when C = 0. The first point is obvious from the fact that eE > eA . So

it must be that eE > πeA . The second point follows from the fact that c0 (eO ) = max{0, (2λ − 1)R}

and henceeO = 0 when λ ≤ 21 . When λ > 12 , we have that eA > eO > 0. The proposition then
                                               ¯ 1)such that eDO = π̄eA . Point iii is true because
follows from noting that there is always a π ∈ (0,

when λ < Λ(Φ) villagers pick competent officials with probability 1 under elections, while the

government only picks competent officials with probability π.

Lemma. Pure elections are always dominated by elections with oversight from the point of view of

the government if λ ≤ Λ(Φ).




                                                     1
Proof. When C = 1 both arrangements obtain the same effort, eE . When C = 0, pure elections obtain

0 effort while elections with oversight obtain eO ≥ 0. Therefore in all circumstances elections with

oversight obtain weakly greater expected payoff as long as λ ≤ Λ.

Proposition. (3) Denote by UAG the expected utility of the government under appointment and by UOG

the expected utility of the government under elections with oversight. We have that

     i. For all λ ∈ [0, 1), π ∈ [0, 1), there is a Φ                       e UG > UG
                                                   e such that for all Φ < Φ,
                                                                              O    A

     ii. For all λ > Λ(Φ), and for all π ∈ (0, 1), UOG < UAG

     iii. For each Φ > 1, there is a non-empty set E ⊂ (0, Λ) × (0, 1) such that if (λ , π) ∈ E, then

UOG ≥ UAG

     iv. For each (λ , π) ∈ E, there is a (λ 0 , π 0 ) with λ ≤ λ 0 and π ≤ π 0 such that UOG (λ 0 , π 0 ) <

UAG (λ 0 , π 0 )

Proof. From the proof of Proposition 1 we have that Λ(Φ) is defined implicitly byeE − ΦeO (Λ) =

0. It follows that Φ(1) = 1. Hence, for all Φ < 1, λ < Λ(Φ). In this case, we can denote by
  G = U G −U G = α(eE − πeA ) + (1 − α)θ (eDO − πeA ). Note that the first term in this expression
∆UOA   O    A
                                                            G = α(eE − πeA + Φ(eO − πeA )). If
is always positive. For point i. note that we can rewrite ∆UOA

Φ < 1 and small enough this is the relevant expression and it is clearly positive. For point ii. note

that villagers elect incompetent officials when λ > Λ(Φ). It follows that UOG (λ > Λ) = 0 < UAG . For
                                                 G as above. As noted, the first term eE − πeA is
point iii. note that for λ < Λ(Φ) we can write ∆UOA
                                                                                            1
always positive. The second term can be arbitrarily close to 0 since eO → 0 as λ →          2   and πcan be
                                                                               G > 0.
as small as needed. Hence there are always combinations of λ and π such that ∆UOA

     Finally, point iv follows from ii and iii. Any λ 0 > Λ combined with any π 0 > π will generate a

situation that complies with ii.


B       Endogenous Timing of Elections
According to the descriptive literature, innovative provincial governments began experimenting with

elections in the early 1980s. Elections were formally codified by the central government in the

Organizational Law on Village Committees (OLVC) in 1987. From this point onwards, all provinces



                                                     2
were pushed to introduce elections in all rural areas. A revision of the OLVC in 1998 required

candidate nominations to be open to all villagers.

    The decision to introduce elections at the province-level was the result of political pressure and

bargaining between the central government and the provincial leaders. However, implementation

within provinces was mainly imposed top-down by bureaucratic fiat. Each level of government

would pilot the reform in a few select villages, and the reform would be widely implemented once

the procedures and logistics were tested (O’Brien and Li, 1999).

    To understand the process, timing and details of the reform, we conducted a large number of in-

terviews with county- and province-level officials and conducted focus groups with village officials

and prominent citizens in over a dozen villages in four provinces during the summers of 2006 and

2007. These discussions suggest the roll-out was mostly orthogonal to village characteristics. In

particular, villages had no discretion over the timing of introduction of elections, which is charac-

teristic of reforms in rural China.56 This is consistent with the speed of roll-out within provinces.

    This being said, the anecdotal evidence collected by us as well as that from qualitative studies

only point to two potential exceptions to this orthogonality. First, the pilot villages used to test

electoral procedures were obviously selected to introduce elections earlier. Second, there are a few

accounts of elections being delayed in “problematic” villages that had a history of non-compliance

with unpopular central government policies (e.g., One Child Policy or the permanent expropriation

of village land by the upper-levels of government) or had a large kinship clan that could dominate

other villagers in a majoritarian regime.57 These examples of “endogenous” timing are important to

keep in mind, and we show in the robustness checks below that they do not drive our findings.

    Appendix Table A.2 shows the timing of the introduction of elections in the VDS villages. The

VDS data are consistent with the descriptive literature on the timing of electoral reforms. First, the

timing of the rollout is consistent with rapid top-down implementation within provinces and coun-
   56 In his detailed study of elections, Unger (2002, p. 222) writes that “These [elections] should not be interpreted

as bottom-up initiatives by the villagers themselves; they are not in a position to play any precedent-setting part in
the initiation of new electoral reforms. There is a mistaken belief among some people outside China regarding this...
elections are quietly being instituted at levels above the village, engineered first in selected districts at a distance from
Beijing, through the connivance of the [central] Ministry of Civil Affairs and middle-ranking officials out in the regions”.
Unger (2002) also notes the general passivity of villages in implementing rural reforms such as land reforms and the
adoption of the Household Responsibility Reform earlier in the reform era.
   57 The role of kinship groups in elections has also been discussed by Li (2009) and Oi and Rozelle (2000).



                                                             3
ties. Our data indicate that 16% of villages held their first elections prior to the official introduction

of elections by the county government, 66% held their first elections the year that the county intro-

duced elections, and 18% held their first election afterwards.58 Table A.1 shows that the average

village implemented its first election within the same year as the official introduction of elections in

its county and five years after the first election in the same province. Since the 29 provinces of our

sample include approximately 2,885 counties and 623,669 rural villages (as defined by the number

of village governments, cunming weiyuanhui), these statistics imply that the average county was

able to introduce elections in 143 villages within one year.59

    Second, the fact that a small number of villages implemented elections before and after the

official introduction in each county is consistent with the anecdotal evidence that each administrative

division typically piloted the reform before officially introducing it and also delayed elections in a

few villages. Hence, given our identification assumption, it is important to check that our baseline

estimates are not driven by the early movers or the stragglers.

    Third, we can provide direct evidence that the timing of the first election is uncorrelated to

most pre-reform village characteristics once province fixed effects are partialed out. We estimate

bivariate regressions of the residualized election timing on each of a large number of residualized

village characteristics such as village size, proximity to an urban area, proxies for social and eco-

nomic structure, measures of the pre-existing level of public goods provision and other outcomes

of interest. We measure all these village characteristics in the first year that data are available.60

The sample for this estimation is therefore a cross section of villages. For brevity, we present the

results for village demographic and physical characteristics, and the main outcome variables of our
  58 Note that the timing of the official introduction of elections in each county is based on respondent recall. To maximize
accuracy, our surveyors only record a date if all respondents surveyed in a given village agree. If there is no consensus,
this variable is recorded as missing. Since provinces are large and respondents could not confidently recall the year of the
first election within a province, the date of province-level introduction is inferred as the year of the first election in each
province according to our survey.
   59 While the presence of province waves is prominent in the data, we do have substantial within-province variation in

the timing of the first election in each village. In a village-level cross-sectional regression, when we regress the year
of the first election on province fixed effects we find that the R-squared is 0.33. Thus, approximately two-thirds of the
variation in the timing of elections is within province.
   60 Most variables reported by the NFS are available starting in 1986. Land variables are available starting in 1987.

Measures of the One Child Policy and upper-government land expropriation from the VDS are available starting in 1982.
The results are similar if we measure the latter two variables in 1986. The results are also similar if we measure all
variables as the average of the first two years for which they are available. These alternative results are available upon
request.


                                                              4
regression analysis. Since it is difficult to compare magnitudes across different regressors, Table

A.4 presents the standardized coefficients for each regression. This table shows clearly that there is

no correlation between village characteristics and the timing of elections.

B.1     Robustness

There are three main concerns for the difference-in-differences estimates for the core-tradeoff pre-

dicted by the model. The first concern is that despite controlling for province time trends, our

baseline results are partly driven by cross-province variation in timing, which is determined by

provincial leaders for potentially endogenous reasons. We address this issue in three ways. First, to

control for the province-level timing of the decision to introduce village elections, we add a dummy

variable that indicates whether any village in a given province has introduced elections (Table A.5

column (2)). The results are similar to the baseline estimates, which are displayed in column (1)

for ease of comparison. Hence, our results are not an outcome of province-level variation in the

timing of the introduction of the reform, which is the main source of endogeneity concerns. A sec-

ond way of accounting for province-level factors is to introduce province-year fixed effects instead

of province-year trends. This allows the influence of province characteristics to vary flexibly over

time. Column (3) shows that this stringent set of controls reduces the precision of our estimates,

which is natural given the presence of province-waves in the data. However, what is important is

the fact that the coefficient is nearly identical in magnitude as the baseline specification. Finally,

we control for province-level variables such as per capita GDP, per capita agricultural GDP, and per

capita government expenditure in public goods.61 In column (4), the coefficients with these controls

are also similar to our baseline.

    The second main concern is that our estimate could be driven by pilot or straggler villages in the

reform implementation which may have been chosen endogenously, as discussed earlier. In column

(5), we repeat our estimate on a restricted sample where we drop pilot and straggler villages.62 The

estimate is similar to the baseline.
  61 These   data are reported by China Statistical Yearbooks.
  62 A pilot village is defined as a village that implemented elections more than two standard deviations before the average

timing of villages in the same province. A straggler village is defined as one that implemented elections more than two
standard deviations after the average timing of villages in the same province. If all of the villages in a province implement
elections in the same year, then that province will have no pilot or straggler villages.


                                                             5
    The final concern is that there may be village-specific and time-varying determinants of the

introduction of elections that are not controlled for by the baseline controls and that affect the out-

comes of interest through channels other than elections. The strongest evidence against this concern

is in Table A.4 which shows that the timing of the introduction of elections is uncorrelated with

observable features of the village. Nevertheless, one may still be concerned that the timing of the in-

troduction of elections is correlated with pre-conditions that affect our outcomes of interest through

channels other than elections. Given the anecdotal evidence on the delay of elections for villages

with a history of non-compliance to unpopular central government policies, we directly controlling

for the interaction term of village-level pre-determined policy outcomes – upper government land

expropriation, One Child Policy– and the full vector of year fixed effects.63 The interaction with

year fixed effects controls for the influence of these variables over time in a fully flexible manner,

and it also controls for the influences of all of its correlates over time. Column (6) of Table A.5

shows that the coefficient with these additional controls is very similar to our main estimates.

    We also consider the possibility that several other village-level factors could potentially con-

found the effect of elections on our outcomes of interest. These factors include whether a village

is a suburb of a city (a dummy variable for being in a suburb interacted with year fixed effects),

whether the Tax and Fee Reform had been implemented (a dummy variable which takes the value

of one if the reform has been introduced), and the level of village social capital (a proxy for social

capital interacted with year fixed effects). To proxy for the latter we follow Tsai’s (2007) work in

using the presence of a lineage group (i.e., an ancestral hall, family tree), village temple, or a large

kinship group to proxy for social capital.64 To maximize the statistical precision of our estimates,

we use the principal component of these three measures as our social capital proxy. Column (7)

shows that the resulting coefficient is similar to the baseline.

    In column (8), we re-estimate the baseline on a sample restricted to villages that never experi-

enced an administrative merger with another village since 1982. This addresses the possibility that

our main results are somehow confounded because the probability of having experienced a merger
  63 Thesecharacteristics are measured in the first year that data are available (1982). If we measure these policies in
1986, we obtain similar results. These alternative estimates are available upon request.
  64 To measure the size of the kinship groups, the VDS recorded names from the village roster.




                                                           6
is correlated with the timing of the electoral reform, and whether a village experiences a merger is

correlated with some factor that can affect our outcomes of interest. The coefficient is also similar

to the baseline.

Additional Sensitivity Checks We conduct many additional sensitivity checks that are not pre-

sented here for brevity.65 For example, we check that our estimates are not driven by selection

within counties by instrumenting for the introduction of elections at the village level with the in-

troduction at the county level or with the introduction at the province level. We also control for

public goods expenditures in 1986 (the first year that data are available) interacted with year fixed

effects to control for the fact that villages with different levels of public goods in the base year may

evolve differently over time; or the average annual increase in public goods expenditures between

1986 and 1988 for each village interacted with year fixed effects to control for the fact that villages

with different trends in public goods in the base years can evolve differently over time. All of these

robustness exercises produce estimates that are similar in magnitude to our baseline results.

B.2    Power of Village Chairmen and Party Secretaries

To document that the elected village chairman had de facto authority, we collected data on signature

rights from each village. Signatures of village leaders are required to keep a record of village

policies. The person who signs is the responsible person (e.g., if there are questions from upper

levels of government or villagers). Villages differ in who signs. Thus, for important policies that

are recorded in the village administrative records, we examine the effect of elections on whether only

the chairman signs, both the chairman and secretary sign, or if only the secretary signs. Table 4 in

the main text of the paper shows some evidence that elections increased the frequency of unilateral

signatures by the chairman and decreased the frequency of unilateral signatures by the secretary.

These results suggest that the initial introduction of elections did shift to some extent real power to

village chairmen.




  65 They   are available upon request.


                                                   7
                       Table A.1: Descriptive Statistics from the VDS
Variable                                                           Source     Obs      Mean Std. Dev.
# of HH in Village                                                  NFS      4,340    416.15 276.17
Near City                                                           NFS      5,208     0.30   0.46
Total Public Goods Expenditure (10,000 Constant RMB)                VDS      4,340     13.81   133.23
 Irrigation                                                         VDS      4,340      3.31    63.69
 Schooling                                                          VDS      4,340      0.02     0.34
 Roads & Sanitation                                                 VDS      4,340      4.98    88.25
 Electricity                                                        VDS      4,340      0.71     7.75
 Environment                                                        VDS      4,340      0.31    12.41
 Other                                                              VDS      4,340      2.58    48.04
Total Village Land                                                   NFS     3,612     9,245   14,719
Arable Land (Mu)                                                     NFS     3,612     2,295    2,329
 Share of Village Land that is Arable                                NFS     3,612      0.51     0.32
 Used for HH Farming (Mu)                                            NFS     3,612     2,215    2,312
 Not Used for HH Farming (Mu)                                        NFS     3,612     79.72   367.26
  Leased Out to Enterprises (Mu)                                     NFS     3,612     60.46   347.61
Median HH Annual Gross Income Growth                                 NFS     3,084     0.08      0.19
The Number of Village Committee Members                             NFS      2,287      4.36     2.36
The Number of Village Party Cadres                                  NFS      2,295      6.70     3.82
Party Secretary Tenure                                              VDS      5,208     10.03     8.13
Village Chief: Tenure                                               VDS      5,208      6.69     6.24
Has Election                                                          VDS 5,208         0.73      0.44
Has Open Nomination                                                   VDS 5,208         0.20      0.40
Years between Election Introductions in Village and Province          VDS     217       5.02      5.07
Years between Election Introductions in County and Province** VDS             217       4.28      4.67
Years between Election Introductions in Village and County**          VDS     217       0.74      2.28
Years since last election                                             VDS 1,084         3.16      1.02
VC different from previous term*                                      VDS 4,312         0.16      0.36
1st Election Changed VC*                                              VDS     182       0.38      0.49
Notes: Each observation is at the village-year level. VDS indicates that the variable is reported by
the Village Democracy Survey . NFS indicates that the variables are reported by the National Fixed
Point Survey . *Not all villages retained records of VC's names from prior to the first election. **The
year of the first election in a county is based on respondent recall.




                                                   8
        Table A.2: Timing of Elections from the VDS


                                            First Open Nominations
                 First Election                    (Haixuan)
         Number of                         Number of
          Villages        Cumulative %      Villages     Cumulative %
        Introducing         of Villages   Introducing     of Villages
Year         (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)

1982        13               5.99              1             0.72
1983        13              11.98              1             1.44
1984        42              31.34              7             6.47
1985         3              32.72              0             6.47
1986        35              48.85              4             9.35
1987        12              54.38              1            10.07
1988         7               57.6              1            10.79
1989        15              64.52              1            11.51
1990        25              76.04              1            12.23
1991         1               76.5              0            12.23
1992         3              77.88              1            12.95
1993         6              80.65              3            15.11
1994         2              81.57              3            17.27
1995         9              85.71              3            19.42
1996         4              87.56             18            32.37
1997         3              88.94              0            32.37
1998         6              91.71              6            36.69
1999         9              95.85             42            66.91
2000         7              99.08             12            75.54
2001         2               100              12            84.17
2002         0               100              11            92.09
2003         0               100               3            94.24
2004         0               100               1            94.96
2005         0               100               7             100

Total       217                              139




                               9
Table A.3: The Effect of Elections on Congruent and Incongruent Policies for Each Year Since the
First Election
                                                           Dependent Variables
                                           (1)                    (2)                        (3)
                                  Public Good
     Dummy Var for X Years                            Public Good Exp from            One Child Policy
                             Expenditures (Villagers,
     Since the 1st Election,                               Upper-Gov                    Exemptions
                                 10,000 RMB)
     X=

                 -3                       1.409                    0.679                   -0.0162
                                         (2.137)                  (1.327)                 (0.0181)
                 -2                       0.865                    1.529                  -0.00791
                                         (4.922)                  (1.271)                 (0.0465)
                 -1                       8.896                    0.214                    0.0352
                                         (5.282)                  (1.283)                 (0.0538)
                 0                        36.05                    1.807                    0.0663
                                         (30.64)                  (1.631)                 (0.0558)
                 1                        11.11                    6.372                    0.0766
                                         (7.363)                  (2.931)                 (0.0649)
                 2                        23.36                    3.564                    0.0879
                                         (13.86)                  (2.202)                 (0.0818)
                 3                        16.34                    2.798                     0.109
                                         (9.250)                  (2.312)                 (0.0897)
                 4                        15.24                    3.758                     0.106
                                         (11.17)                  (3.005)                 (0.0902)
                 5                        35.93                    8.372                     0.135
                                         (16.76)                  (4.878)                 (0.0983)

     Observations                         3919                       3919                      3919
     R-squared                            0.130                      0.081                    0.812
     Notes: All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, and
     village and year fixed effects. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are reported in
     parentheses. The sample is a village-level panel balanced across election years (years since the first
     election).




                                                      10
    Table A.4: Correlation between Village Characteristics and Election Timing

                                                                   (1)        (2)        (3)
Dependent Variable: Year of 1st Election                          Coef.       Obs     R-Square
Near City                                                         -0.004      217       0.000
Total Number of Households                                         0.062      217       0.004
Median Household Income                                            0.070      217       0.005
Median Household Income Growth                                     0.105      217       0.011
Total Village Arable Land                                          0.024      216       0.001
Land used for Household Farming                                    0.005      217       0.000

Total Public Goods Exp (10,000 RMB)                               -0.122      217       0.015
of which, from Village Sources                                    -0.071      216       0.037
of which, from non-Village Sources                                 0.004      216       0.001

Land Leased Out to Enterprises (Mu=1/15 Hectare)                  0.028       109       0.001

One Child Policy Exemptions                                       -0.042      217       0.001
Upper-Government Special Aid                                       0.044      217       0.001


Notes : Standardized coefficients are presented in column (1). Each row corresponds to a
different bivariate regression estimated in a cross section of villages. The dependent variable
is the year of the 1st election while the regressor of interest is defined by each row. The
regressors of interest are measured in the base year (defined as the first year that data are
available for each variable). Measures of total public goods by source drop one outlier
observation. All variables are demeaned by province fixed effects. *, **, and *** indicates
statistical significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.




                                              11
     Table A.5: The Effect of Elections on Congruent and Incongruent Policies – Robustness to Controls
                                                                                        Dependent Variables
                                            Control for Province              Control for Prov Omit Early Control for Control for Year FE x  Omit if Ever
                                                                  Control for
                                   Baseline Introduction of 1st               Per Capita GDP and Late Year FE x Base    Near City, Social    Merged with
                                                                 Prov-Year FE
                                                 Election                       and Growth Introducers Year Vars ** Capital, Post Tax & Fee Another Village
                                      (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)           (5)           (6)                 (7)                          (8)
                                                       Panel A. Dependent Variable: Public Goods Expenditure from Villagers (10,000 Constant RMB)

          Post 1st Election         16.080          14.190             13.626            18.077        14.338          15.535               16.692                16.734
                                    (7.717)         (6.620)            (9.509)           (8.509)       (8.012)         (8.219)              (7.740)               (8.459)

          Wild Bootstrap p-value [0.044]            [0.028]            [0.196]           [0.060]       [0.044]         [0.120]              [0.004]               [0.096]

          Observations              4,340            4,340              4,340            4,018          4,100          4,280                 4,340                 3,500
          R-squared                 0.103            0.105              0.221            0.119          0.119          0.122                 0.114                 0.105
          Clusters                    29               29                29                29            29              29                    29                    29

                                                                       Panel B. Dependent Variable: Village Land Leased to Enterprises

          Post 1st Election         -62.202         -59.926            -52.219           -57.878        -61.756        -51.584               -60.021              -57.932
                                   (33.842)        (34.316)           (32.520)          (32.030)       (35.176)       (37.693)              (33.231)             (39.238)

          Wild Bootstrap p-value [0.048]            [0.076]            [0.136]           [0.104]       [0.056]         [0.148]              [0.068]               [0.176]

          Observations              1,957            1,957              1,957            1,842          1,862          1,957                 1,957                 1,672
          R-squared                 0.560            0.560              0.747            0.593          0.560          0.670                 0.580                 0.614
          Clusters                    27               27                27                27            27              27                    27                    26




12
                                                                                     Panel C. One Child Policy Exemptions

          Post 1st Election          0.101           0.102              0.093             0.104         0.107           0.108                0.103                 0.124
                                    (0.056)         (0.056)            (0.062)           (0.051)       (0.060)         (0.054)              (0.055)               (0.058)

          Wild Bootstrap p-value [0.052]            [0.080]            [0.136]           [0.056]       [0.080]         [0.040]              [0.072]               [0.040]

          Observations              4,340            4,340              4,340            4,018          4,100          4,280                 4,340                 3,500
          R-squared                 0.792            0.792              0.813            0.797          0.795          0.798                 0.794                 0.790
          Clusters                    29               29                29                29            29              29                    29                    29

                                                                                Panel D. Dummy for Expropriation of Village Land

          Post 1st Election          -0.013          -0.013             -0.007            -0.014        -0.014          -0.013               -0.011                -0.011
                                    (0.006)         (0.006)            (0.008)           (0.006)       (0.006)         (0.007)              (0.007)               (0.007)

          Wild Bootstrap p-value [0.072]            [0.072]            [0.407]           [0.068]       [0.044]         [0.092]              [0.116]               [0.136]

          Observations                4,340            4,340             4,340            4,018          4,100          4,280                 4,340                  3,500
          R-squared                   0.094            0.094             0.199            0.105          0.095          0.103                 0.103                  0.095
          Clusters                      29               29               29                29             29             29                    29                     29
          Notes : All regressions control for the introduction of open nominations, province trends, village and year fixed effects, and the additional controls stated in the
          column headings. Standard errors, clustered at the province level, are presented in parentheses. Wild bootstrap p-values are presented in square brackets. The
          number of clusters is stated at the bottom of each panel. The samples of panels A, C and D are balanced village-level panels of 217 villages for the years 1986-
          2005. Panel B has fewer observations because data on land leased is missing in some years, and also because we restrict the sample to 109 villages that ever
          leased land to enterprises. ** In column (6), we control for the interaction of base year measures of the PCA of pub goods, OCP, land expropriation, land leased
          out, each interacted with all of the year fixed effects.
