                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFECTS OF LAND MARKETS ON RESOURCE ALLOCATION
                     AND AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY

                                        Chaoran Chen
                                      Diego Restuccia
                                   Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis

                                      Working Paper 24034
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24034


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                          November 2017, Revised March 2020




We thank Stephen Ayerst, Loren Brandt, Rui Castro, Murat Celik, Margarida Duarte, Doug
Gollin, Andre Groger, Joan Llull, Leandro De Magalhães, Hannes Mueller, Amma Panin,
Xiaodong Zhu, and seminar participants at Fudan University, University of Lausanne, McMaster
University, Midwest Macro Conference at Louisiana State University, National University of
Singapore, Oxford, Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, Singapore Management
University, Syracuse University, and the World Bank for useful comments. All remaining errors
are our own. Chen thanks the National University of Singapore for the faculty start-up grant
(R122000266133) while he worked on this paper and to York University for his grant (481419).
Restuccia gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the Canadian Research Chairs
program and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. Räul Santaeulàlia-
Llopis thanks the ERC AdG-GA324048, “Asset Prices and Macro Policy when Agents Learn
(APMPAL)” and the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness through the Severo
Ochoa Programme for Centers of Excellence in R&D (SEV-2015-0563) for financial support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Chaoran Chen, Diego Restuccia, and Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of Land Markets on Resource Allocation and Agricultural Productivity
Chaoran Chen, Diego Restuccia, and Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis
NBER Working Paper No. 24034
November 2017, Revised March 2020
JEL No. E02,O11,O13,O55,Q1

                                          ABSTRACT

We assess the effects of land markets on misallocation and productivity by exploiting effective
variation in land rentals across time and space arising from a large-scale land certification reform
in Ethiopia, where land remains owned by the state. Our main finding from detailed micro panel
data is that land rentals substantially reduce misallocation and increase agricultural productivity.
Our evidence builds from an empirical difference-in-difference strategy and a calibrated
quantitative macroeconomic framework with heterogeneous household-farms that replicates—
without targeting—the empirical effects, an outcome that externally validates our model. The
empirical effects are nonlinear—impacting more farms farther away from efficient operational
scale, consistent with our theory. Further, counterfactual model experiments suggest that the land
reform reduces income inequality, is relatively scalable and explains a sizeable proportion of the
full extent of misallocation. Additional insights on the role of (in)formality in land markets and
its effects on technology adoption are provided.

Chaoran Chen                                     Raül Santaeulàlia-Llopis
York University                                  MOVE, UAB, and Barcelona GSE
4700 Keele St.                                   Plaza Civica s/n
Toronto, ON M3J 1P3                              Bellaterra, Barcelona
Canada                                           08193
chenecon@yorku.ca                                Spain
                                                 rauls@movebarcelona.eu
Diego Restuccia
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
CANADA
and NBER
diego.restuccia@utoronto.ca
1         Introduction
What are the effects of land markets on resource allocation and agricultural productivity?
This question is important for many poor countries in which land transactions are either pro-
hibited by law or face high transaction costs (Binswanger and Rosenzweig, 1986; Rosenzweig
and Binswanger, 1993). The advocates of these prohibitions base their arguments on the lack
of evidence in favor of the efficient use of resources generated from land markets and on the
notion that common or customary tenure—as opposed to the private titling of land—keeps
inequality and landlessness in check. Indeed, many governments and institutions justify
“against-market” land policy on these grounds in poor countries.1 Unfortunately, despite
its importance and the large efforts devoted into understanding it, the answer to whether
land markets improve resource allocation and productivity as well as its implications for
equity remains poorly understood. We address these questions assessing both empirically
and quantitatively the effects of land markets in the context of a large-scale land certification
reform in Ethiopia that partially lifts restrictions on land rental transactions but it does not
allow for land purchases or sales as the ownership continues to reside with the state.
        Ethiopia provides a unique and relevant context to investigate the effects of land markets
on productivity. From 1974 until the early-1990s, the Communist government in power
expropriated and uniformly redistributed all of the rural land in the country, and prohibited
land transactions by law. Although land ownership still resides with the state and many
of the restrictions to land transactions remain in place, a land certification reform was
launched in the 2000s to grant land certificates to farmers that allow land to be reallocated
across farmers via rentals (up to a limit) of the use rights (Holden and Ghebru, 2016).
A key aspect of this land reform is that the granting of land certificates—and, hence, the
lifting of barriers to land rental market activity—was decentralized and implemented by local
governments with different intensity and timing across zones (i.e., sub-regions) as opposed to
being contemporaneously implemented by the central government (Deininger et al., 2008).
Indeed, using representative panel data that catches the reform in the 2010s—in three waves
2011/12, 2013/14, and 2015/2016—we find large variation in land rental market activity
across space and time. This layout provides us with unique variation in land rentals across
    1
    There, the ownership of land typically resides with the collective or the state and use rights of land are
distributed by local leaders on a fairly egalitarian basis. However, although long-lived land-use rights can
help improve land tenure security and generate investment (Besley, 1995), they do not necessarily entail the
right to sell or rent, which prevents land transactions and reallocations (Galiani and Schargrodsky, 2011).


                                                      2
time and space that we exploit in our analysis.2
       Our assessment of the effects of land markets builds on both empirical evidence and quan-
titative macroeconomic theory. First, we use an empirical difference-in-difference approach
to assess the effects of increasing reform intensity on resource allocation and agricultural
productivity—where the treatment zones are those that show an increase in land market
activity and the control zones those that do not. Our main finding is that land rentals
reduce misallocation and increase agricultural productivity. An increase in one percentage
point of land rentals increases agricultural productivity by a significant 3.2 percent. We
assess the validation of these effects by showing nonsignificant pre-trends between treatment
and control zones and nonsignificant placebo tests. We also explore an analogous quantile
difference-in-difference specification where quantiles group farmers with similar distance be-
tween actual factor inputs and optimal operational scale and find that the effects of land
markets are nonlinear—impacting more those farms farther away from their efficient op-
erational scale. We further study the effects of reform adoption—the extensive margin of
land rentals—with two additional difference-in-difference specifications in which we com-
pare late reformers to the unreformed or to the early reformers. In both cases we reach
similar insights that adopting land rental markets reduces factor misallocation and increase
agricultural productivity.
       Second, we consider a quantitative macroeconomic theory with households-farms that are
heterogeneous in their permanent productivity and face zone-specific institutional barriers,
summarized by a cost parameter, to accessing land rental markets. We calibrate these insti-
tutional costs by zone in order to match the status quo land rental market activity separately
for each zone. We are particularly interested in assessing whether our calibrated model can
quantitatively generate the estimated empirical effects of land markets. To do so, we conduct
a policy experiment on the status quo allocations through a land reform that we formalize
as an exogenous and unexpected reduction in the institutional costs. Specifically, we change
   2
     Since our goal is to assess the effects of land rental markets, we focus directly on the variation in land
rental activity as opposed to the variation in the distribution of land certificates. In this context, notice
that although the land reform was initiated in the 2000s, our representative panel data is collected in the
2010s. This is relevant as it allows us to capture potential lagging behavior between the granting of land
certificates and the farms’ engagement in land rental activity, for which we find evidence (see Section 2.3).
A plausible explanation for this lagging behavior is the potential lack of trust in the institutional reform
(Ostrom, 2010). For example, this could be driven by the fact that Ethiopian farmers have witnessed a
recent past with recurrent governmental land expropriations (Gottlieb and Grobovšek, 2018). We discuss
this further in Section 2.



                                                      3
the costs in order to match the actual zone-level changes in land rental activity that we
observe in the data over time. This policy experiment generates a new set of counterfactual
allocations in which the land rental activity in the model matches the actual land rentals af-
ter the reform. Then, we use the model-generated status quo and counterfactual allocations
to estimate the effects of land rental markets on resource misallocation and agricultural pro-
ductivity using the same difference-in-difference specification as the empirical counterpart.
We find that the model-generated effects are very similar to the empirical effects, even if
our calibration strategy targets the zone-level change in land rentals but not the empirical
effects. It is important to note that the model-generated effects of land rental markets are
entirely driven by the policy experiment—a reduction in the institutional costs. That is,
unlike the empirical assessment, the model-based analysis is not tainted by the potential
endogeneity of the policy or any other concerns behind the changes in allocative efficiency
that follow the land rental reform.
    We then conduct several counterfactual quantitative experiments on our model to address
the effects of land markets on inequality, reform scalability and the extent of misallocation.
First, a critical aspect of the political discourse on land policy in poor countries is whether
land rentals enhance or reduce farm income inequality (Deininger and Binswanger, 1999;
Deininger and Feder, 2001). A complete assessment of the effects of land rental markets on
inequality is challenging as it requires data that is typically not available.3 Fortunately, we
can use our model-generated status quo and counterfactual allocations to construct measures
of within-zone inequality in farming income and assess the effects of land markets on inequal-
ity with difference-in-difference strategy on model-generated data. We find that an increase
in land rental market activity substantially reduces zone-level inequality, for a wide range of
inequality measures. That is, the efficiency gains generated from land rental markets do not
arise with the cost of a loss in equity. Second, we assess the scalability of the land reform
by further reducing the institutional costs to accessing land rental markets in our model
through a new set of counterfactuals. We find that scaling up the reform to zones that do
not show land rental market activity increases efficiency gains for those zones. Interestingly,
not all zones need the same reform scale to reduce efficiency gains from reallocation, which
depends on the pre-existing extent of misallocation. This context-dependence indicates that
   3
     In particular, it requires the record of both land rental payments and receipts as well as consistency in
that the sum of land rents paid be identical to the sum of land rents received.



                                                      4
unreformed zones with the largest efficiency gains require a land reform of a scale similar to
the already reformed median (in terms of efficiency gains) zone suggesting that the reform
is relatively scalable. Third, we assess how much the institutional costs to accessing land
rental markets account for the full extent of misallocation. These institutional costs account
for approximately 35 percent of the extent of misallocation on average across zones.
       Our analysis also provides additional insights regarding land rental markets. In our
sample, we find a strong relationship between personal connections and rental transactions,
and hence some rentals may aim at goals other than efficiency such as the provision of social
insurance (Kinnan and Townsend, 2012; Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2016).4 In addition, land
rental decisions may depend on factors other than the holding of a land-use certificate such
as the state of rule of law, complementary institutions, and remaining fears of expropriation.
In this context, we find that reductions in the extent of misallocation due to changes in
operational scale via rentals mostly operate through market-based rentals and not through
non-market land rentals. We also explore whether land rental markets affect technology
adoption. We find that land rental markets overall generate a significant increase in fertilizer
use, but the effects on livestock and agricultural equipment are mixed.
       Our paper is related to a growing macroeconomic development literature on agricultural
productivity.5 The importance of agricultural productivity in accounting for income per
capita differences across countries has been emphasized, among many others, in Gollin et al.
(2002), Restuccia et al. (2008) and Gollin et al. (2014).6 The measurement of the extent
of misallocation in poor countries has been recently emphasized using micro panel data in
Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017) and Gollin and Udry (2017). In sharp contrast
with these authors, our interest is on the changes in the extent of misallocation due to the
effects of land markets—and not on the extent of misallocation per se. If the introduction of
land markets generates positive effects on resource allocation and productivity, then we have
identified the lack of land markets as one source—among potentially many others—of factor
misallocation (Restuccia and Rogerson, 2017). In this context, our paper also relates to the
microeconomic development literature studying the role of institutions that impede economic
   4
      The seminal papers by Rosenzweig and Stark (1989), Townsend (1994) and Udry (1994) highlight the
role of insurance. See also Morten (2019), Kinnan (2019) and De Magalhães and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2018).
    5
      For example, see Adamopoulos (2011), Lagakos and Waugh (2013), Donovan (2016), Chen (2017),
Adamopoulos et al. (2017), and Chen (2019).
    6
      See also Gollin et al. (2004, 2007). More recently, Adamopoulos and Restuccia (2014) discusses the role
of factor misallocation in explaining cross-country differences in agricultural productivity.


                                                     5
development.7 We specifically focus on barriers to accessing land markets and how this mi-
croeconomic distortion matters for macroeconomic agricultural productivity. To investigate
this question, we use a specific large-scale land policy reform that generates variation across
space and time in land market activity. This approach of exploiting policy-driven variation
across time and space follows an important existing literature in growth and development
economics (Besley and Burgess, 2000; Banerjee and Iyer, 2005; Giné, 2005; de Janvry et al.,
2015). While land reforms have been studied in a recent empirical literature (Deininger et al.,
2008, 2011; Chari et al., 2017), our empirical contribution has the advantage of hindsight
using a rich layout of effective policy impact that combines the intensive and extensive mar-
gins of variations land rentals—e.g., early reformers, late reformers and unreformed areas.
Further, our paper integrates empirical strategies and quantitative macroeconomic theory
which provides a comprehensive aggregate assessment of the policy-driven land reallocation
effects triggered at the micro level. Furthermore, we use the estimated empirical effects to
externally validate the theoretical effects—a methodology that resembles the work in Todd
and Wolpin (2006). This validation exercise warrants our model counterfactuals for (1) the
assessment of the implications of land markets for inequality, (2) the study of the scalability
of the reform and (3) the mesaurement of how much barriers to land markets account for
the full extent of misallocation. In this context, our work closely relates to a recent strand of
the development literature that combines empirical approaches and theory such as Mobarak
and Rosenzweig (2014), Bryan et al. (2014), Lagakos et al. (2018), and Meghir et al. (2019).
      The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the data, the institutional background
and the land reform, and market activity in Ethiopia. In Section 3, we present our theoretical
framework and qualitatively discuss the theoretical effects of land markets. Section 4 shows
our empirical results about the effects of land rentals on factor misallocation and agricultural
productivity using a difference-in-different approach. In Section 5, we use assess whether
our model is able to replicate the empirical results. We also conduct a set of counterfactual
experiments using our model to assess the effects of land markets on inequality, study the
scalability of the reform and measure how much the barriers to accessing land markets
explains of the full extent of misallocation. We provide further insights related to formal
versus informal land rental markets and effects on technology adoption in Section 6. Section 7
concludes.
  7
      See Acemoglu et al. (2001), Banerjee et al. (2002), and Banerjee and Iyer (2005), among others.



                                                      6
2     Data and Institutional Background
2.1    Data
We use household-level panel data from the World Bank, the Ethiopia Integrated Survey of
Agriculture (ISA), for all available waves 2011/12, 2013/14, and 2015/16. The ISA’s provide
information over the entire process of crop production, including physical measures of farm
inputs and outputs. These are representative surveys of the population, with approximately
5,250 households interviewed per wave, among whom around two thirds live in rural areas
and participate in agricultural production. Each household is surveyed twice in a year: the
first round is during the planting season, and the second round is during the harvest season.
    Almost all farms in Ethiopia are family farms. Therefore, we treat a family farm operated
by a household as our basic unit of production. We construct our measures of factor inputs,
outputs, and total factor productivity (TFP) at the household-farm level. A farm operated
by a household typically consists of several different plots of land; we therefore aggregate
the inputs and outputs of these plots to the household level. A detailed description of our
variables for output, capital, land quality, land, and labor input, as well as transitory shocks
such as rain, is in Appendix A.
    The panel dimension of the Ethiopia ISA data is key in two aspects of our analysis.
First, we use the panel dimension of our survey data to compute a permanent component of
individual farm TFP. This permanent component—or fixed effect—captures unobserved het-
erogeneity in productivity. We use this benchmark productivity to conduct our reallocation
exercises. Second, we use the policy-driven variation across time and space of land rentals in
Ethiopia to provide direct evidence of the effects of rentals on aggregate productivity with
a difference-in-difference approach that requires the panel structure.


2.2    Institutional Background
We focus the study in Ethiopia because of its historical institutional background related
to land policies and its more recent land certification reform that we assess. Current land
institutions in Ethiopia are shaped by historical events, but their prevailing characteristic
has been state control over the allocation and use of land. The evolution of land institutions
can be divided into three periods. The first period is the imperial period, spanning from the
mid nineteenth century to 1974. During this period, land ownership was usually granted to


                                               7
political supporters regardless of occupation or use in farming, which created a feudal regime.
Further emergence of private property during this period resulted in powerful landlords. The
second period, from 1975 to 1991, resulted from the severe social injustices created by the
feudal regime that lead to a Communist regime. A comprehensive land reform, “Land to the
Tiller”, was then implemented. The Communist government expropriated all of the land in
the country and redistributed it to all rural households—adjusting for soil quality and family
size—in the form of use rights. Land redistributions were frequent, every one to two years,
to achieve an equitable allocation of use rights among the local rural populations, and land
transactions were strictly prohibited.
       The third period started with the collapse of the Communist regime in 1991, under
a market-oriented government that has largely maintained land-related policies from the
previous regime. Essentially, land ownership still resides with the state and households are
assigned use rights by local authorities at the village (kebele) or district (woreda) level. Many
of the restrictions to land transactions remain in place. However, land certification reforms
have been implemented since the early 2000s to mainly promote tenure security by issuing
land certificates of use rights. Critically, farmers with these land certificates are allowed to
rent out land, but not to sell land because land is entirely owned by the state.


2.3       Land Certification Reform and Land Rental Markets
Our interest is in assessing the effects of land markets on economic development. For this
reason, and since the land certification reform under study is specifically a reform that lifts
restrictions to land rental markets (Holden and Ghebru, 2016), we directly focus on land
rental market activity as our source of variation. In particular, we measure land rental
market activity, Rz,t , as the ratio between the size of total rented land and the size of total
cultivated land in a given zone z and period t.8
       Notice that we focus on Rz,t as opposed to direct measures of the granting of land
certificates—e.g. the percentage of the land plots with certificates. This distinction is im-
portant because the granting of land certificates does not necessarily generate immediate
land market activity, which is our object of interest. Indeed, we find that although land
   8
    Despite the land reform, the land rental market is relatively under-developed in Ethiopia. Indeed, severe
restrictions on land rentals remain in place. For example, only a fraction of use rights can be rented and
the renting household must dwell in the rural area as well as be engaged only in farming. See Holden and
Ghebru (2016) for a discussion of a set of legal restrictions on land rentals present in Ethiopia since 2006.



                                                     8
                           Figure 1: Land Certificates and Land Rentals




                                        .05 .1 .25 .5 1
                               Rental Percentage
                                .01
                                                          0    .25        .5          .75    1
                                                              Land Plots with Certificates
Note: The percentage of land rentals within a zone increases with the percentage of land plots with certificates
in the previous period. We report 100 zone-year observations that have positive rental land and more than
10 observations. The size of the circles indicates the number of observations in each zone.


certificates have been already granted in all zones (at least partially), there are zones with
granted land certificates where we do not observe land rental market activity at all through
our entire sample period (from 2011/12 to 2015/16).9 This suggests that certain lagging
behavior between the granting of land certificates and land rental activity exists. That is, it
is plausible that it takes time for farmers—who throughout their lifetime have been subject
to recurrent land expropriations by the government in Ethiopia—to trust and use the new
land rental entitlements. Indeed, during the launching of the land reform, local governments
still illegally evicted landholders with de-facto imprisonment threats (ELTAP, 2007), which
further depletes trust.10 Nevertheless, we find that land rentals are clearly associated with
the land certificate reform. Figure 1 shows the positive association between the percentage of
the land plots with certificates in the previous period and Rz —the percentage of land rentals
in the current period—across zones, pooling both 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves of data. The
contemporaneous correlation within each year is also positive and significant: The Spear-
man’s rank correlations between the two are 0.44 and 0.37 for the two waves, respectively,
both of which are significant at the one percent level.
    The key aspect of the land market reform under study is that its implementation was
decentralized to local authorities (Deininger et al., 2008), so the timing and extent of land
   9
     We find that the certificates in these zones where (on average) granted in 2008. That is, we find zones in
which farms do not engage in land rentals in the 2010s even though land certificates were granted in those
zones in the 2000s.
  10
     See Ostrom (2010) for a discussion on the importance of trust in the context of policy implementation.



                                                                       9
                           Table 1: Land Rentals across Time and Space
                                                   Percent                                Obs.
                          Aggregate      Min.    10 pct Median         90 pct    Max.
            Rz,2013/14      10.9         0.0      0.0      5.2          24.7     66.0      67
            Rz,2015/16      11.5         0.0      0.0      6.3          27.7     73.2      67
Notes: Data from Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16. The share of land rentals Rz is defined as the ratio
between the size of total rented land in cultivation and the size of total cultivated land in zone z. We show
distributional statistics of the level of Rz separately for our two waves of data 2013/14 and 2015/16. We
drop zones with less than 10 household observations in either year.


rental market activity potentially differ across zones and time. We hence explore this rich
variation in land rentals (intensive and extensive margins) in our empirical strategy. We
show several features of the land rental market activity across space and time in Table 1.
In terms of the intensive margin of land rentals, the nationwide percentage of rented land
is 10.9 in 2013/14. This percentage differs greatly across space with many zones in which
there is no evidence of the presence of land rental market activity whereas other zones
show more than 60 percent of cultivated land is acquired through the rental market.11 The
heterogeneity in the extensive margin is also important. There are a total of 8 zones that have
not experienced land rental activity in 2013/14. Finally, across time, there is a substantial
and heterogeneous increase in land rental market activity between 2013/14 and 2015/16. In
terms of the intensive margin, while 34 zones out of 67 zones did not experience an increase
in land rentals, 7 zones experienced land rental increases by at least 10 percentage points,
and 3 zones experienced rental increases of more than 15 percentage points. In terms of the
extensive margin we find that 6 zones out of the 8 zones that had not implemented rentals
in 2013/14 implement rentals in 2015/16. That is, there are zones that do not show land
rental market activity throughout our sample period.


3      Theoretical Framework
We develop a macroeconomic model to assess the effects of land rental markets on resource
misallocation and productivity within zones in Ethiopia.
  11
    There are four levels of administrative divisions in Ethiopia: regions (states), zones (counties), woreda
(districts), and kebele (wards). For the 2013/14 sample, we have farm location information down to the
kebele level. We have a total of 2,877 observations, located across 10 regions, 73 zones, and 272 woredas.
Due to sample size, we mainly focus our analysis at the zone level since we have a reasonable number of
zones and a relatively large number of observations within each zone.



                                                     10
3.1       Setup
Our economy is populated by heterogeneous household farms that differ in their permanent
farming productivity, si ∈ S. Each household farm produces a homogeneous agricultural
good using the following decreasing returns to scale technology:
                                                                        γ
                                       yeit = (si ζit )1−γ kitα `1−α
                                                                 it          ,

where yeit is the output of farm i in period t (measured as value added net of intermediates
such as fertilizer and seeds), kit is the associated capital input and `it is a measure of land
size adjusted for land quality. Precisely, `it = qit lit , where qit is land quality and lit is land
size. Notice that household-farm productivity consists of a permanent component, si , that
does not change over time and a transitory component ζit (e.g., rain shocks and illnesses).
All variables are in per capita (hourly) terms.12
       Two remarks are in order. First, we are interested in reallocations guided only by the
permanent component of productivity si . For this reason, in practice, we use our panel data
to recover this permanent component (a fixed effect) and measure the transitory shocks ζit
as the residual deviations from that permanent component. Second, we also use our rich
data on land quality at the plot level to net its effects on output (see Section 2.1). This way,
                                                           yeit
we can define our benchmark output as yit =             1−γ (1−α)γ ,        that is,
                                                       ζit qit
                                                                   γ
                                          yit = s1−γ
                                                 i   kitα lit1−α        ,                                 (1)

where the parameter γ ∈ (0, 1) governs returns to scale at the farm level, and α is a factor
share parameter.
       In our calibration, we use our micro data to estimate the factor shares of income with
capital, labor, and land shares that pin down the values for α and γ. We find that the capital,
labor, and land shares are 0.147, 0.464, and 0.389, respectively. This implies that α = 0.274
and γ = 0.536.13 Given values for α and γ, together with farms’ actual inputs (including
land quality) and outputs in the data, we recover farm-level productivity separately for each
year, si ζit , which is the product of a permanent si and transitory component ζit . Then we
  12
     Notice that we set all variables in per capita terms. This choice follows the idea that the reallocations
of capital and land that we conduct across household farms are not accompanied by the reallocation of
household members across farms. The reason is that the labor input in agricultural production is largely
provided within family. We conduct robustness to this assumption in Appendix C.3 where we allow for the
labor input to be reallocated.
  13
     Appendix B describes in detail how we obtain factor income shares.



                                                      11
use our panel data to recover our benchmark measure of permanent farm-level productivity
for the reallocation exercises, si , which is constructed as the geometric mean of farm-level
productivity across years. That is, our benchmark productivity measure si is equivalent to
the outcome of an estimation of household-farm fixed effects of productivity (in logs) and,
hence, it captures permanent unobserved heterogeneity across farms.14 Notice that although
farm productivity si is invariant to time, farm output and factor inputs can change over time
in production as in equation (1). However, for the ease of notation, we drop time subscripts
for all variables in our analysis from now on.
       Each household farm takes price as given and solves the following profit maximization
problem:
                                                                   γ
                           max π(si , ¯li ) = s1−γ
                                               i   kiα li1−α            − rki − c(li , ¯li ),             (2)
                            ki ,li

where li and ¯li denote the actual operational scale and land endowment, respectively. The
function c(li , ¯li ) represents the cost of changing the amount of land endowments to the desired
operational scale. This cost is a combination of the rental cost of land plus a land transaction
cost that captures the institutional barriers to accessing land rental markets determined by,
for example, the amount of land certificates distributed in given zone that allow for rentals.
We write this cost function as

                                      c(li , ¯li ) = q(li − ¯li ) + b(li , ¯li ),                         (3)

where q is the rental rate of land, q(li − ¯li ) the rental payment (receipt) of land if li > ¯li
(li < ¯li ), and b(li , ¯li ) represents the institutional barrier to accessing land rental markets.
By definition, the transaction cost is such that b(¯li , ¯li ) = 0 and b(li , ¯li ) > 0 for all li 6= ¯li .
 Further, we assume that the transaction cost b(li , ¯li ) increases in the distance between li and
¯li at an increasing rate. Formally,
                                       ∂bl (li , ¯li )
                                                       > 0.                                      (4)
                                           ∂li
   Denote the optimal inputs solved from the profit maximization problem (2) as l∗ (si , ¯li )
and k ∗ (si , ¯li ). Given an initial joint distribution of land endowments, capital and permanent
productivity Φ(s, ¯l, k̄), an equilibrium is a set of land and capital allocations (li∗ , ki∗ ) such
  14
    After observing the implied distribution of productivity we trim approximately 0.8 percent of the farm
TFP distribution to remove what we find are candidate outliers which may reflect measurement error in
inputs and outputs in the data. A more systematic (and aggressive) trimming, say one percent of the TFP
distribution on both tails, barely changes the dispersion of TFP with a standard deviation of 0.75, as opposed
to our benchmark 0.79.


                                                         12
that given the rental prices of land q and capital r farms solve their profit maximization
problem (2) and land and capital rental markets clear, that is, i l∗ (si , ¯li ) = L = i ¯li . and
                                                               P                      P

   k (si , ¯li ) = K =
P ∗
                         k̄i , respectively.15
                       P
     i                           i



3.2          Theoretical Effects of Land Rental Markets
We now use our theoretical framework to qualitatively examine the effects of access to land
rental markets. To do this, we need to specify a functional form for the barriers to accessing
land rentals that satisfy the assumptions described in (4). We assume these barriers take
a standard quadratic cost adjustment function b(l, ¯l) = χz (l − ¯l)2 , where χz ∈ [0, ∞) is a
                                                                                2

zone-specific component capturing the difficulty of accessing to land rental markets within a
given zone (a geographical area) z. Because we are interested in resource allocations within
zones z which are subject to potentially different implementations of the land reform policy,
we separately solve for the optimal allocations within zones, that is, subject to the total
amount of zone-specific aggregate capital Kz and land Lz .
         We define the total amount of rentals in a given zone as
                                        (l (si , ¯li ) − ¯li )1(l∗ (si , ¯li ) > ¯li )
                                     P ∗
                               Rz = i                   P ¯                            ,       (5)
                                                             i li

where 1(l∗ (si , ¯li )) is a binary variable which is equal to one if farmer i rents in land and
zero otherwise. We use this binary variable to prevent double counting, i.e., renting in and
renting out should be counted only once.
         Efficient allocation (χz = 0). We start by focusing on the efficient allocation, achieved
with χz = 0, which coincides with the social planner’s problem. It is straightforward to show
that when χz = 0, equilibrium allocations are, after solving for the equilibrium prices, given
by
                                                                           si
                                          l∗ (si , ¯l; χz = 0) = le (si ) = Lz ,               (6)
                                                                           Sz
                    P
where Sz =        si . That is, optimal land is proportional to farmer’s productivity si . The
                        i∈z

solution for capital is analogous. Notice that in this case the initial endowment ¯li does
not affect the optimal operational scale of land which is solely a function of individual
productivity si . Clearly, in this case, land rentals are positive (Rz > 0) as long as the initial
land endowments ¯li differ from the optimal allocations le (si ) for each and all i.
                                                                            i
 15
         We describe a solution algorithm for the equilibrium in Appendix D.1.



                                                             13
   The equilibrium farm output associated with the efficient allocation is
                                                                    K α L1−α γ
                    y e (si ) = s1−γ
                                 i   (ki
                                        e
                                          (si )α e
                                                l  (s
                                                 i i  )1−α γ
                                                          )  = s i
                                                                      z z
                                                                                 .
                                                                        Sz
The zone-level aggregate output associated with the efficient allocation is
                                   X
                             Yze =     yie = Sz1−γ (Kzα L1−α
                                                         z   )γ ,
                                          i∈z

which is the maximum aggregate output subject to the aggregate resource constraints.
   Allocations with imperfect land markets (χz > 0). When the institutional cost χz > 0,
the optimal operational land per farmer solved from the profit maximization problem (2) is
                                              αγ                         1−αγ
                          ∗         1
                                        α  1−γ       1−α                  1−γ
                         li = si γ 1−γ                                                (7)
                                         r         q(1 + τ (li∗ , ¯li ))
where τ (l, ¯l) = bl (l, ¯l)/q represents an endogenous land wedge (i.e., a “distortionary tax”
on the rental price of land). The RHS of the equation is decreasing in l while the LHS is
increasing in l, and hence the solution is unique. Further, the optimal land operational scale
depends on the farm’s productivity and its initial endowment. This way, we denote l∗ (s, ¯l)       i

as the solution to this first order condition. The solution for capital ki∗ is analogous.
   Recall that, absent from the institutional cost (χz = 0), land rentals are generally positive
(Rz > 0) as long as the initial land endowments ¯li differ from the optimal allocations lie (si )
for each and all i. On the contrary, if the institutional cost is prohibitively high (χ → ∞),
then the operational land of each farm will be simply given by

                                       li∗ (si , ¯li : χz → ∞) = ¯li .

In this case, the rental markets collapse and land rentals will be zero (Rz = 0). In those
intermediate cases where χz ∈ (0, 1), land rentals Rz decrease with χz , as illustrated in Figure
2. The amount of land rentals, Rz , then indicates the institutional cost of land rentals χz .
   Measures of misallocation. Farm output is given by yi∗ = (s∗i )1−γ [(ki∗ )α (li∗ )1−α ]γ . As long
as χz > 0, this output level yi∗ (si , ¯li ) is different from that in the efficient allocation y e (si ),
unless the distribution of ¯li coincides with le (si ). The aggregate output is then
                                                X
                                       Yz∗ =          yi∗ (si , ¯li ) 6= Yze .
                                                i∈z

Recall that   Yze   is also the output associated with the planner’s problem, then Yz∗ 6= Yze
must imply that Yz∗ < Yze . The ratio of which, indicating the efficiency gain of relocating


                                                        14
    Figure 2: Institutional Land Rental Costs (χz ) and Equilibrium Land Rentals (Rz )




                                 Percentage of Zone Rentals            z


resources,
                                                                     Yze
                                                              ez =       > 1,                                      (8)
                                                                     Yz∗
is our first measure of misallocation, with ez = 1 only if χz = 0 and hence Yz∗ = Yze .
Intuitively, χz > 0 reduces equilibrium land rentals Rz and hence prevents land from being
allocated efficiently. As a result, ez will decrease with equilibrium rentals Rz , as is illustrated
in the left panel of Figure 3.
   An alternative direct measure of the extent of misallocation is the dispersion in the
marginal product of land among farmers within a zone. To see this, notice that if χz = 0,
then our economy reaches the efficient allocations by equalizing the marginal product of
land across all farms in zone z. This way, the efficient marginal product of land for each
farm i given by
                                                                                y e (si )            Yze
                  MPLa∗i (χ = 0) = MPLaei = (1 − α)γ                                      = (1 − α)γ     ,
                                                                                le (si )             Lz
which is identical across farmers. This implies that the dispersion (standard deviation)
of the MPLai across farms is zero in efficiency within a given zone, and strictly positive
otherwise, i.e., with χz > 0. Deviations from this efficient zero dispersion can be used
to measure the extent of misallocation. Furthermore, it implies the negative relationship
between equilibrium land rentals Rz and the dispersion of the MPLai as illustrated in the
middle panel of Figure 3.
   We also construct a widely used summary measure of misallocation as the dispersion of
farm-level revenue productivity (“TFPR”). Under the efficient allocations in our framework,
TFPR is give by
                                                                          yie (si )                 Yze
              TFPR∗i (χ = 0) = TFPRei =                                                    =                   ,
                                                                (kie (si )α (lie (si ))1−α   (Kze )α (Lez )1−α

                                                                     15
                           Figure 3: Effects of a Land Rental Markets on Zone-Level Misallocation




                                                          Dispersion of Log MPLa




                                                                                                                             Dispersion of Log TFPR
       Efficiency Gain




                         Percentage of Zone Rentals                                Percentage of Zone Rentals                                         Percentage of Zone Rentals
Note: Zone-level misallocation, measured as the zone-level efficiency gain and the dispersion of marginal
product of land or revenue productivity, against the percentage of zone rentals.


which is a constant and hence also equalized across farms. Therefore, we also use the disper-
sion (standard deviation) of TFPR across farms within a given zone to measure the extent
of misallocation.16 Similarly, a higher institutional cost χz reduces equilibrium rentals Rz ,
and then increases the dispersion of TFPR. The negative relationship between equilibrium
rentals and the dispersion of TFPR is illustrated in the right panel of Figure 3.
       The above three zone-level measures of misallocation will be used in the quantitative
analysis. In addition, we also provide corresponding measures of misallocation at the farm
level to facilitate our empirical analysis. To do so, we first define the farm-level efficiency
gain as
                                                                                               yie (si )
                                                                                      ei =
                                                                                             yi∗ (si , ¯li )
which should equal to one when there is no resource misallocation. Any deviation from one
indicates misallocation: If farm-level efficiency gain is greater (smaller) than one, then the
efficient output should be higher (lower) than the actual output. Similarly, we can define
the farm-level MPLa and TFPR as
                          y ∗ (si , ¯li )                                                                             yi∗ (si , ¯li )
                  MPLai = ∗i              ,                                             TFPRi =                                               .
                          l (si , ¯li )               i                                                   li∗ (si , ¯li )1−α ki∗ (si , ¯li )α
Absent from misallocation, farm-level MPLa and TFPR should equal to their zone-level av-
erage and any deviation from zone average indicates misallocation. Intuitively, a land reform
that reduces χz increases land rentals within a zone which moves farm-level efficiency gains
towards unity. The same occurs for MPLa and TFPR that move toward the zone average.
  16
     See Hsieh and Klenow (2009) and Adamopoulos et al. (2017) for related definitions of revenue produc-
tivity.


                                                                                             16
                          Figure 4: Effects of Land Rental Markets on Farm-Level Misallocation

                                90 PCT Farmer                                              90 PCT Farmer                                      90 PCT Farmer
                                                                                           75 PCT Farmer                                      75 PCT Farmer




                                                 Marginal Product of Land
                                75 PCT Farmer




                                                                                                           Revenue Productivity
                                25 PCT Farmer                                              25 PCT Farmer                                      25 PCT Farmer
  Efficiency Gain




                                10 PCT Farmer                                              10 PCT Farmer                                      10 PCT Farmer




                    Percentage of Zone Rentals                              Percentage of Zone Rentals                            Percentage of Zone Rentals
Note: The left panel plots the relationship between farm-level efficiency gain, defined as yie (si )/y ∗ (si , ¯li ), and
the zone-level rental activities. We sort farmers according to the ratio of their actual operational scales and
the efficient operational scales. Farmers at the 10th, 25th, 75th, and 90th percentile of the distribution are
illustrated in the figure. As rental activity increases in a zone, the farm-level efficiency gain converges to the
zone-level average, which is one. The middle and right panels show the same relationship for the marginal
product of land and for the revenue productivity.


Furthermore, the effects are non-linear in that the farmers that benefit most from the in-
stitutional change brought by the land reform are the ones that are the farthest away from
their optimal operational scale. Figure 4 illustrate the farm-level measures of misallocation
reduce with land rentals within zones. Especially, we sort farmers by the ratio of their ac-
tual operational scales and their optimal operational scales. It is clear that farmers who are
farther away from their optimal operational scale (10 percentile and 90 percentile ones in
the figure) benefit more compared to those relatively closer to their operational scales (25
percentile and 75 percentile ones).


4                   The Empirical Effects of Land Markets
Our main empirical strategy consists of conducting a set of difference-in-difference exercises
exploiting the variation in land rentals across time and space to capture both the intensive
and extensive margins of the reform, as well as its maturity. Our difference-in-difference
specifications simply differ in what we consider as treatment and control zones. All the spec-
ifications deliver a common message that land rentals unambiguously improve the efficiency
of resource allocation.




                                                                                      17
4.1    The Effects of Increasing Land Reform Intensity
We define the control group as zones for which the share of rented land, Rz , does not
increase between 2013/14 and 2015/16, and the treatment group as those zones for which
land rentals increases in that period. This specification captures the effects of increasing
the intensity of the land reform independently of the reform maturity (i.e. level of Rz ) in
each zone. Whether or not our strategy is convincing clearly depends on how similar the
control and treatment groups are. A detailed analysis of paralleled pre-trend is conducted
below. In addition, Table 2 shows that these two groups do not show significant differences
in socioeconomic and demographic variables such as age, gender, marital status, schooling
years, health status, and household size. There is no significant difference in geographical
variables (e.g., distance to population centers and markets) and amount of rain either. We
find some slight but significant differences in average slope of 1.2 degrees and in elevation
of 61.3 meters. Perhaps, most importantly, we do not find significant differences between
factor inputs (labor, land, and capital) and farm output which are crucial to determine
productivity.
   A potential concern is that the land institutional reform across zones may be correlated
with the closeness to the central political leadership that decentralized the reform. That
is, areas closer to the ruling power can decide to implement the reform quicker than those
farther away from it because of, for example, differences in the provision of state capacity.
If this were the case, it would suggest that the policy variation that we observe in terms of
rental activity cannot be used to identify the effects of land rental markets. To assess this
issue we test whether the treatment and control zones differ in distance to the capital city.
To do so we use the available GPS location of the branches where survey agents work in
each zone. We can link these branches to zones and use the distance between the branches
and the capital city to approximate the distance between the zones and the capital city. The
road distance is calculated by Google Maps through the shortest route by car. Our findings
are that the distances do not differ significantly between the treated zones and the control
zones, see Table 2.
   Furthermore, as it is not unusual to find economic reforms taking place in locations with
ties to the political leaders, we also calculate the distance of zones to the birth locations
of the president and prime ministers of Ethiopia. The relevant presidents to our sample
period are Girma Wolde-Giorgis (2001-2013, born in Addis Ababa, the capital city) and

                                             18
           Table 2: Households in Treatment and Control Zones, Reform Intensity
                                                    Treatment Zones      Control Zones t-test
                                                     Mean      Std.      Mean      Std.    |t|
         Household Characteristics:
         Demographic Variables
            Household Head
               Age                               46.7            14.7     45.9     14.6    1.30
               Gender (1=female)                 0.18            0.39     0.19     0.39    0.53
               Marriage Status (1=married)       0.82            0.38     0.82     0.39    0.17
               Schooling (years)                  2.3             2.6      2.2      2.4    1.58
               Health Status (1=healthy)         0.28            0.45     0.27     0.45    0.44
            Number of Household Members           6.1             2.3      6.0      2.3    0.76
         Population and Geographical Variables
            Distance to Market (km)              65.0            44.5   68.7       50.7    1.89
            Distance to Population Center (km)   35.9            28.1   37.0       24.4    0.97
            Annual Precipitation (mm)          1173.3           382.8 1149.3      370.5    1.53
            Average Slope                        11.8            10.1   13.0       10.5    2.95
            Average Elevation (m)              1964.6           488.8 1903.3      543.9    2.87
         Factor Input and Output
            Labor (hour)                       1467.3           1800.6 1447.3 3398.0       0.18
            Land (hectare)                        1.3              4.5    1.3    3.8       0.06
            Fraction of Rented Land              0.12             0.24   0.12   0.26       0.12
            Capital (1000 local currency)         5.5              6.2    5.2    7.3       1.10
            1 if use cattle                      0.55             0.50   0.50   0.50       2.52
            Output (1000 local currency)         23.0             37.7   24.1   44.8       0.72
         Number of Observations                 1,011                   1,345
         Zone Characteristics:
         Distance to Political Leadership
            Distance to Capital (km)                    424.8   217.7 440.3       220.8    0.29
            Distance to Arjo (km)                       543.6   294.5 556.3       273.2    0.18
            Distance to Adwa (km)                       990.2   403.1 1122.5      401.2    1.33
            Distance to Boloso Sore (km)                560.2   350.8 470.3       347.4    1.04
         Zone-Level Rented Land (Rz )
            2013/14                                      0.12    0.15     0.16     0.18    0.91
            2011/12                                      0.19    0.18     0.13     0.13    1.58
         Zone-Level Market Land (Rz )
            2013/14                                      0.11    0.15     0.14     0.18    0.68
            2011/12                                      0.15    0.16     0.10     0.13    1.40
         Number of Observations                            27               42

Note: Comparison of sample mean and standard deviation for key demographic, geographical, and economic
variables between the treatment and control groups. Control group is zones for which the share of rented
land Rz did not increase between 2013/14 and 2015/16, and treatment group is zones for which land rentals
increased in that period.




                                                   19
Mulatu Teshome (2013–2018, born in Arjo), and the relevant prime ministers are Meles
Zenawi (1995–2012, born in Adwa) and Hailemariam Desalegn (2012–2018, born in Boroso
Sore). None of the comparisons show significant differences between the treated zones and
the control zones.
   Finally, we study the level of rentals in the reference wave where we initiate the difference-
in-difference (i.e., 2013/14) and find no significant difference in the amount of rented land
between treatment and control zones. The same insights are obtained with data from the
previous wave. Below, we provide our benchmark results and an economic interpretation,
and discuss further the validation of the difference-in-difference strategy with a pre-trend
analysis and placebo tests.
   Empirical specification and results. We consider the following benchmark difference-in-
difference specification to assess the impact of land rentals on resource misallocation:

                           mizt = αz + λt + ψdzt + β log TFPiz + εizt ,                             (9)

where mizt is an individual measure of the degree of misallocation for farm i in zone z
and time t, αz is a zone fixed effect, λt is a year fixed effect, and dummy dzt captures the
implementation of the land rental reform. In the treatment zones the indicator variable dzt
equals one, and in the control zones dzt equals zero. The parameter of interest is ψ, which
captures the effect of land rentals on individual farm-level misallocation. We also control for
the permanent component of individual farm-level TFP.
   We use three measures of farm-level misallocation as described before: (a) individual
                        e     a              e
efficiency gain, | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient
                  a
reallocation and yizt is actual output in the data; (b) individual marginal product of land
(MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|; and (c) individual
revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average, | log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|.
Notice that deviations from efficient allocations may imply efficiency gains or loses and
therefore the ratio in logs between efficiency values and actual data can take positive or
negative values. For this reason, we consider the absolute value of the log efficiency gains.
This implies that we can unambiguously interpret a negative (positive) estimate for ψ as a
movement towards (away from) efficiency.
   The difference-in-difference results are reported in Table 3, panel (a). Using farm-level
productivity gains from zone-level efficient reallocations, we find that land rentals generate a


                                                  20
                         Table 3: Effects of Land Rentals, Reform Intensity
                                        (a) Benchmark Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   Land Rentals (dz )              -0.132             -0.192         -0.151
                                                  (0.033)            (0.031)        (0.030)
                   Observations                    4,712              4,712          4,712
                   R2                               0.23               0.12           0.16

                                          (b) Quantile Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   ψQ1                             -0.034             -0.087         -0.007
                                                  (0.030)            (0.032)        (0.028)
                   ψQ2                             -0.054             -0.062         -0.077
                                                  (0.034)            (0.037)        (0.033)
                   ψQ3                             -0.128             -0.098         -0.099
                                                  (0.040)            (0.036)        (0.039)
                   ψQ4                             -0.278             -0.379         -0.362
                                                  (0.070)            (0.068)        (0.062)

Notes: Results of regression (9) in panel (a) and of regression (10) in panel (b) for the following measures
                                                         e     a             e
of farm-level misallocation: (1) efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a
                                       a
zone-level efficient reallocation and yizt is actual output in the data, (2) marginal product of land (MPLaizt )
relative to the zone-level average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (3) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to
the zone-level average, | log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for
the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2.


significant decline in resource misallocation. The increase in land rentals generate a decline
in efficiency gains with a significant coefficient of −0.132. We also apply this specification to
the additional measures of farm-level misallocation: relative MPLa and relative TFPR. The
estimated effect for each MPLa and TFPR is also negative and significant with coefficients
of −0.192 and −0.151. Further trimming the increase in rentals we find larger effects. In
particular, if we restrict the analysis to treatment zones that increase rentals by more than
one percent, we find relevant coefficients of −0.156 for farm-level efficiency gains, −0.236 for
MPLa, and −0.212 for TFPR (see Appendix E).
    In sum, our analysis implies that a more active land market reduces resource misallocation
and increases agricultural productivity. These empirical results are robust to the measure
of misallocation used in the analysis. Also, the fact that we exploit variation across zones
and over time underscores alternative explanations for the relationship between land rentals

                                                        21
and misallocation such as misspecification or measurement error in inputs or output.17 Also
note that our results stand if we additionally control for other household characteristics or
potential output market frictions, see Appendix C.1 and Appendix C.2.
      Non-linear effects. The previous results capture the average effect between land rentals
and individual measures of misallocation. However, our theoretical framework implies that
efficiency gains are larger when resources are reallocated among farmers with the larger
deviations from efficient production. As a result, it is relevant to assess whether rental
markets empirically ease misallocation disproportionally more for farmers farthest away from
efficient production. To explore the potential non-linear relationship between land markets
and misallocation across farmers, we divide the distribution of our measure of misallocation
in the base year, miz , into four quantile groups (quartiles) and run the following regression
separately for each group:

                          mizt = αQz + λQt + ψQ dzt + βQ log TFPiz + εizt ,                    (10)

where the first quantile (Q1) represents farms that are closest to their optimal operational
scale, and the last quantile (Q4) consists of farms that are farthest from their optimal
operational scale.
      Our findings are in panel (b) of Table 3. The effects of land rentals on resource misal-
location is clearly nonlinear, consistent with the specification of our theoretical framework.
Specifically, land rentals are not associated with much changes in the efficiency gain for farm-
ers that are already close to their efficient allocation. The negative relationship between land
rentals and efficiency gains starts to be significant in the third quantile, with ψQ3 = −0.128,
and substantially increases as we move away from efficiency with significant elasticities of
ψQ4 = −0.278 in the fourth quantile. Both estimates are significant at the one percent level.
The results are even larger when using the other farm-level misallocation measures in terms
of MPLa and TFPR (see the last two columns in panel (b) of Table 3).
      Economic interpretation of results. To provide a quantitative interpretation of our results,
we use our quantile specification for farm-level outcomes to compute the changes in individual
farm-level MPLa generated by an increase in land rentals across waves as follows:
                                               
                                       MPLaizt
                              ∆ log                = ψQ .                                      (11)
                                       MPLazt
 17
      Note that a detailed discussion of measurement issues is in Appendix G and Appendix H.



                                                    22
Then, we plug our estimates for ψQ into Equation (11) to compute the projected individual
MPLa generated by an increase in land rentals, denoted as MPLapiz . Note that we have
MPLapiz ∝ s1−γ αγ p (1−α)γ−1
           iz kiz (liz )     . We can then solve out the projected land input associated
with rental lip as
                                                MPLp  (1−α)γ−1
                                                            1
                                        p            iz
                                       liz ∝                     .                                    (12)
                                                s1−γ αγ
                                                 iz kiz

Notice that Equation (12) solves lip up to a scalar, which is determined by the land market
                                P      p                              p
clearing condition of each zone i∈z liz   = Lz . We then substitute liz into the production
                                            p
function to solve out the projected output yiz = s1−γ αγ p (1−α)γ
                                                  iz kiz (liz )   for the 2013/14 wave.
  The projected zone-level efficiency gain associated with rental is calculated as epz =
P     e
           P      p
 i∈z yiz /   i∈z yiz . Comparing the average of these implied efficiency gains (1.423) with our

benchmark average efficiency gains per zone (1.527), we find that an increase in land rentals
reduces efficiency gains by 16.6% on average per zone (calculated as 1−log(1.423)/ log(1.527)).
Because the implementation of the land rental policy (i.e., dz,t = 1) comes with different lev-
els of growth of rentals per zone Rz , we divide the estimated effects by the aggregate growth
in the share of rented land across our two waves within treatment groups, which is 5.1 per-
cent. This implies that an increase in one percentage point of land rentals increases aggregate
productivity by 16.6/5.1=3.2 percent.
       Validation of the empirical strategy. A common problem with difference-in-difference
estimates is that the policy reform may be targeted, while a pre-condition of the validity of
our difference-in-difference assumption is that the policy is not implemented based on pre-
existing differences in productivity across zones. In other words, one possible reason why
we find that zones that increase land rentals reduce within-zone misallocation is that those
zones for which rentals increase already have a pre-existing decreasing trend in misallocation,
compared with zones for which rentals do not increase. This would imply that the reason
behind the reduction in misallocation is not land rentals, but something else that explains
both increasing land rentals and reductions in misallocation suggesting a clear endogeneity
problem between these two variables. We empirically address this issue in two ways.
       First, we design a placebo test to assess this common trend using the previous Ethiopia
ISA 2011/12.18       Consider again our benchmark difference-in-difference specification (9),
  18
    Notice that Ethiopia ISA 2011/12 wave cannot be directly used to quantify misallocation because agri-
cultural output is missing from that dataset. Fortunately, the data needed to construct all our factor
input variables (including land quality) is collected in the 2011/12 wave. This implies that we can use our



                                                    23
                                                                                     Table 4: Placebo Test

                                             Dependent variable:                                   Farm-Level Misallocation
                                                                                          Efficiency Gain     TFPR         MPLa
                                             Land Rentals (%), ψ                              -0.012         0.006                                -0.029
                                                                                             (0.037)        (0.037)                              (0.034)
                                             Observations                                     3,706          3,706                                3,706
                                             R2                                                0.22           0.16                                 0.23

Note: Results of the placebo test re-estimating equation (9) using 2011/12 and 2013/14 wave data and
assigning the treatment to the same zones for 2013/14 wave.

                                        Figure 5: Common Trend Analysis, Misallocation from Reform Intensity




                                                                                                                                 .1
                                                                          .05
                               .05
 Difference in Eff. Gain (Log)




                                                               Difference in MPLa (Log)




                                                                                                                      Difference in TFPR (Log)
                                                                                     0
                         0




                                                                                                                                           0
                                                                              -.05
                -.05




                                                                                                                                  -.1
                                                                       -.1
         -.1




                                                                                                                       -.2
                                                               -.15
 -.15




                                                                          -.2
                 -.2




                                                                                                                                 -.3
                                 2011        2013       2015                          2011         2013       2015                           2011          2013   2015
                                             Year                                                  Year                                                    Year

Note: Differences in the average within-zone misallocation between the treated group, where rentals increase
between 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves, and the control group, where rentals do not increase. We show these
results separately for our three measures of misallocation. The bar shows the 95% confidence interval.


where the dummy dzt indicated treatment in the 2015/16 wave. Suppose that we instead
estimate that same specification using the previous waves, i.e., 2011/12 and 2013/14 data.
That is, assume that the same zones that are treated in 2015/16 wave are also treated in
2013/14 wave. If both groups of zones have common trend before 2015/16, then we should
find the estimate of ψ to be insignificant. We report the results of this placebo test in Table
4. There is no pre-existing reason (or trend) that reduces misallocation within the treated
zones compared with the control zones.
                        Second, Figure 5 shows the average of misallocation (weighted by farm output) within
zones where rentals increase between 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves (treated group) and within
benchmark permanent component of farm productivity estimated using the 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves to
reconstruct the implied farm output in the 2011/12 wave net of transitory components, exactly as we did
for the 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves. In this manner, the results for 2011/12 wave are comparable across all
three waves. A caveat of this approach is that the permanent component is computed using the last two
waves, as opposed to using all three waves.



                                                                                                 24
zones where rentals do not increase (control group) with associated confidence intervals. We
show these results separately for our three measures of misallocation. Clearly, the two groups
have similar trends between 2011/12 wave and 2013/14 wave, but the trends differ after that,
as those zones where rentals increase after 2013 have significantly lower misallocation in the
2015/16 wave.


4.2    The Effects of Land Reform Adoption
Despite the fact that the land policy reform was launched in early 2000s, our sample still
captures zones for which the land reform has not yet been implemented at all. This allows
us to assess the effects of reform adoption on misallocation. To do this, we use two common
difference-in-difference strategies where the treatment group are the late reformers defined
as the zones that adopted the land rental market reform between 2013/14 and 2015/16.
That is, the treated zones exhibit land rentals in 2015/16, but not in 2013/14. The two
difference-in-difference strategies differ in the control group that we describe next.
   Unreformed vs. late reformers. We estimate the effects of land markets by comparing
the behavior of late reformers (treated zones) against unreformed (control zones). There
are eight zones for which the proportion of rented land in total land is zero in 2013/14.
Out of these eight zones, six zones implemented the reform and initiated land rentals in
2014/15 (treated zones), and two zones did not implement the reform and remained without
land rentals in 2014/15 (control zones). We use this 8-zone subsample to re-estimate our
benchmark difference-in-difference specification (9) with dummy dzt = 1 for the treatment
group defined by Rz,2013/14 = 0 and Rz,2015/16 > 0, and dzt = 0 for the control group defined by
Rz,2013/14 = Rz,2015/16 = 0. Clearly, this extensive margin analysis is much more demanding
on our data than the one focused on reform intensity (Section 4.1) as our sample reduces to
a total of 332 households spread into two control zones and six treated zones, with 72 and
260 households respectively.
   We find that, compared with the control group, zones that start to implement the land
policy largely reduce misallocation in whichever way we measured it, as efficiency gains,
relative MPLa, and relative TFPR (see panel (a1) of Table 5). Interestingly, the point esti-
mates are approximately one-half times larger with this smaller sample than those obtained
for the intensive margin in the previous section. Not surprisingly, given the fewer number
of observations, the standard errors are larger in the current specification. However, even


                                              25
                                Table 5: Effects of Reform Adoption
                                            (a) Unreformed vs. Late Reformers
                           (a1) Effects of Land Markets               (a2) Placebo Tests
                       Eff. Gain      MPLa           TFPR         Eff. Gain      MPLa           TFPR
  Land Rentals, ψ        -0.184        -0.240         -0.241        0.052         -0.068         -0.175
                        (0.123)       (0.114)        (0.117)       (0.184)       (0.195)        (0.178)
  Observations            332           332            332           150           150            150
  R2                      0.10          0.15           0.16          0.20          0.17           0.27


                                              (b) Early vs. Late Reformers
                           (b1) Effects of Land Markets               (b2) Placebo Tests
                       Eff. Gain      MPLa           TFPR         Eff. Gain      MPLa           TFPR
  Land Rentals, ψ        -0.135        -0.259         -0.252        0.060         -0.033         0.002
                        (0.083)       (0.079)        (0.079)       (0.069)       (0.070)        (0.065)
  Observations            1,378        1,378          1,378         1,180          1,180         1,180
  R2                       0.23         0.18           0.17          0.29           0.19          0.26

Note: Results of regression (9) for the following measures of farm-level misallocation: (a) efficiency
             e    a              e
gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient reallocation and
  a
yizt is actual output in the data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level av-
erage, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average,
| log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA
2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2. Panel (a) compares the unreformed zones (no land
rentals) with zones with positive rentals in 2015/16 but not in 2013/14. Panel (b) compares late reformers
to early reformers. Placebo tests re-estimate equation (9) using 2011/12 and 2013/14 wave data, and assign
the treatment to the same zones for 2013/14 wave.


with fewer number of observations, we still find significant results at the five percent level
for MPLa and TFPR. Finally, to validate the difference-in-difference strategy we conduct a
placebo test which rejects the hypothesis of differential trends between treated and control
zones, see panel (a2) of Table 5.
    Early reformers vs. late reformers. We estimate the effects of land markets by comparing
the behavior of late reformers (treated zones) against early reformers (control zones). To
catch early reformers we use zones for which land rentals are consistently above 20% in
both 2013/14 and 2015/16. The threshold choice follows the argument that the amount of
land rentals in zones that adopt the reform increase gradually. The implied sample comprises
approximately one third of our original sample of households. Although it does not affect our
results, we increase the sample size of late reformers by redefining these zones as those that
have less than 10% of land rentals in 2015/16. We drop the unreformed from the analysis.


                                                     26
         Table 6: Effects of Land Rental Markets: Conditional on Reform Maturity
                Dependent variable:                    Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                Land Rentals, ψm
                    Rz,2013/14 ∈ [0, 5]             -0.111           -0.244        -0.179
                                                   (0.041)          (0.039)       (0.038)
                    Rz,2013/14 ∈ (5, 10]            -0.179           -0.232        -0.208
                                                   (0.055)          (0.051)       (0.051)
                    Rz,2013/14 ∈ (10, 100]          -0.130           -0.063        -0.052
                                                   (0.052)          (0.049)       (0.048)
                Observations                         4,712            4,712         4,712
                R2                                   0.23             0.13          0.16

Notes: Results of regression (9) for the following measures of farm-level misallocation: (a) efficiency
             e    a              e
gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient reallocation and
  a
yizt is actual output in the data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level
average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average,
| log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16 are described in Section 2.


The results are in panel (b1) of Table 5. Compared with the early reformers, late reformers
largely and significantly reduce misallocation in whichever way we measure it. The placebo
tests validate our results, see panel (b2) of Table 5.


4.3     Short-Run Effects across the Maturity of Reform
We assess the short-run effects of land markets across the maturity of the reform through
the lens of a unified framework that considers the gradual rise in land rental market activity.
Specifically, the fact that the land reform has been ongoing for a prolonged period of time
allows us to condition on the zone-level maturity of the reform defined by the proportion of
land rentals in a given zone, Rz . We assess the following difference-in-difference specification
that encompasses the intensive and extensive margins of the two previous specifications:
                                     X       (m)
                    mizt = αz + λt +     ψm dzt + β log TFPiz + εizt ,                 (13)
                                               m

where mizt is an individual measure of the degree of misallocation for farm i in zone z and
                                                                                                         (m)
time t, αz is a zone fixed effect, λt is a year fixed effect. The set of indicator variables dzt
depends on the maturity of the reform which we define in three stages or groups. Precisely,
                                                                                                  (1)
if the share of rented land strictly increases between 2013/14 and 2015/16, then dz,t = 1 if
                         (2)                                       (3)
Rz,2013/14 ∈ [0, 5.0], dz,t = 1 if Rz,2013/14 ∈ (5.0, 10.0], dz,t = 1 if Rz,2013/14 ∈ (10.0, 100.0],


                                                     27
and 0 otherwise. We choose the thresholds in Rz that define the stages such that each stage
consists of approximately one third of our original sample.
    The results are in Table 6. We find that although rental markets significantly reduce
misallocation at early stages of the reform, these effects dissipate in the most advanced
stages of the reform. This is expected as the scope of land reallocation is reduced the closer
land allocations are to efficient levels. In the case of efficiency gains, the first stage of the
reform (Rz ∈ [0, 5]) significantly reduces misallocation, and this effect is even slightly larger
at the second stage of the reform (Rz ∈ (5, 10]). In the case of relative MPLa and relative
TFPR, land markets the largest effect of land markets occurs at the first stage, although
effects remain large and significant at the second stage of the reform. The last stage of the
reform (Rz ∈ (10, 100]) implies smaller and less significant effects of land markets.


5     Quantitative Policy Experiments
We now use our quantitative macro model in order to conduct several policy experiments to
study the effects of land markets. First, we assess whether the model is able to replicate the
empirical effects of rental markets with a a quantitative policy experiment that replicates in
the model the changes in land rental market activity in the data. To do so, we implement on
our model-generated data the same difference-in-difference strategy used in Section 4. If the
model is able to replicate the empirical effects, then we have externally validated the model.
Second, we assess the effects of land rentals on inequality through a set of model counterfac-
tuals, an assessment that cannot be done empirically due to data limitations. Third, we use
our model to assess the scalability of the reform by decreasing the barriers to access land
rental markets through a set of policy experiments that go from counterfactual scenarios
where land rentals are prohibited to scenarios where there are no barriers to accessing land
markets. Fourth, we quantify how much the barriers to land rental markets account for the
full extent of misallocation within zones.


5.1    Can the Model Replicate the Empirical Effects?
First, recall that the institutional cost χz —which represents barriers to accessing land rentals
markets such as the granting of land certificates (or their lack of)—is endogenously related
to land rentals in our model: A reduction in χz endogenously generates an increase in the


                                               28
amount of land rentals (see Figure 2 in Section 3.2). Here, we use this theoretical relationship
between χz and land rentals to calibrate χz in order to match the actual level of land rentals,
Rz , separately by zone in 2013/14, while the distribution of farm TFP and endowments,
Φ(s, ¯l, k̄), are chosen as in the data.19 In this manner, we are able to perfectly match the
land rentals per zone, Rz , for each of the 67 zones under study in 2013/14.20 We denote the
                                                                         m
model-generated output for farm i in zone z at this level of rentals as yizt , and the model-
generated aggregate output for zone z as Yztm . Also note that at the farm-level, efficiency
gain associated with this status quo level of rentals is given by | log em              e     m
                                                                         izt | = | log(yizt /yizt )|.

    In order to address the question of whether the model can replicate the empirical effects,
we conduct a policy experiment on the status quo allocations to assess the effects of land
markets through a land reform that we formalize as an unexpected reduction in the insti-
tutional costs, χz . Precisely, the land reform consists of changing χz so as to match the
actual zone-level changes in land rental activity by zone between our two last waves of data
2013/14 and 2015/16. We then recompute the counterfactual factor input allocations at the
farm level that result from this policy experiment. Importantly, notice that in this policy
experiment we do not target the empirical difference-in-difference results neither in our cal-
ibration strategy nor in our specification of the policy experiment which is solely based on
changing χz as to match the change in rentals by zone.
    To compare the model-generated effects of land markets with the empirical effects esti-
mated in Section 4, we use the model-generated status quo and counterfactual allocations
in order to estimate the difference-in-difference specification (9) on reform intensity and its
quantile specification (10). Our main finding is that the results from the policy experiment
in the model are very similar to the estimated empirical effects. Panel (a) of Table 7 shows a
significant average effect on efficiency gains of −0.151. Notice that the model-generated effect
is not significantly different from the estimated empirical average effect on efficiency gains of
−0.132 reported earlier. Similar insights are obtained using relative MPLa and TFPR with
significant but somewhat lower effects in the model than their empirical counterparts.
    The results for the quantile specification are in panel (b) of Table 7. Recall that the
quantiles are specified according to the distance from optimal operational scale. Focusing on
   19
      This implies adding an outerloop for χz to the solution algorithm that solves for the model equilibrium
allocations—if the iterative value of χz generates larger (smaller) land rentals than those observed in the
data for zone z, we increase (decrease) χz in the next iteration till convergence (see Appendix D.2).
   20
      This implies a median value for χz of 1.67 and a range that goes from the 5th percentile of 0.09 to the
95th percentile of more than 100—for the zones for which there are no rentals.


                                                     29
              Table 7: Model-Generated Effects of Land Rentals, Reform Intensity
                                        (a) Benchmark Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   Land Rentals (dz )              -0.151             -0.171         -0.130
                                                  (0.022)            (0.027)        (0.019)
                   Observations                    4,712              4,712          4,712
                   R2                               0.52               0.47           0.52

                                          (b) Quantile Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   ψQ1                             -0.057             -0.071         -0.049
                                                  (0.007)            (0.008)        (0.006)
                   ψQ2                             -0.149             -0.164         -0.129
                                                  (0.012)            (0.014)        (0.010)
                   ψQ3                             -0.186             -0.211         -0.161
                                                  (0.015)            (0.018)        (0.013)
                   ψQ4                             -0.197             -0.223         -0.170
                                                  (0.045)            (0.053)        (0.038)

Notes: Results of regression (9) in panel (a) and of regression (10) in panel (b) for the following measures
                                                         e     a             e
of farm-level misallocation: (1) efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a
                                       a
zone-level efficient reallocation and yizt is actual output in the data, (2) marginal product of land (MPLaizt )
relative to the zone-level average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (3) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to
the zone-level average, | log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data are
simulated by the model calibrated to the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 data.


the land market effects on efficiency gains, we find that the policy experiment on the model
shows the presence of nonlinear effects of land markets that are larger the farther farms
are from their optimal operational scale. This was also the case in our empirical estimates
reported earlier. Indeed, the quantile model-generated effects are not significantly different
from their empirical counterparts except for the second quantile. We find similar insights
focusing on relative MPLa and TFPR with significant average effects and the same presence
of nonlinear effects in the quantile specification.
    Using the same back of the envelope calculation that we applied to our empirical results,
we find that the model-generated data implies the following land market effects: One per-
centage point increase in rentals increase aggregate productivity by 2.9 percent. That is,
the model generated effects are similar to that in the empirical counterpart (3.2 percent).
In this context, notice that the model generated effects are entirely driven by our policy

                                                        30
experiment, a change in χz that replicates the actual zone-level change in land rentals. In
the context of the model it is an unexpected and exogenous change in χz . In this manner,
unlike the empirical assessment, the model-based assessment is not tainted by the potential
endogeneity issues of the policy or other potential reasons behind the changes in allocative
efficiency that follow the reform.
       We have also re-conducted our analysis on the effects of land reform adoption using
unreformed and early reformers as control groups, and late reformers as treated zones, anal-
ogously to our empirical assessment in Section 4.2. Again, because we use the same definition
of control and treatment groups in model and data, the size of the sample in the model de-
creases as much as that in the data for this specification: We have barely 332 households
when the control zones are defined as the unreformed zones and the late reformer are the
treated zones. As a result, point estimates are less significant than the effects of increasing
reform intensity, as it was the case in the empirical assessment in Section 4.2.21 Finally, the
effects across the maturity of the reform using model-generated data are very similar to their
empirical counterpart in Section 4.3.
       The fact that results from the model-generated data are overall similar to those from the
real data is important in two perspectives. First, as we noted previously, the model-based
assessment is not tainted by potential concerns that is faced by the empirical assessment,
such as the endogeneity issues of the policy or measurement errors that might potentially af-
fect the empirical results. Second, being able to externally validate the model by replicating
the empirical results gives us confidence in using the model to conduct additional counterfa-
cutal experiments that cannot be conducted empirically such as assessing the effects of land
markets on inequality, assessing the scalability of the land market reform and assessing the
role of land markets in explaining the full extent of factor input misallocation within zones.


5.2       The Effects of Land Markets on Inequality
Even if the effects of land markets imply higher efficiency in resource allocation and pro-
ductivity, a common and important concern for policy makers is that opening land markets
might result in higher inequality (Deininger and Binswanger, 1999; Deininger and Feder,
  21
    Interestingly, although not reported, the land market effects that arise from model-generated data are not
significant using asymptotic standard errors, while they become significant using block-bootstrap standard
errors. Notice that either way of computing standard errors does not change our point estimates.




                                                     31
                   Table 8: Effects of Land Rental Markets on Income Inequality
            Dependent variable:                  Zone-Level Inequality Measure
                                    Variance of Logs Gini Index 90-10 Ratio 75-25 Ratio
            Land Rentals, ψ               -0.067           -0.007         -0.101         -0.039
                                         (0.028)          (0.002)        (0.031)        (0.017)
            Observations                   138              138            138            138
            R2                             0.96             0.99           0.98           0.99

Notes: We calculate the zone-level variance of logged farm income, Gini index of farm income, the 90-10 ratio
of log farm income, and the 95-75 ratio. We then estimate the impact of rentals specified as equation (14)
at the zone level. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. In our estimation we use the model-generated
panel data from the policy experiment described in Section 5.1 that is calibrated to match the status quo
level of land rentals in Ethiopia 2013/14 and its change between 2013/14 and 2015/16 in the counterfactual.
Notice that the R2 tends to be large simply because we control for zone fixed effects.


2001).22 The idea is that land markets might put plenty of land ownership and, hence,
farm income in the hands of few highly productive farms. We now assess the effects of land
markets on inequality using the same large-scale land reform in Ethiopia.
       The assessment of the effects of land markets on income inequality is challenging in terms
of data requirements. First, the assessment requires data on both land rental payments
paid and received by each farm. Second, the assessment also requires that the sum of
rental payments paid by those that rent in land be identical to the total receipts from
renting out land, which can also be an important constraint for non-administrative survey
data. Unfortunately, although the Ethiopia ISA collects the payments paid by farmers
that rent in land, it does not collect the data on income generated from renting out land,
which unambiguously limits the empirical assessment on inequality. Fortunately, our model-
generated status quo and counterfactual allocations resulting from our policy experiment
(Section 5.1) satisfy the data requirements. As a result, we now conduct an assessment
of land markets on inequality using our quantitative framework and recall that our model
has been externally validated by finding model-generated effects of land rental markets on
resource allocation and productivity (Section 5.1) that are the bulk of the estimated empirical
effects (Section 4).
       To assess the effects of land markets on inequality we construct measures of within-zone
inequality for farming income separately in the status quo and counterfactual scenarios. We
use the definition of farm income posed in our theoretical framework (Section 3). That
  22
       See also André and Platteau (1998) and Otsuka (2007).


                                                     32
                                                Figure 6: Scaling Up the Reform

          (a) Land Reform (↓ χz )                               (b) Scaling Up (1):                                    (c) Scaling Up (2):
          and Equilibrium Rentals                           Increasing Reform Intensity                            Reforming the Unreformed
          0.6                                                        1.4                                                1.4




                                                   Efficiency Gain




                                                                                                      Efficiency Gain
                                                                     1.3                                                1.3 Highest Eff. Gain
          0.4
 Rental




                                                                     1.2                                                1.2
                                                                                Actual Rental
          0.2             Actual Rental
                                                                     1.1                                                1.1
                                                                                                                                  Lowest Eff. Gain
           0                                                          1                                                  1
            0.01   0.1       1    5       20                               0   0.2        0.4   0.6                           0         0.2        0.4   0.6
                         (log)                                                       Rental                                                   Rental
Note: Panel (a) shows how land rentals change with the institutional cost χz for the zone with median
efficiency gain using our calibrated model. The circle indicates the actual level of rentals and the associated
calibrated χz . Panel (b) shows the model-implied efficiency gain reduces when rentals increase in this median
zone. Panel (c) shows this same relationship for zones with zero rentals in the data which we illustrate for
the zone with the highest efficiency gain and the zone with lowest efficiency gain.


is, farming income is the sum of farming production (value added) minus capital factor
payments and the land rental costs c(¯l, l), see equation (2). Notice that the land rental
costs incorporates the possibility of non-negative income generated from renting out land,
see equation (3). We then run the following difference-in-difference specification on our
measures of farm income inequality:

                                               Inequalityzt = αz + λt + ψdzt + εzt ,                                                                      (14)

where the treatment zones are defined as those for which there is an increase in reform
intensity (as in Section 4.1). Table 8 shows the results for four different measures of in-
equality: the variance of logged farm income, the Gini index, the 90-10 ratio, and the 75-25
ratio. Across all inequality measures we find the same message that land rentals significantly
reduce income inequality.


5.3             Scalability of the Reform
An important aspect for our macro policy analysis is the scalability of locally-implemented
land reforms. Scalability is not necessarily straightforward because of equilibrium effects
and context dependence (e.g., the extent of pre-reform resource misallocation). Although we
cannot empirically assess reform scalability, an advantage of our analysis is that we can use
our quantitative macro model to conduct a set of conterfactuals that address this question.
          First, we study whether scaling up reform intensity, i.e., further reductions of the institu-

                                                                                 33
tional barriers to land markets (i.e., χz ), in zones with ongoing reforms imply further gains
from reallocation. To illustrate this, we show the effects of the institutional barriers on the
equilibrium rentals of our median zone (i.e., zone with median efficiency gains), see panel (a)
of Figure 6. The status quo equilibrium is calibrated with χz so as to match the actual land
rentals of our median zone, 19 percent of total land, which implies efficiency gains of 16%
in that zone. Clearly, counterfactual reductions in the institutional barriers to land markets
increases equilibrium land rental market activity. In this context, we find that scaling up the
reform intensity beyond the status quo rentals generates further efficiency gains, see panel
(b) of Figure 6. However, the scaling-up effects diminish the larger is the land rental market
activity. Precisely, land reforms that generate equilibrium land rentals above 57 percent
imply efficiency gains below 1%. This sets an upper bound for scalability.
       Second, we show the effects of scaling up the reform to zones in which the land reform
has not been implemented yet. These are zones that do not register land market activity.23
The results are in panel (c) of Figure 6. The main result is that the reform is scalable in
that reducing institutional barriers to accessing land markets in zones where there is no
land market activity reduces the gains from reallocation. Importantly, the results by zone
are heterogenous. The unreformed zone with the smallest efficiency gain from reallocation
achieves the upper bound of 1% efficiency gains with relatively few rentals, 17 percent of total
zone land. In contrast, the unreformed zone with the largest efficiency gain from reallocation
requires rentals in 54 percent of total zone land to achieve 1% efficiency gains. Note that
even in this extreme case the level rentals required to achieve gains of 1% is similar to those
of the reformed median zone, which we argue makes the reform relatively scalable. Further,
the presence of zone heterogeneity indicates that not all zones need the same reform scale
to reduce efficiency gains.


5.4       How Much do Barriers to Land Markets Account for the Ex-
          tent of Misallocation?
Whereas in our theoretical framework we restrict our analysis to a specific wedge—an insti-
tutional barrier to accessing land markets—distorting the allocations of factor inputs, there
  23
     For example, the lack of land market activity can be the outcome of either the absence of land certificates
that allow for rentals or the presence of other forms of institutional barriers that prevent land market activity
(e.g., low trust in the institutional environment that enforces the rental contracts so as to return the land
that is rented out to rentier when the contract ends).


                                                       34
            Table 9: The Extent of Misallocation within Zones, Ethiopia ISA 2013/14

                                          Average     Median     5th pct.    95th pct.
                       Efficiency Gain     1.66        1.64        1.28        2.81
                       MPLa (Std.)         0.84        0.81        0.55        1.15
                       TFPR (Std.)         0.84        0.82        0.61        1.13

Notes: Data for Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 as described in Section 2. We compute the average efficiency gain
using actual output as weights, hence the average gain is the country-level gain of eliminating within-zone
misallocation.


is potentially a myriad of others reasons that contribute to explain factor input misalloca-
tion Restuccia and Rogerson (2017). In this context, we now assess how much the specific
institutional cost on land rentals χz —calibrated to match the actual rental activity from the
data—accounts for the full extent of misallocation in agriculture within Ethiopian zones.
       First, we report several statistics for the efficiency gains—the ratio of efficient to actual
output as in equation (8)—by zone in in Table 9. These figure represents the full extent
of factor input misallocation by zone as the reference benchmark is that of a zone-level
social planner that, facing aggregate feasibility constraints, chooses efficient allocations that
maximize output. On average, the full efficiency gain per zone is 1.66-fold with a median
of 1.64-fold. This median estimate is tight with bootstrap standard deviation of 0.03 and is
significant at the one percent level. This means that reallocating resources from the actual
allocation to the efficient allocation across existing farmers increases aggregate output by
approximately 66 percent on average.24,25 There is substantial variation in efficiency gains
across zones with a 95th percentile of 2.81 and a 5th percentile of 1.28. Because we compute
the average gain using actual output as weights, the average gain is the country-level gain of
eliminating within-zone misallocation. For comparison purposes with previous literature, we
also conduct our reallocation exercise nationwide and find that the efficiency gains are 2.00.
This implies that eliminating within-zone misallocation accounts for log(1.66)/ log(2.00) =
73 percent of the overall efficiency gain. The remaining 27 percent is accounted for by
reallocating resources across zones. There is a substantial amount of dispersion in MPLa,
with a standard deviation of 0.84 on average per zone, and a median of 0.81. Also, on
average, the standard deviation of (log) TFPR is 0.84 per zone, see Table 9. The median
  24
     These numbers are based on Ethiopia ISA 2013/14, but we also find similar within-zone efficiency gains
in Ethiopia ISA 2015/16 with an average efficiency gain per zone of 1.67-fold and a median of 1.59-fold.
  25
     Note that our result is not driven by crop composition. We conduct this analysis by crops in Appendix C.4
and find similar results.


                                                     35
                     Figure 7: Land Rentals and the Extent of Misallocation within Zones




                                                   1.5




                                                                                           1.5
         3
  Efficiency Gain




                                               Std. MPLa




                                                                                       Std. TFPR
             2




                                                    1




                                                                                            1
                                                   .5




                                                                                           .5
         1




               .01    .05 .1      .25 .5   1           .01    .05 .1      .25 .5   1           .01    .05 .1      .25 .5   1
                     Rental Percentage                       Rental Percentage                       Rental Percentage


Notes: We show the within-zone extent of misallocation ez (in logs) with respect to the fraction of rented
land Rz (in logs) by zone. We report 84 zone-year observations that have a positive percent of rental
land and more than 10 observations. We also trim zones with the highest and lowest efficiency gain. The
within-zone ez is computed separately for each of the three measures of misallocation described in the test:
(a) within-zone efficiency gain (left panel), (b) dispersion in the marginal product of land (MPLa) (center
panel), and (c) dispersion of farm-level revenue productivity (TFPR) (right panel). The size of the circles
indicate the number of observations in each zone. The solid line corresponds to the predicted value of
log ez = α + λt + ψ log Rz + εz , where α is a constant and λt is a year fixed effect for the pooled samples
of Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and Ethiopia ISA 2015/16. The estimated elasticities ψ with respect to Rz are
−0.072, −0.061, and −0.063, respectively; all three are significant at the one percent level. This relationship
is robust to controlling for the zone-level dispersion of farm TFP.


zone estimate is 0.82. As a comparison, Hsieh and Klenow (2009) find this statistic to be 0.63
and 0.67 in the manufacturing sector of China and India.26 This indicates that the extent of
misallocation within zones is severe in Ethiopia. Further, the within-zone correlation between
log TFPR and log farm TFP is 0.86 on average, indicating that correlated implicit distortions
constitute a strong source of misallocation. This confirms our earlier characterization that
more productive farms, unable to operate at larger scales, face larger implicit distortions.
Interestingly, from an aggregate perspective, there exists a clear cross-sectional association
between the within-zone efficiency gains and the within-zone percentage of land rentals Rz
(i.e. the proportion of rented land of total land in zone z) as illustrated in the left panel of
Figure 7, that is in line with the empirical effects from micro panel data in Section 4.27
        Second, we assess how much the specific institutional cost on land rentals χz —calibrated
  26
     Nationwide, the standard deviation of (log) TFPR is 0.99 in our sample. The 75 – 25 difference is 1.19
in our sample, compared to 0.82 and 0.81 in China and India, respectively. The 90 – 10 difference is also
larger in our sample.
  27
     See also Appendix F for an alternative assessment of this cross-sectional relationship between land rentals
and productivity.

                                                                36
to match the rental activity in 2013/14—accounts for the full extent of misallocation per
                                       log(Y e /Y m )
zone. This implies computing the ratio log(Yzte /Yzta ) where Yztm = i∈z yizt
                                                                          m
                                                                              and recall that Yzte
                                                                    P
                                                zt    zt

and   Yzta   are, respectively, the aggregate efficient and actual output per zone. We find that
the institutional cost on land rentals χz explains 34 percent of the extent of misallocation
for the median zone (6 percent and 70 percent, respectively, for the 5th and 95th percentile
zones). The average explained portion is 35 percent weighted by Yztm . Clearly, although
the institutional cost in accessing land rental markets, χz , cannot fully explain the observed
extent of misallocation, it accounts for an important part of this misallocation which adds
further relevance to the study of this land reform.


6      Further Insights
Formal versus informal land rentals. Although the reduction in misallocation due to land
rentals is economically substantial, not all rentals necessarily imply larger efficiency. A
nice feature of our data is that detailed information on the land rental arrangements is
available. This information helps in attributing a land rental to either the formal market
or the informal market. In particular, the survey data includes information about both the
rental contract—that stipulates the rental payments agreed before cultivation between the
renter and the rentier—and the actual rental payments paid after harvest. We also have
information about whom the land is rented from. Indeed, the vast majority of land rentals
occur between relatives and friends: among the households that rent in land 82 percent rent
land from relatives (46 percent) and friends (36 percent). This suggests that reallocations
through rentals may not necessarily be efficient in directing resources to their best uses
because they may obey other goals such as redistribution or the provision of social insurance
which can be related to household proximity in kin (Kinnan and Townsend, 2012) or social
stratification (Munshi and Rosenzweig, 2016).
    Since land rentals from relatives and friends are not necessarily informal, we use rental
payments stipulated between renter and rentier in the rental contract to distinguish between
formal and informal land rentals. The idea is that if a rental contract specifies a plot to
be rented for free, then it is likely that this land rental is not market-based and that other
considerations are at play. Following this idea, we define informal land rentals as those
that are stipulated to be for free (zero rental payments) in the rental contract and formal


                                                 37
                     Table 10: Effects of Formal versus Informal Land Rentals
                  Dependent variable:                    Farm-Level Misallocation
                                                Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                  Formal Rentals (dmz )               -0.140             -0.207          -0.090
                                                     (0.034)            (0.032)         (0.031)
                  Informal Rentals (dnz )             -0.004             -0.053          -0.054
                                                     (0.033)            (0.031)         (0.031)
                  Observations                        4,712               4,712           4,712
                  R2                                   0.23               0.13            0.16

Notes: Results of econometric specification (15) with the following measures of farm-level misallocation:
                           e     a             e
(a) efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )| where yizt is efficient output a farm i of a zone-level efficient reallocation
       a
and yizt is actual output in the data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level
average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average,
| log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for waves Ethiopia ISA
2013/14 and 2015/16 described in Section 2.


rentals as those for which the rental contract stipulates a non-zero rental payment.28 Notice
that our definition of formal rentals—which adds stipulated payments in cash and in kind—
includes sharecropping contracts (Shaban, 1987; Sadoulet et al., 1997; Burchardi et al., 2018)
as long as the ex-ante agreed amount of shared crops between the renter and the rentier is
nonzero—independently of the proximity in kin or social stratification.29
       Based on this definition of informal and formal land rentals, we construct the indicator
variable dmzt to denote an increase of formal (market-based) land rentals of a zone: dmzt = 1
if formal rentals increase in a zone and dmzt = 0 otherwise. Similarly, we construct the
indicator variable dnzt to denote an increase of informal land rentals of a zone. Using these
two dummies in our benchmark specification (9) controls for the effect of informal rentals:

                     | log eizt | = αz + λt + ψm dmzt + ψn dnzt + β log TFPiz + εizt .                          (15)

       Results are in Table 10. In all three measures of farm-level misallocation, the effects of
formal rentals on misallocation, captured by φm , are significant and approximately 25 percent
larger than our benchmark panel results in Section 4. In contrast, the effect of informal
rentals, captured by the coefficient ψn , is not only smaller but also not significant. We hence
  28
     Extending the definition of informal rentals as those with small nominal payments agreed in the rental
contract delivers similar results.
  29
     Clearly, the amounts stipulated in the rental contract and the actual payments paid after harvest do not
need to be the same. Our focus on the rental payments specified in the contract is motivated by the notion
that the actual post-harvest payments can be affected by default or renegotiation.



                                                         38
               Table 11: Effects of Land Rental Markets on Technology Adoption
                                     (a) Extensive Margin:                   (b) Intensive Margin:
                                      Probit Specification                     DID Specification
                              Fertilizers    Livestock       Tractors   Fertilizers   Livestock   Capital
       Market Rentals            0.421         0.617          -0.110       0.249        -0.050     -0.039
                                (0.064)       (0.075)        (0.128)     (0.086)       (0.077)    (0.079)
       Non-Market Rentals        0.040         0.051          -0.110      -0.142        0.037       0.107
                                (0.129)       (0.085)        (0.164)     (0.090)       (0.075)    (0.078)
       Observations              2,357         2,356           2,356      2,459         2,241       4,712
       R2                         0.02          0.10           0.00        0.31          0.26       0.41


Notes: Results of probit specification in panel (a) and of difference-in-difference specification (16) in panel
(b). Each specification estimated for different measures of technology adoption: fertilizer use, livestock use
in agricultural production per unit of labor, and tractors per unit of labor. For the difference-in-difference
specification, we use capital per unit of labor (as described in Section 2.1). Standard deviations are in
parentheses. Panel (a) uses the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 data, and panel (b) uses the panel Ethiopia ISA
2013/14 and 2015/16 described in Section 2.


conclude that reductions in the extent of misallocation due to changes in operational scale
via rentals mostly operate through market forces and not through informal land rentals.
       The effects of land rentals on technology adoption. The level of technology adoption in
Ethiopia is low. We find that only 4.8 percent of farmers use tractors (owned or rented),
51.2 percent use fertilizers, and 61.5 percent use livestock in agricultural production. These
figures are consistent with economies that are at early stages of development.30 We now
investigate the effects of land rental markets on the extensive and intensive margins of
technology adoption such as fertilizers use, livestock, and tractors.31 First, we explore the
extensive margin by positing a probit regression among households, using an indicator for the
adoption (or not) of a given technology, which is equal to one if a household uses any positive
amount of that technology. The key dependent variables are dmi and dni , which are indicators
of whether or not farm i rents any positive amount of land through the formal and informal
markets, respectively, We estimate this specification separately for fertilizers, livestock, and
tractors. We also control for farm TFP (TFPi ) and for farm TFPR (relative to the economy-
wide average), the latter of which is as a summary measure of farm misallocation.
  30
    See Yang and Zhu (2013) for a study of the modernization in agriculture and long-term growth.
  31
    The Ethiopia ISA data about the use of capital (livestock and tractors) is restricted to land preparation
activities. Land preparation lends itself to the adoption of capital as a substitute for labor since it is power
intensive but not control intensive (Pingali, 2007).



                                                        39
    The results are in Table 11, panel (a). Farms with formal land rentals are significantly
more likely to use fertilizers in agricultural production than farms without rentals. Specifi-
cally, consider a farm of average TFP and TFPR; our estimate implies that such a farm is
14.3 percent more likely to use fertilizer if it operates with rented land.32 In contrast, infor-
mal land rentals are not significantly associated with the use of fertilizers. Similar insights
arise when looking at the probability of using livestock in agricultural production. The use
of tractors is, however, not significantly associated with land rentals and we come back to
this result below.
    Exploiting the panel dimension of our data set to estimate the effects of land rentals
on the intensive margin of technology adoption, we focus on households that have already
adopted the technology in the 2013/14 wave, and discuss how land rentals affect the intensity
of technology use in the 2015/16 wave. We consider the following difference-in-difference
specification, which is analogous to equation (15),
                                                                      TFPR 
                                                                              izt
    log f˜izt = αz + λt + ψm dmzt + ψn dnzt + β log TFPiz + γ log                  + εizt .     (16)
                                                                        TFPR
where log f˜izt is the amount of fertilizers used in production, αz is zone fixed effect, λt is year
fixed effect, and dmzt is an indicator for formal land rental increases across waves in zone z,
and dnzt is an indicator for informal land rental increases across waves in zone z. We also
control for farm TFP and farm TFPR.
    Our results are shown in Table 11, panel (b). We find that an increase in land rentals
generates an increase in fertilizer use intensity, with a large and significant estimate ψm =
0.249, consistent with the cross-sectional probit results. In contrast, the effects of land rentals
on agricultural capital or on livestock used in agricultural production are not significant along
the intensive margin. These results can be partly explained by short-term rental contracts
and small plot size. Rental contracts can still be of very short term in nature in Ethiopia
partly due to various restrictions imposed by local government (Deininger et al., 2008) which
can create disincentives for long-term investments (Goldstein and Udry, 2008). In addition,
while fertilizers can boost agricultural productivity almost independently of the size of the
cultivated plot, this is not the case for large animals, tractors, and other sizable capital
  32
     This result potentially alleviates the puzzling low take-up rate of fertilizers in poor countries emphasized
by Duflo et al. (2011) if one entertains the possibility that without land transactions—or without the possi-
bility of changing the amount of farm land—there are no incentives to take on fertilizers; an argument that
needs further study.



                                                       40
which, unless rented on a daily or hourly basis, are more likely to pay off in large operational
scales (e.g., Chen, 2019). Indeed, the average farm size remains extremely small (a bit more
than one hectare per household), and is largely unaffected even after the reform.33


7        Conclusions
We show that land rentals provide a useful mechanism to overcome imbalances between the
allocation of land-use rights and the efficient operational scale of farms. Our assessment is
based on a large-scale land reform in Ethiopia that grants households the right to rent land.
The context is relevant because land sales are prohibited by law, and land-use rights are
ex-ante distributed among rural farm households in a fairly egalitarian basis. Hence, land
rentals are the only channel that allow for the reallocation of farms’ operational scale.
       Our main finding is that land rentals substantially reduce resource misallocation and
increase agricultural productivity. Our evidence builds on a difference-in-difference approach
that exploits effective variation in land rental market activity across space and time, and
a calibrated macroeconomic model with heterogeneous household farms that quantitatively
replicates the empirical effects. In addition to the positive effects of land markets on resource
allocation and productivity, we find that these effects are accompanied by a reduction in
income inequality, which provides an important dimension for the assessment of land policy
and its implementation.
       Despite the strong positive effects of land rentals on resource allocation and agricultural
productivity, land markets are still underdeveloped in Ethiopia. The limited use of land
rentals can arise from various frictions which may include restrictions on other factor inputs,
remaining imperfections in land markets (e.g., purchases and sales are prohibited) or weak
legal institutions that limit the credibility of the land reform. In particular, we argue that
the fact that most land rentals occur through the informal market—among relatives and
friends—with less effect on improving resource allocation and productivity are indicative of
  33
     In addition to fertilizers, livestock, and machinery input, we also find that land rentals have little impact
on the choice of crops. The detailed analysis is in Appendix C.4. Further, an important potential concern
is the possibility of measurement error in the data affecting the extent of misallocation. We highlight that
our main focus is not on the extent of misallocation but on changes in misallocation across zones and
across time associated with rental market activity, which is less susceptible to classical measurement error.
Furthermore, the model-generated difference-in-difference effects of land rentals match well the empirical
results without targeting them. This provides confidence that the effects of land rentals are not simply the
result of measurement error. Appendix G and H provide detailed discussions on measurement issues.



                                                       41
imperfections in the institutional environment which deserve further investigation.
   Finally, although our analysis strictly belongs to the context of a specific large-scale
reform for Ethiopia, we do think that our results generally highlight the importance of land
reforms in poor countries that specifically address the tradability of the land through rentals
to promote better resource allocation and not simply tenure security—which has been the
main focus in most reform episodes. We hope that our work generates further research on
the effects of land market activity and its limitations in other contexts.


References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., and Robinson, J. A. (2001). The colonial origins of comparative
  development: An empirical investigation. American Economic Review, 91(5):1369–1401.
Adamopoulos, T. (2011). Transportation costs, agricultural productivity, and cross-country
 income differences. International Economic Review, 52(2):489–521.
Adamopoulos, T., Brandt, L., Leight, J., and Restuccia, D. (2017). Misallocation, selection,
 and productivity: A quantitative analysis with micro data from China. Working Paper.
Adamopoulos, T. and Restuccia, D. (2014). The size distribution of farms and international
 productivity differences. American Economic Review, 104(6):1667–1697.
André, C. and Platteau, J.-P. (1998). Land relations under unbearable stress: Rwanda
 caught in the malthusian trap. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 34(1):1 –
 47.
Banerjee, A. and Iyer, L. (2005). History, institutions, and economic performance: The
  legacy of colonial land tenure systems in India. American Economic Review, 95(4):1190–
  1213.
Banerjee, A. V., Gertler, P. J., and Ghatak, M. (2002). Empowerment and efficiency: Ten-
  ancy reform in West Bengal. Journal of Political Economy, 110(2):239–280.
Behrman, J. R. (1999). Chapter 43 labor markets in developing countries. volume 3 of
  Handbook of Labor Economics, pages 2859 – 2939. Elsevier.
Besley, T. (1995). Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from
  Ghana. Journal of Political Economy, 103(5):903–937.
Besley, T. and Burgess, R. (2000). Land reform, poverty reduction, and growth: Evidence
  from india. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2):389–430.
Binswanger, H. P. and Rosenzweig, M. R. (1986). Behavioural and material determinants of
  production relations in agriculture. The Journal of Development Studies, 22(3):503–539.
Bryan, G., Chowdhury, S., and Mobarak, A. M. (2014). Underinvestment in a Profitable
  Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in Bangladesh. Econometrica, 82(5):1671–
  1748.


                                              42
Bryan, G. and Morten, M. (2019). The Aggregate Productivity Effects of Internal Migration:
  Evidence from Indonesia. Journal of Political Economy, (forthcoming).
Burchardi, K. B., Gulesci, S., Lerva, B., and Sulaiman, M. (2018). Moral Hazard: Ex-
  perimental Evidence from Tenancy Contracts. The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  134(1):281–347.
Chari, A., Liu, E. M., Wang, S.-Y., and Wang, Y. (2017). Property rights, land misalloca-
 tion and agricultural efficiency in china. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic
 Research.
Chen, C. (2017). Untitled land, occupational choice, and agricultural productivity. American
 Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 9(4):91–121.
Chen, C. (2019). Technology adoption, capital deepening, and international productivity
 differences. Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.
de Janvry, A., Emerick, K., Gonzales-Navarro, M., and Sadoulet, E. (2015). Delinking land
  rights from land use: Certification and migration in Mexico. American Economic Review,
  105.
De Magalhães, L. and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, R. (2018). The Consumption, Income, and Wealth
  of the Poorest: An Empirical Analyisis of Economic Inequality in Rural and Urban Sub-
  Saharan Africa for Macroeconomists. Journal of Development Economics, 134:350–371.
Deininger, K., Ali, D. A., and Alemu, T. (2008). Assessing the functioning of land rental
  markets in Ethiopia. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 57(1):67–110.
Deininger, K., Ali, D. A., and Alemu, T. (2011). Impacts of land certification on tenure secu-
  rity, investment, and land market participation: Evidence from Ethiopia. Land Economics,
  87(2):312–334.
Deininger, K. and Binswanger, H. (1999). The Evolution of the World Bank’s Land Policy:
  Principles, Experience, and Future Challenges. World Bank Research Observer, 14(2):247–
  276.
Deininger, K. and Feder, G. (2001). Land institutions and land markets. In Agricultural
  Production, volume 1 of Handbook of Agricultural Economics, pages 287 – 331. Elsevier.
Donovan, K. (2016). Agricultural risk, intermediate inputs, and cross-country productivity
 differences. University of Notre Dame Working Paper.
Duflo, E., Kremer, M., and Robinson, J. (2011). Nudging farmers to use fertilizer: Theory
 and experimental evidence from Kenya. American Economic Review, 101(6):2350–90.
ELTAP (2007). Study on The Assessment of Rural Land Valuation and Compensation
  Practices in Ethiopia: Final Main Report.
Galiani, S. and Schargrodsky, E. (2011). Land property rights and resource allocation. The
 Journal of Law & Economics, 54(4):S329–S345.
Giné, X. (2005). Cultivate or Rent Out? Land Security in Rural Thailand. Policy Research
  Working Paper Series 3734, The World Bank.
Goldstein, M. and Udry, C. (2008). The profits of power: Land rights and agricultural
 investment in Ghana. Journal of Political Economy, 116(6):981–1022.


                                             43
Gollin, D., Lagakos, D., and Waugh, M. E. (2014). Agricultural productivity differences
 across countries. American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 104(5):165–170.
Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., and Rogerson, R. (2002). The role of agriculture in development.
 American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 92(2):160–164.
Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., and Rogerson, R. (2004). Farm work, home work and international
 productivity differences. Review of Economic Dynamics, 7(4):827–850.
Gollin, D., Parente, S. L., and Rogerson, R. (2007). The food problem and the evolution of
 international income levels. Journal of Monetary Economics, 54(4):1230–1255.
Gollin, D. and Udry, C. (2017). Heterogeneity, measurement error, and misallocation: Evi-
 dence from african agriculture. Working Paper.
Gottlieb, C. and Grobovšek, J. (2018). Communal land and agricultural productivity. Jour-
 nal of Development Economics, 138:135–152.
Hendricks, L. and Schoellman, T. (2018). Human capital and development accounting: New
  evidence from wage gains at migration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 133(2):665–
  700.
Holden, S. T. and Ghebru, H. (2016). Land rental market legal restrictions in Northern
  Ethiopia. Land Use Policy, 55(Supplement C):212 – 221.
Hsieh, C.-T. and Klenow, P. J. (2009). Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
  India. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4):1403–1448.
Kinnan, C. (2019). Distinguishing barriers to insurance in Thai villages. Technical report.
Kinnan, C. and Townsend, R. (2012). Kinship and Financial Networks, Formal Financial
  Access, and Risk Reduction. American Economic Review, 102(3):289–293.
Lagakos, D., Mobarak, A. M., and Waugh, M. E. (2018). The Welfare Effects of Encouraging
  Rural-Urban Migration. NBER Working Papers 24193, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Inc.
Lagakos, D. and Waugh, M. E. (2013). Selection, agriculture, and cross-country productivity
  differences. American Economic Review, 103(2):948–980.
Meghir, C., Mobarak, A. M., Mommaerts, C. D., and Morten, M. (2019). Migration and
 Informal Insurance. NBER Working Papers 26082, National Bureau of Economic Research,
 Inc.
Mobarak, A. M. and Rosenzweig, M. (2014). Risk, Insurance and Wages in General Equi-
 librium. CEPR Discussion Papers 9797, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
Morten, M. (2019). Temporary Migration and Endogenous Risk Sharing in Village India.
 Journal of Political Economy, 127(1):1–46.
Munshi, K. and Rosenzweig, M. (2016). Networks and misallocation: Insurance, migration,
 and the rural-urban wage gap. American Economic Review, 106(1):46–98.
Ostrom, E. (2010). Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Eco-
  nomic Systems. American Economic Review, 100(3):641–672.


                                            44
Otsuka, K. (2007). Chapter 51 efficiency and equity effects of land markets. In Evenson, R.
  and Pingali, P., editors, Agricultural Development: Farmers, Farm Production and Farm
  Markets, volume 3 of Handbook of Agricultural Economics, pages 2671–2703. Elsevier.
Pingali, P. (2007). Agricultural mechanization: Adoption patterns and economic impact.
  Handbook of Agricultural Economics, 3:2779–2805.
Restuccia, D. and Rogerson, R. (2017). The causes and costs of misallocation. Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 31(3).
Restuccia, D. and Santaeulàlia-Llopis, R. (2017). Land Misallocation and Productivity.
  Working Paper 23128, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Restuccia, D., Yang, D. T., and Zhu, X. (2008). Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A
  quantitative cross-country analysis. Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(2):234–250.
Rosenzweig, M. R. (1978). Rural Wages, Labor Supply, and Land Reform: A Theoretical
  and Empirical Analysis. American Economic Review, 68(5):847–861.
Rosenzweig, M. R. (1988). Labor markets in low-income countries. In Chenery, H. and
  Srinivasan, T., editors, Handbook of Development Economics, volume 1 of Handbook of
  Development Economics, chapter 15, pages 713–762. Elsevier.
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Binswanger, H. P. (1993). Wealth, Weather Risk and the Composition
  and Profitability of Agricultural Investments. Economic Journal, 103(416):56–78.
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Stark, O. (1989). Consumption Smoothing, Migration, and Marriage:
  Evidence from Rural India. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4):905–926.
Rosenzweig, M. R. and Wolpin, K. I. (1985). Specific Experience, Household Structure, and
  Intergenerational Transfers: Farm Family Land and Labor Arrangements in Developing
  Countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(Supplemen):961–987.
Sadoulet, E., de Janvry, A., and Fukui, S. (1997). The meaning of kinship in sharecropping
  contracts. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 79(2):394–406.
Shaban, R. A. (1987). Testing between competing models of sharecropping. Journal of
  Political Economy, 95(5):893–920.
Todd, P. E. and Wolpin, K. I. (2006). Assessing the impact of a school subsidy program
  in mexico: Using a social experiment to validate a dynamic behavioral model of child
  schooling and fertility. American Economic Review, 96(5):1384–1417.
Townsend, R. M. (1994). Risk and insurance in village India. Econometrica, 62(3):539–591.
Udry, C. (1994). Risk and Insurance in a Rural Credit Market: An Empirical Investigation
 in Northern Nigeria. Review of Economic Studies, 61(3):495–526.
Valentinyi, A. and Herrendorf, B. (2008). Measuring factor income shares at the sectoral
  level. Review of Economic Dynamics, 11(4):820–835.
Yang, D. T. and Zhu, X. (2013). Modernization of agriculture and long-term growth. Journal
  of Monetary Economics, 60(3):367–382.




                                            45
  Online Appendix

A      Ethiopia LSMS-ISA Data
Agricultural output. Farm output is recorded in physical quantities (kilograms) of differ-
ent crops.34 In the 2013/14 wave of survey, the most common crops in Ethiopia based on
the percentage of households who produce it are maize (57 percent), sorghum (43 percent),
tea leaves (40 percent), coffee (29 percent), and wheat (25 percent).35 To aggregate farm
production of different crops, we use common crop prices. For our purposes, the key is that
aggregate production at the farm level reflects physical variation in output. Valuing output
at common prices therefore allows us to compare output across farms, reflecting variation
in quantities produced. Less important is what common price we use. Since we observe the
prices of crops traded at local markets, we compute for each crop the median price among all
transactions and use it as the common price of this crop. The value of the crop output of a
farm is estimated by multiplying the physical quantity produced with its common price. We
then sum up the values of all crop types produced by the farm to obtain the value of gross
output of each farm. We also use common prices to estimate the value of intermediate inputs
used by farms, such as fertilizers and seeds, in a similar way. Note that some fertilizers and
seeds are from the farmers’ home production; we evaluate these home-produced goods using
common market prices as well. Again, the key in these assumptions is that the aggregate
measure of intermediate inputs used on a farm tracks physical variation in inputs as best as
possible. We calculate the value added of a farm by subtracting the value of intermediate
inputs from the value of gross output. We use this measure of value added in our analysis
as the net farm output.
    Rain. To measure productivity, it is important to exclude transitory variation in output
from value added. In agricultural production, the most important shock is precipitation.
Rainfall information is provided in the data, recorded as the annual precipitation in millime-
   34
      Some farmers may not have finished harvesting at the time of survey. In those cases, they report the
percentage of harvest that is pending. We adjust for that to estimate their total harvest.
   35
      We restrict our analysis to crops only and hence abstract from livestock as the production cycles of
livestock are usually longer than one year, which is our data period.



                                                   46
ters, and we use it to identify shocks in rainfall. We create 10 dummies representing different
levels of rainfall. Then, we regress the calculated farm value added on those dummies and
obtain the residual of this regression as the value added excluding the transitory variation
due to rainfall shocks. This is the measure of farm value added we ultimately use in our
analysis.
       Land. Land input of a farm (i.e., farm size) is the sum of the size of all land plots operated
by this farm. In the 2013/14 wave, the size of 93.8 percent of land plots is accurately
measured by GPS or, in case of small fields, by compass and rope at a precision of 0.1
square meters, while the size of the remaining land plots is reported by farmers.36 Farms
are in general very small in Ethiopia. The average farm size in our sample is around 1.3
hectares, compared to 169.2 hectares in the United States as reported in 2007 U.S. Census
of Agriculture. The farm size distribution is skewed to very small sizes: 64.7 percent of
households in our sample operate farms smaller than one hectare, 86 percent of households
operate farms smaller than two hectares, and only two percent of households operate farms
larger than five hectares. We note that a plot of land is treated as a part of a particular
farm if it is operated by that farmer, regardless of whoever has the use rights of the land. In
other words, the size of the farm is the operational scale and not the ownership or use rights
of land. Therefore, when computing farm size, we include rented-in land plots and exclude
rented-out plots for each household.
       Land quality. The survey also records land quality and other geographical characteris-
tics for each plot of land. For each plot, we have information on its elevation, slope, terrain
roughness, nutrient availability, nutrient retention, rooting conditions, excess salts, toxicity,
and workability. The issue is how to combine these measures of land characteristics into
one aggregate measure of land quality. We regress log value added per labor hour on these
variables of land quality, controlling for log capital and land input per labor hour. This
regression estimates how each dimension of land quality affects farm value added per labor
hour. Then, we take the coefficients from this regression to evaluate the land quality index
q for each farm. This is an upper bound measure of land quality as some inputs may be
  36
    Note that in this section, we describe sample statistics in the 2013/14 wave as examples, but they are
similar overall in the 2015/16 wave.



                                                   47
correlated with the quality of the land and hence is conservative in our analysis of the extent
of misallocation.
    Capital. Farm capital has three components: agricultural tools, transportation tools,
and some livestock. Agricultural tools include sickles, axes, pick axes, traditional or modern
ploughs, and water pumps. We observe the physical quantity of these tools owned by each
farmer, as well as their prices at local markets. Again, we construct common prices, defined as
the median of sell prices, to evaluate these agricultural tools. Transportation tools include
hand-pushed or animal-drawn carts and bicycles. The price of transportation tools are
not directly available in the data, so we estimate their values using local prices from the
internet.37 The livestock used for agricultural crop production are a bit more complicated.
The survey records the three most common livestock in Ethiopia, cattle, goats, and sheep,
as well as their farm use. In our measure of capital, we only include cattle that are for
agricultural or transportation purposes, and exclude goats and sheep, which are mainly used
for meat, wool, or milk. We also observe the prices at which farmers sell their cattle. Given
this, we construct common cattle prices separately for male and female cattle, to evaluate
livestock value. Finally, we sum up the values of agricultural tools, transportation tools, and
cattle as our measure of farm capital.38
    Labor. The data provide labor input for every plot of land of a farm, in both the planting
season and the harvest season. Labor input includes farmers’ family labor, hired labor, and
unpaid labor from other households. Family labor is recorded in hours (the data reports
hours per day, days per week, and number of weeks per season); hired labor and unpaid
labor, however, are only recorded in days. We assume that hired men work the same hours
per day as male family members, and hired women and children work the same hours as
female and children family members, respectively. Furthermore, labor quality of women and
  37
     We assign the prices of transportation tools as follows: one hand-pushed cart is worth about 6 traditional
ploughs; one animal-drawn cart is about 9 traditional ploughs; one bicycle is about 17 traditional ploughs.
Note that very few farmers have these transportation tools, so excluding them in the measure of capital
would only change our results slightly.
  38
     To deal with a set of farmers who have zero measured capital but report cultivated land and positive
production, we follow Adamopoulos et al. (2017) in imputing an amount of capital to all farms representing
a common set of very small tools and structures used by farmers that are not recorded in the data. The
amount we assign to each farmer is set to equal ten percent of the median capital-land ratio of farms within
the zone, multiplied by the amount of land input of the farm. We have verified that our results are not
sensitive to the size of adjusted capital or to dropping these households.


                                                      48
children maybe lower than that of men, reflected by their lower wage rates. We therefore
adjust for the hour inputs of women and children downwards based on the median wage
ratios relative to men to obtain the male-equivalent hours. We also assume that unpaid
labor from other households work the same hours per day as hired workers of the same
identity: for example, unpaid men work the same hours per day as hired men, and we apply
the same quality adjustment as well. Finally, we construct farm labor input as the sum of
hours from all three types of labor for all land plots of this farm in both seasons. We find
that, out of total labor input, 75.3 percent is supplied by household members, 14.7 percent
by hired labor, and 10.0 percent by unpaid labor from other households.



B     Factor Income Shares
We document how we estimate factor shares using our Ethiopia data. The factor shares are
calculated as the share of cost of each factor in production.

Labor share.—We observe the wage payments for hired labor, separately for male, female,
and children. We then calculate the cost per day for these three types of labor by taking the
median wage rate of each type. For household members and free labor from other households,
we do not observe the cost. We hence impute the cost by assigning the same wage rate as
hired labor of the same type. For example, we assume that using male household members
has the same cost as using the same amount of hired male individuals. By doing this, we
calculate the labor cost of each farm. We then take the ratio between this labor cost and
the farm output (value added), and take the median (0.464) as labor income share.

Land share.—We observe the land payments, both cash and in-kind, for those rentals. Note
that there is a substantial portion of rentals that are non-market as we described in Section
??. We therefore calculate land share using the portion of rentals that are market, i.e., the
payment is not zero. The cost of land is then as the ratio between rental payments and
rental size. We take the median of this to be our measure of land price. Then for all land
plots, regardless of rented or own land, we apply this price to calculate the implied cost of
land. We next aggregate this land cost to the farm level to obtain the shadow land cost of



                                             49
each farm, including both rented land and own land. Finally, we calculate the ratio between
this implied land cost and the farm output (value added), and take the median (0.389) as
land income share.

Capital.—We do not directly observe the capital cost. We therefore use the residual as
capital share, which is 1 − 0.464 − 0.389 = 0.147.
    To summarize, we estimate that capital, labor, and land shares are 0.147, 0.464, and
0.389, respectively. Note that estimation of factor income shares in agriculture varies in
the literature. Valentinyi and Herrendorf (2008) find that in the United States, the capital,
labor, and land shares in agriculture are 0.36, 0.46, and 0.18, respectively. Restuccia and
Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017) use micro data from Malawi and estimate the capital, labor, and
land shares to be 0.190, 0.419, and 0.391, respectively. This discrepancy may arise from the
fact that Malawi has a lower level of mechanization in agriculture compared to the United
States. In fact, Chen (2019) argues that the capital-output ratio (and therefore, the capital
income share) in agriculture tends to increase as an economy develops. Ethiopia is typically
considered to be at a stage of development similar to Malawi, and our estimated factor shares
are also close to those of Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017).



C     Robustness and Extensions
We provide a set of robustness checks and discuss some extensions. First, we discuss two
potentially important qualifications of our findings, by controlling for household-level observ-
ables and with regards to the presence of output market distortions. Second, we extend our
analysis adding potential misallocation of the labor input. Third, we study the role of crop
composition on the extent of misallocation. Finally, we provide additional evidence through
the instrumental variable approach to complement the difference-in-difference approach that
we use in the main text.




                                              50
C.1     Controlling for Household-Level Observables

Table 2 shows that the treated group and the control group are largely comparable over many
household-level observables. Nevertheless, we repeat the difference-in-difference regression
specified in equations (9) and (10) explicitly controlling for a set of household-level observ-
ables in Table 2 such as the household head’s age, gender, education, marriage status, health
status, and the household’s size and distance to market. Notice that further controlling for
land quality measures, such as elevation or slope, does not change our results since they are
already taken into account when removing land quality from farm level measures of output.
The results are displayed in Table 12. We can see that the results are very similar to those in
Table 3. Including household-level observables as controls does not alter the effects of land
rental markets on resource misallocation.


C.2     Output Market Distortions

It is important to recognize that other distortions, in addition to distortions on factor inputs,
may be in place. Our emphasis has been on connecting misallocation with restrictions to land
markets in Ethiopia, as well as on establishing a causal link from land rentals to misallocation.
Even if Ethiopia’s land certification reforms have been successful in providing tenure security
as their primary objective, we have documented that strong restrictions in rentals remain in
place and that, even if not everywhere enforced, rental activity remains tenuous. However,
to the extent that there may be other frictions in the economy—such as poor infrastructure
which would make markets in remote rural locations difficult to access—that may be driving
the misallocation we document, it is relevant to assess the extent to which the land market
is the dominant source of misallocation in the data as opposed to other frictions.
   To this effect, we exploit the availability of data on farm distance to markets as a proxy
for other frictions such as product market distortions and assess the extent to which these
variables are related to farm-specific measures of distortions. In particular, we extend our
benchmark difference-in-difference specification (9) to include farm distance to nearest mar-




                                               51
                    Table 12: Effects of Land Rental Markets: Reform Intensity
                                         (a) Benchmark Specification
                    Dependent variable:                Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     TFPR         MPLa
                    Land Rentals (dz )              -0.078             -0.124          -0.136
                                                   (0.034)            (0.031)         (0.031)
                    Observations                    4,534              4,534            4,534
                    R2                               0.24               0.17             0.14

                                           (b) Quantile Specification
                    Dependent variable:                Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                    ψQ1                             -0.045             -0.085          -0.077
                                                   (0.030)            (0.031)         (0.029)
                    ψQ2                             -0.026             -0.098          -0.080
                                                   (0.034)            (0.037)         (0.033)
                    ψQ3                             -0.119             -0.105          -0.079
                                                   (0.041)            (0.037)         (0.040)
                    ψQ4                             -0.238             -0.306          -0.299
                                                   (0.071)            (0.066)         (0.063)

Notes: Results of regression (9) in panel (a) and of regression (10) in panel (b) for the following measures of
                                                                                                        e     a
farm-level misallocation, after controlling for household-level observables: (a) efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|,
        e                                                                             a
where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient reallocation and yizt is actual output in the
data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, and
(c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average, | log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard
deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as
described in Section 2.


ket denoted by mi as an additional control variable. This implies the following specification:


                    | log eizt | = αz + λt + ψdzt + β log TFPiz + γ log miz + εizt .


We find that controlling for output market distortions does not alter our benchmark results.
The estimated coefficient ψ (and standard errors) for efficiency gains, TFPR, and MPLa
barely change, with −0.132 (0.033), −0.151 (0.030), and −0.192 (0.031), respectively. The
coefficients on log distance for dependent variables of efficiency gains, TFPR, and MPLa,
are not always significant with estimates of −0.030 (0.017), −0.019 (0.016), and −0.044
(0.016), respectively. These results should not be entirely surprising since we have shown
that the bulk of misallocation occurs within narrow geographical areas that share similar

                                                         52
market access.


C.3     Explicit Labor Input

That the functioning of labor markets in poor countries is far from perfect is well-known
(Rosenzweig, 1978, 1988; Rosenzweig and Wolpin, 1985; Behrman, 1999). So far, we have
abstracted from labor in our analysis because most farm labor is family labor and hence
have avoided the notion of splitting families in reallocation. We show that our results are
robust to explicitly including labor in the production function. Recall that in our bench-
mark production function output (yi ) and inputs (ki , li ) are all normalized to labor input.
Alternatively, we consider an expanded production function where we explicitly include the
labor input:
                                     yi = s1−γ
                                           i   (kiα nθi li1−α−θ )γ ,                                     (17)

where ni is labor input and θγ is the corresponding factor share. In this case, the farm produc-
                                   h                  1
                                                   i 1−γ
tivity can be calculated as si = (kα nθ ly1−α−θ
                                            i
                                                )γ
                                                         , and the planner’s solution requires kie =
                                      i i i
Psi K,    nei = Psisi N, lie = Psisi L, where N = i ni denotes the aggregate labor endow-
                                                         P
  i si             i              i

                                                          e
                                                              P e  P 1−γ α θ 1−α−θ γ
ment. The efficient aggregate output per zone is Y = i yi =               i si     (K N L         ) .
                                                                                             yi
Analogously, farm revenue productivity (TFPR) is now defined as TFPRi ≡              kiα nθi li1−α−θ
                                                                                                     .
   In this alternative specification, we have three parameters to calibrate: γ, α, θ. Note that
the labor income share is now given by 1 − γ + θγ, where 1 − γ is the profit of the farm
and θγ is the share of labor input. We therefore set 1 − γ + θγ = 0.464 to match the labor
share of 0.464 as in our benchmark specification. Recall that family labor accounts for 75.3
percent of total farm labor. We then choose the first component 1 − γ to be 75.3 percent of
the total labor share, which means γ = 0.651. The capital share, αγ is 0.147, and hence we
choose α = 0.202.
   Our results remain largely unchanged in this alternative specification. On average, the
efficiency gain per zone is 1.83, compared to 1.66 in our benchmark case. The results of our
difference-in-difference analysis when we add labor are in Table 13. We obtain similar results
to our benchmark. Land rentals significantly reduce misallocation and the effects are again
non-linear. To provide a quantitative interpretation of the size of efficiency gain, we redo the


                                                  53
  Table 13: Effects of Land Rentals on Misallocation and Productivity with Labor Input
                                        (a) Benchmark Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   Land Rentals (dz )              -0.084             -0.168         -0.070
                                                  (0.046)            (0.033)        (0.028)
                   Observations                    4,716              4,716          4,716
                   R2                               0.16               0.16           0.13

                                          (b) Quantile Specification
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   ψQ1                              0.012             -0.129         -0.053
                                                  (0.036)            (0.028)        (0.019)
                   ψQ2                             -0.110             -0.078         -0.082
                                                  (0.038)            (0.036)        (0.024)
                   ψQ3                             -0.090             -0.113         -0.050
                                                  (0.051)            (0.040)        (0.029)
                   ψQ4                             -0.127             -0.386         -0.155
                                                  (0.096)            (0.078)        (0.059)

Notes: Results of regression (9) in panel (a) and of regression (10) in panel (b) for the following measures
                                                         e     a             e
of farm-level misallocation: (a) efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a
                                       a
zone-level efficient reallocation and yizt is actual output in the data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt )
relative to the zone-level average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, (c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to
the zone-level average, | log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for
the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2. The results shown in this table
are under the setup where labor enters production explicitly.


back-of-envelope calculation and find that one percentage more rentals reduce misallocation
by 2.7 percent, compared to 3.2 percent that we found in our baseline.39


C.4      Crop Choice and Within-Crop Misallocation

Farmers in Ethiopia cultivate a variety of crops with maize, sorghum, and tea leaves being
among the most produced crops by farms. Since our production function specification is
common across farm households who may be producing different crops, differences in com-
  39
     Notice that in assessing the effects of land markets on resource allocation and productivity, we reallocate
factor inputs (including labor) within zones. That is, we are not allowing for reallocation gains potentially
generated from (internal) migration we think deserves further exploration. For such analysis in different
contexts, see the recent work of Munshi and Rosenzweig (2016) for India and of Bryan and Morten (2019)
for Indonesia. For a cross-country analysis, see Hendricks and Schoellman (2018).


                                                        54
position of production can generate dispersion in marginal products across farm households.
To address this issue, we explore the extent of misallocation within each crop using our
plot-level data.
   The data records the crop cultivated in each plot operated by a household. We then focus
on an individual crop indexed by c. We keep all land plots cultivating crop c, aggregate inputs
and outputs of these plots to the household level, and then repeat the analysis in Section
5.4 to calculate the extent of misallocation and zone-level efficiency gain.
   Table 14 panel (a) reports the results for five different crops, which are the most widely
cultivated in Ethiopia. We find that within crops, both the extent of misallocation measured
by the dispersion in log MPLa or log TFPR, and the efficiency gain from reallocation are
fairly similar to our baseline farm aggregate. For instance, more than half of all farmers
produce maize and, for this crop, the dispersion in log TFPR is 1.03 and the efficiency gain
is 1.79-fold (compared with 0.84 and 1.66-fold in our baseline).
   We also explore if rentals affect the choice of crops. In particular, we want to study
whether more rentals cause farmers to cultivate more cash crops. We hence divide crops
into two kinds: food crops and cash crops. We use two versions of definition of food crops.
In the first definition, we define maize, sorghum, wheat, rice, barley, millet, and oaks to be
food crops, while all others are cash ones. The second definition, we are more strict in cash
crops that only tobacco, sunflower, sesame, rapeseed, soya beans, and onion are defined as
cash crops, which are not directly used for food consumption, while others are considered
as food crops. We then calculate for each household the fraction of total output that is in
food crops, denoted as f racizt , and then run the following difference-in-difference regressions
among households:


                        f racizt = αz + λt + ψdzt + β log TFPiz + εizt .                    (18)


The results are in panel (b) of Table 14. We can see that rentals have little impact on farm
crop choices. We also repeat our regression using the number of crop kinds of each household
farm on the left hand side of the regression and we obtain similar results.




                                               55
                                     Table 14: Crop-Level Analysis
                                      (a) Misallocation within Crops

        Crop           Number of       Cultivated     Efficiency         Dispersion       Dispersion
                       Farms (%)       Land (%)          Gain            in MPLai         in TFPRi
                                                     within Zones       within Zones     within Zones
        Maize              56.6           17.5             1.79             1.02             1.03
        Sorghum            42.7           18.6             1.74             0.84             0.88
        Tea Leaves         40.2           13.5             1.51             0.84             0.86
        Coffee             29.3           16.6             2.16             1.13             1.12
        Wheat              25.2            8.7             1.61             0.91             0.94

                          (b) Effects of Land Rental Markets on Crop Choice

                  Dependent variable:       Fraction of Cash Crops          Kinds of Crops
                                           Definition 1 Definition 2
                  Land Rentals (dz )           -0.027          -0.000               0.232
                                              (0.016)         (0.007)              (0.163)
                  Observations                 4,714            4,714               4,714
                  R2                            0.34             0.14                0.35

Notes: Panel (a) lists the five most common crops in Ethiopia. Column 1 reports the percentage of household
farms cultivating at least one plot with a particular crop. Column 2 reports the percentage of land used
to cultivate a given crop. The last three columns report the efficiency gains and the dispersion of MPLa
and TFPR within zones and then weighted by zone-level output, as defined in Section 5.4, when we focus
only on farm plots of a single crop. Data for the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14. Panel (b) reports the results of
regression (18) for the following left-hand-side variables: fraction of farm-level output that is food crops, in
two versions of definitions, and the number of different crops. Standard deviations are in the parentheses.
Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2.


C.5      Additional IV Evidence

We recognize that a potential concern on the use of a policy as an exogenous source of
variation is the potential endogeneity of the policy implementation itself. The idea is that
some local governments might be willing—or bounded—to enforce the land reform quicker
or more intensively than others which can potentially yield endogenous differences in Rz . In
this context, notice that our pre-trends analysis suggests that there is no pre-existent factor
(including type of local government or institution) that explains the rise in land rentals and
the reduction of misallocation. In addition, our examination of the distance to political
leadership between treatment and control zones showed no significant differences (Table 2)


                                                      56
which adds evidence to our causal interpretation of the empirical difference-in-difference
effects of land markets. Nevertheless, we now address the endogeneity concern by using two
sets of instrumental variables.40
       The first instrument that we use is the religious status of local farmers. Religion is a good
candidate for an instrument for several reasons. First, more than 95% of the population
in Ethiopia adheres to a religion. In our sample, around 42.3% of farmers are Christian
Orthodox, 31.2% of Muslim, and 23.4% of Protestants, with the remaining farmers abiding to
other (or none) religions. Importantly, the composition of religions varies substantially across
zones. For example, we find five zones with no Orthodox farmers, while in other seven zones
all farmers are Orthodox. Similarly, there are twenty-three zones with no Muslim farmers.
Second, it is very rare to see transitions across religions, which are basically transmitted from
parents to children (inherited) and hence ex-ante exogenous. Third, religion is correlated
with land rentals which provides a strong first stage. For example, 47.9 percent of Orthodox
farmers participate in land rentals, compared to only 21.6 percent among Muslim farmers.
This could be due to the lack of the tradition of charging rents among Muslim farmers
historically. In fact, we do observe this difference: 68.5 percent of land rentals among
Orthodox farmers take place in exchange of either monetary or in-kind payments, while
this number is only 50.5 percent among Muslim farmers. If charging rents is culturally
more costly for Muslims, then their farmers have potentially less incentives to rent out their
farm land. This implies that establishing well-functioned land rental markets can be more
costly ceteris paribus in the Muslim population. We also find strong correlation at the zone
level: the rank correlation between the rental percentages and the Orthodox percentages
is 0.61 and is significant at the one percent level. Further, we argue that religion satisfies
the exclusionary restriction since the institutional context is such that land rentals are the
only channel generating the land transactions (reallocations) that we study. That is, religion
can affect resource re-allocations only through land rentals. This is in consonance with our
theoretical framework in Section 3 (see also the policy experiment in next Section 5) in which
resource allocations are affected by land rentals through an institutional cost that determines
  40
    We further address endogeneity by assessing a controlled experiment on our theoretical model in Sec-
tion 5.1. Specifically, we implement an exogenous and unexpected policy change in our model that replicates
the changes in land rental market activity by zone.


                                                    57
                  Table 15: Effects of Land Rental Markets: Two IV Strategies
                                         (a) Orthodox Population
             Dependent variable:                     Farm-Level Misallocation
                                       Efficiency Gain       MPLa             TFPR
                                       OLS        IV      OLS      IV       OLS    IV
             Land Rentals (%), ψ       -0.067    -0.066     -0.092    -0.059    -0.068    -0.046
                                      (0.010)   (0.018)    (0.009)   (0.016)   (0.009)   (0.016)

             Weak ID Test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic):
                                    -     1242.5       -             1242.5       -      1242.5
             Stock-Yogo Weak ID 10% Critical Value: 16.38.

             Observations              2,545     2,545      2,545     2,545     2,545     2,545
             R2                         0.13      0.13       0.04     0.03       0.04     0.04

                                         (b) Lagged Land Rentals
             Dependent variable:                     Farm-Level Misallocation
                                       Efficiency Gain       MPLa             TFPR
                                       OLS        IV      OLS      IV       OLS    IV
             Land Rentals (%), ψ       -0.058    -0.087     -0.057    -0.062    -0.073    -0.073
                                      (0.011)   (0.019)    (0.010)   (0.016)   (0.010)   (0.017)

             Weak ID Test (Cragg-Donald Wald F statistic):
                                    -     1239.0       -             1239.0       -      1239.0
             Stock-Yogo Weak ID 10% Critical Value: 16.38.

             Observations              2,168     2,099      2,168     2,099     2,168     2,099
             R2                         0.06      0.06       0.02     0.03       0.10     0.10

Notes: We report OLS and IV results from a cross-sectional estimation of the following specification
| log eiz | = α + ψ log Rz + β log TFPiz + εiz for Ethiopia ISA 2013/14. In panel (a) we use the percent-
age of Orthodox farmers as the instrument of the rental percentage within zones. In panel (b) we use the
percentage of rentals of the same zone in the previous period as the instrument of the rental percentage of
the current period. We report the elasticity of land rentals and individual farm-level misallocation for these
two specifications. Data used is for Ethiopia 2013/14.


the access to land rental markets, χz . That is, an instrumental variable strategy rationalized
using our theoretical framework implies that religion takes the role of χz as institutional—or
cultural—cost. Finally, also notice that measurement error in religion denomination should
be minor (if not absent). The instrumental variable results using the Orthodox percentage
of farm households at the zone level as instrument are reported in panel (a) of Table 15. In
line with our difference-in-difference results, we find that more rentals reduce misallocation
at the farm level and increase agricultural productivity.

                                                     58
    The second instrument that we use is the lagged rental ratio of the same zone. In
particular, when we estimate the effects of rental on misallocation using the 2015/16 sample,
we use the zone-level rentals of the previous previous period (2013/14) as the instrument.
The lagged rental ratio affects current misallocation only through its persistent effect on
current rental ratio, and hence it satisfies the exclusive restriction. We report the results
in panel (b) Table 15. Again, we find similar significant results in that more rentals reduce
misallocation.



D      Model Solution and Calibration Strategy
We describe the solution algorithm that we implement to solve for the model equilibrium
allocations and the algorithm that we use in our calibration strategy to pin down χz by zone.


D.1     Solution Algorithm

Given a set of parameter values (α, γ, χz ), and an initial joint distribution of land endow-
ments, capital and permanent productivity Φ(s, ¯l, k̄):

  1. Guess land and capital factor prices, respectively, q and r.

  2. Solve the farm profit maximization problem (equation (2)). That is, find the farm-
      specific optimal demands of land and capital (li∗ , ki∗ ) that solve the first order conditions
      (equation (7)).

  3. Check whether land and capital market clears for each zone, that is,

                                        X                            X
                                                  l∗ (si , ¯li ) −       ¯li = 0
                                             i                       i
                                       X                             X
                                                 k ∗ (si , ¯li ) −       k̄i = 0.
                                         i                           i



  4. If factor markets clear, then STOP. Otherwise, update the guess of factor prices (q, r)
      and GO TO step 2.



                                                        59
Notice that to generate the update in step 4 if the aggregate demand of land exceeds the
aggregate supply of land, then we need to increase the rental price of land, q. Analogously
for capital. Also, notice that there is no analytical solution to the first order condition in
step 2. We numerically search for roots.


D.2      Calibration Strategy for χz

In Section 5.1, we describe our calibration strategy that aims at finding the institutional
cost χz such that the model land rentals match the actual land rentals by zone. Precisely,
we apply the following calibration algorithm.

    1. Guess the institutional cost by zone, χz .

    2. Solve the model by zone, applying the solution algorithm in Section D.1.

    3. Compute the model-generated land rentals as equation (5) by zone.

    4. If the model-generated rentals by zone equate their data counterparts, then STOP.
       Otherwise, update guess of χz and GO TO step 2.


To generate the update in step 4. if the model-generated rentals are smaller (larger) than their
data counterparts, then we need to decrease (increase) the institutional cost χz . Notice that
this procedure is computationally intense and that, further, we need to follow it separately
for each zone. To ease the computational burden we parallelize our computation with 56
CPU cores.



E      Effects of Land Rentals via Reform Intensity
One aspect that we emphasized when describing the land rental reform is that there is
substantial heterogeneity in growth of rentals across zones: while rental increases in some
zones by less than one percent, a few other zones have increases of more than 15 percent.
This heterogeneity is not captured by our benchmark specification (9) in which the dummy
dzt simply separates increases and non-increases in land rentals across waves. To exclude

                                               60
those zones where rental increases marginally, we re-define dzt as a dummy that takes value
one in the second period if rentals in zone z increase by at least two percent, and zero
otherwise.41 We find that the effects of land rentals on resource misallocation are larger with
this specification. The relevant coefficients are −0.156 for farm-level efficiency gains, −0.236
for MPLa, and −0.212 for TFPR.

                 Table 16: Effects of Land Rental Markets, Higher Reform Intensity
                     Dependent variable:                Farm-Level Misallocation
                                               Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                     Land Rentals (%), ψ             -0.156                  -0.236    -0.212
                                                    (0.035)                 (0.032)   (0.032)
                     Observations                    4,714                   4,714     4,714
                     R2                               0.22                    0.13      0.17

Notes: Results of econometric specification (9) for the following measures of farm-level misallocation: (a)
                       e     a              e
efficiency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient reallocation
       a
and yizt is actual output in the data, (b) marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level
average, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, and (c) revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average,
| log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA
2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2. We restrict our treatment group to be those zones
where rentals increase by at least two percent.




F         Alternative Assessment of Land Rentals
We explore an alternative approach to assess the effects of rental markets on resource allo-
cation and productivity. Note that in our analysis, we define farm size using the operational
scale, i.e., the actual operated land of farmers including rentals, instead of the owned land.
Now let us consider another counter-factual analysis. Suppose we completely shut down land
rental markets, so that farmers cannot rent in or rent out any land. In this case, the farm
size will coincide with owned land, denoted as ¯l. We can use the actual capital input as well
as our estimated productivity to calculate the level of output associated with this alternative
land allocation as
                                              ŷi = s1−γ
                                                     i   (kiα ¯li1−α )γ .
  41
       Our results also hold if we require rental increases by at least one percent or three percent.




                                                         61
We can then calculate the aggregate output of this hypothetical land allocation, denoted
as Ŷ a = i ŷi , and compare it to the actual aggregate output Y a = i ŷi to obtain the
         P                                                           P

efficiency gain of land rentals that actually happens in the economy: ê = Ŷ a /Y a . In our
2013/14 sample, we find this ratio to be 0.934. That is to say, if we completely shut down
rentals, the aggregate output will be only 93.4% of the actual output. In other words, the
existing rentals increase productivity by around 7.07%. That is, one percent of rentals is
associated with 7.07/10.9 = 0.65% more productivity. We also obtain a confidence interval
of this statistics ê through bootstrap estimates, which is [0.890, 0.978] with a median of 0.938
and a standard deviation of 0.027. That is, the ratio of interest is statistically different from
unity.42
       Most likely, this calculation underestimates the effect of rentals due to selection (Lagakos
and Waugh, 2013). To see this, notice that we can only compare the allocation of rentals
for the currently existing farmers. That is, we ignore the notion that some farmers may
completely rent out their land and migrate to the non-agricultural sector, as we cannot
observe these farmers in our data. This extensive margin can be quantitatively important
for resource allocation (Chen, 2017; Adamopoulos et al., 2017).



G         Measurement Issues
An important concern in the literature that measures the extent of misallocation is the
possibility of measurement error in individual inputs and outputs driving dispersion in the
TFP and marginal products of production units. It is therefore relevant to recognize this
measurement issue in agricultural production and TFP, and at the same time, recognize
the difficulties in fully addressing it. In the context our exercise, two remarks are in order
regarding the potential role of mismeasurement on the estimated effects of land markets.


Theoretical versus empirical effects. First, an important aspect of our analysis is that
we have showed that the model-generated difference-in-difference effects of land markets on
  42
    Note that in our sample, wePobserve more rent in than rent out. As a result, we rescale land input for
everyone to make sure i ¯li = i li . If we rescale that only for those farmers who rent out (at a different
                       P
rate to make sure the resource constraint holds), then we would get the statistics to be 93.9% instead of
93.4%.


                                                    62
resource allocation and productivity (Section 5.1) match the empirical difference-in-difference
effects (Section 4) quite well without targeting them. This result provides confidence that
the effects of land markets on productivity are not simply the result of measurement error
because our theoretical framework does not per se generate measurement error. Specifi-
cally, the effects measured through our theoretical framework are the result of a controlled
experiment that solely changes χz from a calibrated status quo level of land rentals to a
counterfactual level of land rentals. This controlled experiment leaves no scope for other
reasons—including measurement error—to surface in the explanation of our model-generated
difference-in-difference effects.


The extent of versus changes in misallocation. Second, a recurrent concern in the
literature that measures the extent of misallocation is that the estimated permanent farm
productivity (and, hence, its dispersion) could be subject to measurement error stemming
from factor input and/or output mismeasurement in agriculture. Although this issue is
potentially relevant to quantify the extent of misallocation (Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-
Llopis, 2017; Gollin and Udry, 2017), it is important to highlight that our main focus is
not on the extent of misallocation but on its changes across zones and across time due to
changes in land rental market activity.43 Therefore, while the level of dispersion in farm
productivity may reflect some classical measurement error, the changes in the dispersion of
farm productivity over time and across differing zones (treatment and control) are less likely
to do so. The main reason for that being that we keep permanent farm productivity—a
fixed effect that captures unobserved heterogeneity—constant at status quo across periods
in our policy evaluation in both the empirical and the theoretical analysis. This, however,
opens the question on whether the estimated effects of land rentals depends on the status
quo measurement of farm-level TFP. For that reason, we re-conduct our analysis using a set
of alternative measures of permanent farm-level TFP next.


The effects of land markets with alternative measures of farm-level TFP. Recall
that our basic unit of production is the farm household. Since a household generally operates
  43
   See also De Magalhães and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2018) for a set of specific issues related to the measure-
ment agricultural production in ISA data.


                                                     63
                             Table 17: Alternative Farm-Level TFP Measures
                                                               Efficiency     Rank Corr.
   Farm-level TFP Proxies, si :                                  Gain       with Baseline si   Observations
                                                1
         (1)   Benchmark sei = (s2013i   s2015
                                           i   )2                1.66              —              2,921
                                 1             1 1
         (2)      1        2013          2015
               sei = ((Πj sij ) J , (Πj sij ) J ) 2              1.70             0.71            2,921
         (3)   se2i = (medianj (s2013               2015 12
                                  ij ), medianj (sij ))          1.70             0.71            2,921
               se3i = (max2j {s2013        2 2015 12
         (4)                   ij }, maxj {sij })                1.71             0.56            2,921

Notes: For each farm household, we construct four alternative measures of productivity based on the panel
data of plot-level productivity of operated plots: the geometric mean, median, and second largest value, in
addition to the geometric mean of farm productivity between the 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves. The number of
observations differ slightly across cases because we apply a consistent trimming of the farm-TFP distribution
as described in Section 3.


a farm spanning several plots of land in the data—an average of more than seven plots
in the case of Ethiopia—we aggregate both factor inputs and outputs at the household-
farm level to calculate farm-level TFP. An important advantage of our aggregation at the
farm level is that potential unmeasured plot-level shocks and classical measurement error
on inputs and outputs are mitigated.44 However, at the same time, our aggregation has the
caveat that it abstracts from potentially genuine efficiency gains from within-household factor
input reallocations across plots.45 That is, although our aggregation reduces the impact of
measurement error, at the same time, it leaves out potentially true variation that could be
relevant to measure misallocation. Our benchmark measure of farm-level productivity is
the permanent component—a fixed effect that captures unobserved heterogeneity—of TFP
computed using our panel data using the production function discussed in Section 3.
       We now construct a set of alternative proxies to measure permanent farm-level TFP
constructed from plot-level data:

                                          1
                          s1i = (Πj sij ) J ,   s2i = medianj (sij ),   s3i = max2j {sij }.               (19)


where sij is the plot-level TFP computed for household-farm i and plot j. The first measure
  44
     We discuss this further in our Appendix H.
  45
     For example, this could be either because there is heterogeneity in the diminishing returns on the number
of plots an individual can manage or because there is more than one manager (e.g., husbands and wives) per
household—which is not uncommon in Ethiopia and other Sub-Saharan Africa countries—with potentially
different managerial ability.



                                                          64
       Table 18: Effects of Land Rental Markets: Alternative Farm-Level TFP Proxies
                  (a) Farm-Level TFP Proxy = Geometric Mean of Plot-Level TFP
                  Dependent variable:                  Farm-Level Misallocation
                                             Efficiency Gain    MPLa           TFPR
                  Land Rentals (dz )               -0.151            -0.161           -0.156
                                                  (0.037)           (0.035)          (0.034)
                  Observations                     4,704             4,704            4,704
                  R2                                0.34              0.10             0.09


                         (b) Farm-Level TFP Proxy = Median Plot-Level TFP
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   Land Rentals (dz )               -0.156            -0.173          -0.178
                                                   (0.037)           (0.035)         (0.035)
                   Observations                     4,694             4,694           4,694
                   R2                                0.37              0.11            0.09


                     (c) Farm-Level TFP Proxy = Second Highest Plot-Level TFP
                   Dependent variable:                 Farm-Level Misallocation
                                              Efficiency Gain     MPLa         TFPR
                   Land Rentals (dz )               -0.093            -0.162          -0.168
                                                   (0.038)           (0.037)         (0.037)
                   Observations                     4,688             4,688           4,688
                   R2                                0.42              0.07            0.14

Notes: Results of regression (9) for three proxies of farm-level TFP: the geometric mean of plot-level TFP
in panel (a); the median plot-level TFP in panel (b); and the second highest plot-level TFP in panel
(c). For each of these three proxies we use the following measures of farm-level misallocation: the effi-
                   e     a              e
ciency gain | log(yizt /yizt )|, where yizt is efficient output of farm i in a zone-level efficient reallocation and
  a
yizt is actual output in the data, the marginal product of land (MPLaizt ) relative to the zone-level aver-
age, | log(MPLaizt /MPLazt )|, and the revenue productivity (TFPRizt ) relative to the zone-level average,
| log(TFPRizt /TFPRzt )|. Standard deviations are in the parentheses. Panel data for the Ethiopia ISA
2013/14 and 2015/16 waves are as described in Section 2.




                                                        65
of household-farm TFP, s1i , is the geometric mean of plot-level productivity (across all plots,
J); the second measure s2i uses the median of plot-level productivity; the third measure s3i
uses the second highest value. As it was the case of our benchmark measure, these alterna-
tive measures in equation (19) are based on the assumption that a household should have
the same productivity across plots. That is, the actual variation in plot-level productivity
within a household is entirely attributed to measurement error. A potential caveat of this
identification assumption is that some variation in plot-level productivity can reflect actual
within-household misallocation. In any case, we take the geometric mean, the median, or
the second highest value of plot-level productivity to mitigate potential measurement error.
   Do the alternative estimates of permanent farm productivity imply different measure-
ments of the extend of misallocation? We find that this is not the case. Using the alternative
farm-level productivity measures in equation (19) we find within-zone efficiency gains that
are very similar to our benchmark results, see Table 17. The (geometric) average produces
an efficiency gain of 1.70-fold, which is slightly larger than our benchmark specification of
1.66-fold. The median yields an efficiency gain of 1.70-fold, and the second max of 1.71-fold.
The Spearman’s ranking correlation between the alternative measures of productivity and
our baseline farm-level productivity are high: 0.71 for the (geometric) average plot, 0.71 for
the median, and 0.56 for the second max.
   Most importantly for our study, do the alternative estimates of permanent farm produc-
tivity change the estimated effects of land rentals on resource allocation and productivity?
We find that this is not the case. Table 18 shows the results of implementing our benchmark
difference-in-difference strategy in equation (9) for the three proxies of farm-level TFP in
equation (19): the geometric mean of plot-level TFP in panel (a); the median plot-level
TFP in panel (b); and the second highest plot-level TFP in panel (c). We find that across
all these proxies of farm-level TFP the effects of land markets on misallocation resemble
our benchmark results in Table 3. This is the case for all three measures of misallocation:
efficiency gains, relative MPLa and relative TFPR.


Land quality differences between owned and rented land. Finally, another concern
is whether there are any land quality differences between rented and non-rented land. Notice


                                              66
that we control for land quality throughout our analysis so our computations of efficiency
gains already incorporate direct data on land quality on eleven dimensions (rainfall, slope,
elevation, terrain roughness, nutrient availability, nutrient retention capacity, rooting condi-
tions, oxygen availability to roots, excess salts, toxicity, and workability). However, we are
interested in the possibility that rented land is of higher quality. This might have impli-
cations for the effects of land rentals on aggregate productivity. We assess this possibility
using our plot-level data. We construct land quality at the plot level in the same way we
constructed land quality at the household level in Appendix A and then compare land qual-
ity between rented and non-rented plots. The Welch’s t-test shows that land quality q in
cultivated rented plots and in non-rented plots is not statistically significant from each other.



H       The Extent of Misallocation: Farm vs. Plot TFP
Our paper focuses on the effect of land markets. In particular, we study of the changes over
time and across zones of the extent of misallocation as opposed to the study of the (cross-
sectional) extent of misallocation itself. This focus on spatial and time variation implies that
the presence of measurement error in the extent of misallocation is less of a concern for our
study (see Appendix G). Measurement error, however, remains an important issue for the
study of the extent of misallocation.
    In the specific context of agricultural production and ISA data, a potentially important
type of measurement error is recall bias as these surveys are rolled over the entire year
whereas there is usually only one rainy season. Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017)
use ISA panel data to assess the effect of recall bias in output and factor inputs—as well
as other types of measurement error in output and factor inputs such as selling value of
capital versus physical capital indexes and GPS measures of plot size versus self-reported
measures of plot size—and find small effects on the implied extent of misallocation. More
recently, Gollin and Udry (2017) emphasize plot-level variation across and within farms by
estimating measurement error in inputs and outputs assuming that individual farmers are
equally efficient in operating each and all plots that they manage. This emphasis in plot-
level variation contrasts with our focus on farm-level variation as per our benchmark unit of


                                               67
analysis, the household-farm.46
       We now assess how our benchmark permanent measure of farm-level TFP that determines
the extent of misallocation fares against the plot-level TFP measures. We use plot-level data
insofar it helps generate a household-farm level measure of productivity. Precisely, since a
household generally operates a farm spanning several plots of land in the data—an average of
more than seven plots in the case of Ethiopia—we aggregate both factor inputs and outputs
at the household-farm level to calculate farm-level TFP. An important implication of our ag-
gregation at the farm level is that potential plot-level shocks and classical measurement error
on inputs and outputs are averaged out. However, at the same time, our aggregation has the
caveat that it ignores potentially genuine efficiency gains from within-household factor input
reallocations across plots. For example, this could be either because there is heterogeneity
in the diminishing returns on the number of plots an individual can manage or because
there are more than one managers (e.g., husbands and wives) per household—which is not
uncommon in Ethiopia and other Sub-Saharan Africa countries—with potentially different
managerial ability. That is, although our aggregation reduces the impact of measurement
error, at the same time, it ignores potentially genuine variation that could be relevant to
measure misallocation. Note that our estimate of permanent measure of farm-level TFP uses
data from both 2013/14 and 2015/16 waves, which also helps reduce the impact of potential
shocks and classical measurement errors.
       To illustrate how our benchmark measure of farm-level TFP contrasts with the plot-level
measure of TFP we plot the density of farm-level TFP and the density of plot-level TFP
in Figure 8. To assign a unique productivity per plot we used plot-level inputs and plot-
level outputs assuming the same technology used in our benchmark analysis in Section 3.In
particular, the land and labor inputs and the value of output (value added) are available
for each plot of land. The capital stock, however, is slightly more complicated since is
measured at the household level. Furthermore, it is reasonable to assume that the capital
(for example, a plough) of a given household can be used in multiple plots owned by this
household. To assign capital services used in each plot, we assume that plot-level capital
  46
    As in our analysis, in Restuccia and Santaeulàlia-Llopis (2017) the basic unit of production is also the
farm household, not the plot.



                                                     68
        Figure 8: Distributions of Farm- and Plot-Level TFP, Ethiopia ISA 2013/14




                             .6
                       Kernel Density
                        .2   0   .4



                                        -5            0                          5
                                                   Log TFP
                                                Plot Level
                                                Farm (Household) Level

Notes: Distributions of farm-level and plot-level total factor productivity (TFP). The dispersion in plot-
level productivity, represented by the standard deviation of log TFP, is 1.394, whereas for the farm-level
productivity is 0.797.


services are proportional to the size of plots (i.e., a larger plot uses more capital than a
smaller plot).
   Consistently with a large microeconomic development literature, we find a lot of plot-level
variation in productivity, even within farm households. Importantly, not all the plot-level
TFP dispersion shows in our benchmark farm-level measure. Precisely, the dispersion in
plot-level TFP is 75 percent larger than the dispersion in farm-level TFP. In terms of MPLa
and TFPR we also find significantly larger dispersion using the plot-level TFP measures than
the farm-level measures, respectively, 65% and 67% larger. We also find that the extent of
misallocation at the plot level is substantially larger (with efficiency gain of nation-wide
relocation equals to 4.72) than in our benchmark that uses farm-level productivity (with
efficiency gain of nation-wide relocation equals to 2.00). That is, the extent of misallocation
using plot-level variation in TFP is 2.36 larger than the extent of misallocation that uses our
benchmark permanent measure of farm-level TFP.
   Importantly, a key feature of the land institution that we study is the weak connection
between operated land and productivity, reflected in a near zero correlation between farm
land input and farm TFP. Interestingly, this pattern of misallocation is not much different



                                                   69
when characterized at the plot level.47 This implies that the reallocation gains are magnified
at the plot level compared with household level reallocations simply because of the larger
dispersion in plot-level TFP.
    Finally, regarding our analysis of the effects of land markets on resource allocation and
productivity, notice that it is unfeasible to conduct our difference-in-difference analysis at
the plot level because the ISA data does not provide us with panel dimension for plots.




  47
     Similarly, the correlation between log TFPR and log TFP is 0.92 when the unit of production is the plot
and 0.87 when the unit of production is the farm household.


                                                    70
