NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOCIOECONOMIC STATUS AND MACROECONOMIC EXPECTATIONS
Sreyoshi Das
Camelia M. Kuhnen
Stefan Nagel
Working Paper 24045
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24045

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

Funding for this paper was provided solely by the universities where the authors of the paper
have been employed during the development of this work. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sreyoshi Das, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Socioeconomic Status and Macroeconomic Expectations
Sreyoshi Das, Camelia M. Kuhnen, and Stefan Nagel
NBER Working Paper No. 24045
November 2017
JEL No. E03,E71,G02,G4,G41
ABSTRACT
We show that individuals' macroeconomic expectations are influenced by their socioeconomic
status (SES). People with higher income or higher education are more optimistic about future
macroeconomic developments, including business conditions, the national unemployment rate,
and stock market returns. The spread in beliefs between high- and low-SES individuals
diminishes significantly during recessions. A comparison with professional forecasters and
historical data reveals that the beliefs wedge reflects excessive pessimism on the part of low-SES
individuals. SES-driven expectations help explain why higher-SES individuals are more inclined
to invest in the stock market and more likely to consider purchasing homes, durable goods, or
cars.
Sreyoshi Das
201 Sage Hall
S.C. Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
sreyoshi.das@cornell.edu
Camelia M. Kuhnen
University of North Carolina
Kenan-Flagler Business School
300 Kenan Center Drive, MC #4407
Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER
camelia_kuhnen@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Stefan Nagel
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
stefan.nagel@chicagobooth.edu

1

Introduction

Individuals’ choices of consumption, saving, and investment depend on expectations about future macroeconomic conditions. As Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003), Souleles (2004), Puri and
Robinson (2007), Dominitz and Manski (2007) and others have shown, there is substantial disagreement between individuals in their forecasts. Such heterogeneity can have important effects on asset
prices and macroeconomic dynamics (e.g., Sims (2008), Geanakoplos (2009), Piazzesi and Schneider
(2012), Guzman and Stiglitz (2015)). Consumption and investment choices induced by differences
in beliefs further may have welfare consequences (Brunnermeier, Simsek, and Xiong (2014)). Yet
the origins of this disagreement are still not well understood.
In this paper, we show that heterogeneity in macroeconomic expectations is associated with
individuals’ socioeconomic status (SES), measured by income and education. Our empirical analysis
is motivated by experimental evidence. Kuhnen and Miu (2017) find that experimental subjects
coming from low-SES backgrounds are more pessimistic about the payoff distributions of risky
assets relative to high-SES subjects. Moreover, this gap in expectations between low and high-SES
individuals’ beliefs arises after good news about the payoff distribution is revealed in the experiment,
but not after bad news. We build on this experimental work by analyzing the relationship between
people’s SES and their degree of optimism about the macroeconomy, as well as the dynamics
of beliefs over the business cycle. We use monthly data spanning almost four decades from the
Michigan Survey of Consumers (MSC).
To guide the empirical analysis, we propose a variant of the local thinking framework of Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010) that reproduces the experimental evidence we build on. As in Gennaioli,
Shleifer, and Vishny (2012) we assume that a local thinker neglects states of the world that she does
not view as representative. In line with the experimental evidence, we hypothesize that personal
economic circumstances influence which states—good or bad ones—people view as representative.
This yields a pessimism bias for people with low SES. Moreover, again in line with the experimental evidence, we hypothesize that low-SES individuals are more prone to local thinking than
high-SES individuals.1 We show that this leads to a pro-cyclical wedge in beliefs between high and
1

See Kuhnen and Miu (2017) for references to psychology and neuroscience literature that supports this hypothesis.

1

low-SES individuals: the relative pessimism of low-SES individuals is most pronounced following
good macroeconomic news.
We start by examining SES-related unconditional heterogeneity in expectations regarding future
stock market returns, the national unemployment rate, and general business conditions. We find
that within virtually every month during our almost four-decade sample, for each one of those
expectations measures, and for both income rank within year-age groups and education as SES
measures, high-SES respondents in the survey are more optimistic than low-SES respondents. These
differences in beliefs are substantial, even after controlling for other demographic characteristics,
age effects, and time fixed effects. For example, moving from the bottom to the top income quintile
implies a change in macroeconomic optimism that is about the same magnitude as a third of
a typical peak-to-trough movement over the business cycle in the monthly average beliefs in the
Michigan Survey. Having a college degree corresponds to a belief difference of about 6% of a typical
peak-to-trough movement.
We then turn to the business-cycle dynamics of the beliefs wedge between high and low-SES
people. We show that the wedge is pro-cyclical. During recessions the macroeconomic expectations
of high and low-SES individuals are quite similar, but the wedge widens substantially in times of
good macroeconomic performance. Thus, there is a remarkable consistency in the behavior of the
beliefs wedge in our long sample of survey data and in the experimental evidence that motivates
our analysis.
Furthermore, the variant of the local thinking model we have set up was based on the assumption that low-SES individuals are more prone to local thinking shaped by personal economic
circumstances than high-SES individuals. This implies that high-SES individuals should make forecasts that are, on average, closer to an objective forecast than low-SES individuals. We test this
implication by comparing the macroeconomic expectations from the MSC with matched forecasts
from the Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF) and, for beliefs about future stock returns in the
MSC, with long-run historical realizations of stock market index returns. Based on these proxies
for objective forecasts, we find that forecasts of high-SES individuals are, indeed, less biased based
than those of low-SES individuals.

2

Having established the basic facts about the unconditional and the dynamic properties of SESrelated heterogeneity in macroeconomic expectations, we examine in more detail the mechanism
that leads to the correlation between SES and macroeconomic beliefs. A potential alternative
theory to our baseline hypothesis of a causal effect of SES on macroeconomic expectations is that
that there is an underlying fixed personal characteristic—e.g., vulnerability to depression—that
causes both general pessimism as well as poor economic choices that lead to low SES (see, e.g.,
Puri and Robinson (2007)). Relatedly, one could worry about reverse causality where pessimism
causes economic choices that subsequently lead to low SES. However, using the panel sub-sample
of the MSC in which respondents are re-interviewed once after six months we can difference out
unobserved fixed personal characteristics. Doing so, we still find a strong positive relationship
between changes in income and changes in macroeconomic optimism. These differenced results
also make clear that a reverse causality story is unlikely to explain our results because a potentially
plausible effect of beliefs changes on SES changes would take much longer than a few months
to materialize. Furthermore, using the full MSC sample, we find that respondents who report a
recent positive change in their personal financial situation or receipt of good economic news, as
well as those who reside in geographic areas with positive recent changes in economic conditions
have more optimistic macroeconomic beliefs. These proxies for experienced changes absorb part
of the explanatory power of the SES level variables. Taken together, all of these results indicate
that macroeconomic beliefs are responsive to recent changes in individuals’ perceived economic
circumstances, which does not fit well with fixed effects or reverse causality stories.
As a final step in our analysis, we show that differences in beliefs associated with individuals’ socioeconomic standing help explain their economic behavior. Since the MSC offers data on
beliefs about macroeconomic conditions, as well as information about respondents’ actual or intended choices, such as stock market investment decisions and attitudes towards purchasing homes,
durables or cars, we can quantify the effect of SES through the beliefs channel on these choices. We
find that, while SES measures like income or education on their own directly predict the interest
in investing in stocks, or buying homes, durables, or cars, there exist indirect effects of income and
education through the belief channel that account for a significant fraction of the total effect of the

3

SES variables on these decisions—for example, close to 25% in the case of home buying attitudes.
We also specifically analyze stock market investment decisions and beliefs regarding stock returns
in particular, and show that SES-induced beliefs account for a significant fraction, up to 47%, of
the total effect of the SES variables, namely, income and education, on the decision to invest, and
on the share of income invested in equities.
Therefore, the results in this paper can help shed light on the empirical pattern documented by
Vissing-Jorgensen (2003), Campbell (2006) and Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2007) that households with lower education, income or wealth are substantially less likely to participate in the stock
market. The causes of non-participation are still unclear. Standard explanations involve participation costs (Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)), but they still appear to leave a substantial part of the
non-participation unexplained (Andersen and Nielsen (2011)). Our findings indicate that beliefs
could be part of the explanation for why some individuals do not participate: whatever the actual
cost or perceived cost of participation, pessimistic expectations lead to lower perceived benefits
from participation and hence to low rates of participation of low-SES individuals.
Stock market non-participation can imply welfare losses for households, as discussed in Calvet,
Campbell, and Sodini (2007). Thus, low macroeconomic expectations can have welfare consequence
for low-SES individuals. Moreover, non-participation of low-SES households could result in heterogeneity in wealth returns that is correlated with the level of wealth, which in turn plays a role
in generating wealth inequality (Favilukis (2013), Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016)). By limiting their investment opportunity set, the pessimistic low-SES households may perpetuate their
disadvantaged financial position.
Pessimistic expectations about future business conditions or unemployment could further induce
individuals from low-SES backgrounds to have low levels of investments along other dimensions also,
such as pursuing higher education, better health, or starting a new business. While there is no
direct evidence for this implication of our work, existing relevant findings seem to support it. For
example, Kearney and Levine (2016) document that children from lower SES families are more
likely to drop out of high school, relative to their better-off peers, and attribute this to more
pessimistic subjective estimates of the likelihood of economic success among lower SES individuals.

4

In this sense, our results also connect to the theory of Piketty (1995) in which individuals draw
on the personal economic experience of their family dynasties to form beliefs about the returns to
effort in the economy.
Our work on macroeconomic expectations builds on earlier work that is focused on stock return
beliefs. Kezdi and Willis (2011) document links between income and education and stock market
return beliefs using a sample of 55- to 64-year olds from the Health and Retirement Study. Their
estimation is based on a single survey wave from 2002. Kuhnen and Miu (2017) complement their
experimental work with evidence on SES-related stock return beliefs heterogeneity based on a single Qualtrics survey cross-section. Our finding in this paper that SES-related beliefs heterogeneity
is subject to strong business cycle dynamics—with the beliefs wedge between high and low-SES
individuals almost disappearing during recessions—highlights that it is important to study samples with a much longer time dimension. Moreover, we show that SES variables are related to
macroeconomic expectations more generally, not just stock return expectations.
Our work is further related to an emerging literature showing that individuals’ macroeconomic
expectations are influenced by personal circumstances that are specific to an individual or a group of
people. While our focus is on an individual’s current economic situation, which is strongly influenced
by a person’s history of idiosyncratic shocks and initial conditions, earlier work has found links
between the macroeconomic history that individuals of a given cohort have experienced, and their
expectations and investment decisions. Individuals in cohorts that experienced bad macroeconomic
conditions subsequently avoid risky financial choices, either as investors (Malmendier and Nagel
(2011)) or as managers (Malmendier and Tate (2005), Malmendier, Tate, and Yan (2011)). Evidence
in support of this belief channel is provided by Malmendier and Nagel (2015), who find that
differences in inflation experiences across cohorts strongly predict differences in the expectations
of these cohorts regarding future inflation levels. Experimental evidence in Kuhnen (2015) shows
that individuals faced with sequences of negative payoffs form overly pessimistic beliefs about the
quality of the available investments. Kuchler and Zafar (2016) show that individuals’ expectations
about national U.S. house prices depend on their personally experienced house price history in
their local geographic area, and expectations about the national unemployment rate are influenced

5

by personal experiences of unemployment.2 A common thread in these studies is that expectations
about a macroeconomic variable (e.g., house prices) are related to personal experiences of the
realized cohort-specific or geographically local history of the same variable. In contrast, the effect
that we study is one where a person’s own economic situation is correlated with a broad range of
macroeconomic expectations.

2

Socioeconomic Status and Macroeconomic Beliefs

Our empirical work is motivated by the experimental evidence in Kuhnen and Miu (2017). To set
the stage for the empirical analysis, we illustrate the key ideas with a simple model based on the
“local thinking” framework of Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010) and Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny
(2012). The model allows us to draw connections between heterogeneity in macroeconomic beliefs,
the experimental evidence, and the notion that personal experiences influence the formation of
expectations, as in Malmendier and Nagel (2011) and other recent work.
Let the trinomial random variable ωt ∈ {−1, 0, 1} represent the current latent state of the
macroeconomy. For simplicity, we assume that ωt is IID. Every period t, individuals observe a
signal st ∈ {0, 1} about the current latent state. This signal is IID over time conditional on ωt and
the distribution of st conditional on ωt is shown in the following table:
st = 0

st = 1

ωt = 1

1-π

π

ωt = 0

1/2

1/2

π

1-π

ωt = −1

We assume 1/2 ≤ π ≤ 1. With π = 1/2, the signal is completely uninformative, with π = 1 it
reaches its maximum informativeness (but is not perfectly informative about the state). From this
table, it is straightforward to derive the probabilities of the state conditional on the signal.
2

Amonlirdviman (2007) documents that people with low income or education are more pessimistic about their
own personal situation, and presents a model where these individuals suffer from low self-control, and the optimal
response to self-control problems is to become defensively pessimistic about one’s future prospects.

6

A rational individual would then estimate the state as
4
2
E[ωt |st = 1] = π − ,
3
3
2 4
E[ωt |st = 0] = − π
3 3

(1)

Now consider a local thinker. In Gennaioli and Shleifer (2010), an agent combines data received
from the external world with information retrieved from memory to evaluate a hypothesis, with
limited and selected recall of information. People can only envision a limited number of scenarios,
and those that do come to mind are more representative, or stereotypical, for these individuals.
As in Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2012), we assume that a local thinker neglects some states
of the world when forming expectations about the macroeconomy; only states that she regards as
representative come to mind. Gennaioli, Shleifer, and Vishny (2015) suggest that the states that
come to mind are those that are similar to recently observed data. Here we explore a variation of this
idea. We analyze a local thinker whose views about the possible states of the economy are influenced
by her own personal economic circumstances and experiences. The notion that individuals rely
on personal experiences when forming macroeconomic expectations is related to the findings in
Malmendier and Nagel (2011), but they analyze how personal macroeconomic experiences influence
macroeconomic expectations. In contrast, here we study the influence of individuals’ microeconomic
situation on their macroeconomic expectations.
Consider an individual with currently low socioeconomic status. On average, such an individual
has accumulated relatively unfavorable experiences in the past. Moreover, the individual is currently
in a relatively disadvantageous economic situation. We assume that these bad experiences lead the
individual to ignore the possibility that the good state, ωt = 1, could arise. As a consequence, the
local thinker perceives the following signal distribution:

ωt = 0
ωt = −1

st = 0

st = 1

1/2

1/2

π

1-π

The complete neglect of the good state is an extreme assumption that yields particularly stark
7

and simple results, but this is not crucial. A skewed tilt towards worse states would result in
qualitatively similar results.
Given the neglect of the good state, the local thinker estimates the underlying state of the
economy as follows:
1−π
,
3/2 − π
π
E P [ωt |st = 0] = −
1/2 + π

E P [ωt |st = 1] = −

(2)

Comparing (2) with (1) one can show that
• the local thinker is always more pessimistic.
• the wedge in beliefs between a rational individual and the low-SES local thinker is biggest
following good signals, i.e.,

E P [ωt |st = 1] − E[ωt |st = 1] < E P [ωt |st = 0] − E[ωt |st = 0].

(3)

The intuition for the second result is that the size of the wedge depends on the importance (in
terms of probability) of the neglected state. Following a bad signal, the neglected good state is less
likely and hence the error from neglecting it is smaller. In the extreme case, with π = 1, the error
would be zero and the local thinker would agree with a rational individual following a bad signal.
Following a good signal, however, the good state is important and neglect of this state induces a
big error.
In line with these predictions, we conduct our empirical analysis of macroeconomic expectations
in two steps:
1. We examine whether socioeconomic status is unconditionally related to individuals’ relative
optimism in macroeconomic expectations. In doing so, we look for the empirical counterpart—
in terms of macroeconomic expectations—to the experimental evidence in Kuhnen and Miu
(2017) that low-SES people are more pessimistic.
8

2. We explore whether low-SES individuals are more prone to local thinking of the type we
sketched above. If low-SES individuals are more prone to local thinking than high-SES
individuals, we should find, according to (3), a pro-cyclical beliefs wedge between high- and
low-SES individuals’ expectations. A time-varying wedge of this kind would be consistent
with experimental evidence in Kuhnen and Miu (2017) that low-SES people update their
beliefs asymmetrically in response to news. Faced with good news, they update their beliefs
less than high-SES people do. In contrast, faced with bad news, high and low-SES people
updated in a similar way. Moreover, we should then also find that the expectations of highSES individuals are, on average, less biased than those of low-SES individuals. We examine
both of these predictions.
An alternative model based on ambiguity aversion could potentially produce observationally
equivalent predictions for individuals’ economic choices. Ambiguity aversion induces an individual
to make choices as if she were pessimistic (Hansen and Sargent (2001)) and ambiguity about signal
precision can induce an asymmetric reaction to news (Epstein and Schneider (2008)). To the extent
that low-SES individuals are more ambiguity averse—perhaps, along the lines of Heath and Tversky
(1991), because they feel less competent than high-SES individuals in judging the macroeconomic
outlook—this could explain why low-SES individuals make choices as if they were pessimistic.
However, unlike the local thinking model above, the ambiguity aversion model does not make clear
predictions for the beliefs that individuals report in a survey. In ambiguity aversion models, the
decision-maker entertains a range of beliefs and makes decisions to maximize utility under the
worst-case scenario from this range of beliefs. But this does not imply that the individual would
report the beliefs associated with the worst-case scenario when asked about her expectations in
a survey. Bhandari, Borovička, and Ho (2016), for example, assume so, but this is an additional
assumption that does not follow from ambiguity aversion theory.

9

3

Data

Our data span the period 1978-2014, at a monthly frequency. Each month, approximately 400
individuals are recruited for the Michigan Survey of Consumers, and are asked to express their
beliefs about future values of several macroeconomic variables. The survey is based on a nationally
representative group of respondents, sampled using landline and cellular phone numbers (Curtin
and Dechaux (2015)). In our analysis, we weight observations with the household sample weights
provided by the MSC. These sample weights adjust, among other things, for differential nonresponse by demographic characteristics.3
Table 1: Data Definitions
Variable

Description

PSTK

Percent Chance of
Invest Increase 1
Year

BEXP

Economy
ter/Worse
Year

BUS12

Economy
Good/Bad
12 Months

BetNext

Next

Source

Values

% Chance of investment increase in 1 year: What do
you think is the percent chance
that a one thousand dollar investment in a diversified stock
mutual fund will increase in
value in the year ahead, so
that it is worth more than one
thousand dollars one year from
now?
And how about a year from
now, do you expect that in the
country as a whole business
conditions will be better, or
worse than they are at present,
or just about the same?
Now turning to business conditions in the country as a
whole–do you think that during the next 12 months we’ll
have good times financially, or
bad times, or what?

0 - 100%. Only
available during
2002-2014.

Better a year from
now
About the same
Worse a year from
now

Good times
Good with qualifications
Pro-con
Bad with qualifications
Bad times
Continued on next page...

3
Curtin, Presser, and Singer (2002) investigate the role of survey non-response on expectations collected by the
MSC, and find that demographic characteristics, including income and education, do not have sizeable effects on
the probability of agreeing to be part of the survey. Moreover, the authors find no evidence that the likelihood of
participating in the survey is a function of the respondents’ macroeconomic optimism.

10

... table 1 continued
Variable
Description
BUS5

Economy
Good/Bad Next 5
Years

UNEMP

Unemployment
More/Less Next
Year

1-Yr
Change
in
Personal
Finances

Personal Finances
Relative to A Year
Ago

County unemployment
County
personal income
Invest

Bureau of Labor
Statistics
Bureau of Economic Analysis
Invest in equities

Invest Share

Overall amount
invested in equities, relative to
current
annual
income
Home Buying Attitude

HOM

DUR

Durables Buying
Attitude

CAR

Car Buying Attitude

Source

Values

Looking ahead, which would
you say is more likely – that
in the country as a whole we’ll
have continuous good times
during the next 5 years or so,
or that we will have periods of
widespread unemployment or
depression, or what?
How about people out of work
during the coming 12 months
–do you think that there will
be more unemployment than
now, about the same, or less?
Would you say that you are
better off or worse off financially than you were a year
ago?
County
Unemployment,
Monthly
County Income/Capita, Annual
Do you have stock investments?
Defined as ln (Amt Invested/Income), if Invest=1

Good times
Good with qualifications
Pro-con
Bad with qualifications
Bad times

Generally speaking, do you
think now is a good time or a
bad time to buy a house?
Generally speaking, do you
think now is a good or a bad
time for people to buy major
household items?
Speaking now of the automobile market –do you think the
next 12 months or so will be a
good time or a bad time to buy
a vehicle, such as a car, pickup,
van, or sport utility vehicle?

Good
Pro-Con
Bad
Good
Pro-Con
Bad

11

More unemployment
About the same
Less
unemployment
Better now
Same
Worse now

Yes
No

Good
Pro-Con
Bad

In total, there are 189,590 person-month observations in our sample. The macro belief variables
we study are P ST K, BU S12, BU S5, BEXP and U N EM P . Table 1 presents the survey questions used to measure the belief variables, and the respondents’ possible answers. P ST K is the
respondent’s subjective probability that the US stock market will have a positive return over the
next 12 months. BUS12, BU S5 and BEXP measure expectations about the evolution of the overall
business environment over the following 12 months or 5 years, and UNEMP measures expectations
about the evolution of the national unemployment rate over the following 12 months. We rescale the
belief variables except P ST K to vary between -1 to 1, and we set the sign such that higher values
imply optimism. To calculate an aggregate measure of macroeconomic optimism, we standardize each of these individual beliefs, and average the standardized values. Because P ST K is only
available starting in June 2002, OP T IN DX is the average of four standardized beliefs (BU S12,
BU S5, BEXP and U N EM P ) prior to that time, and it is the average of five standardized beliefs
(BU S12, BU S5, BEXP , U N EM P , and P ST K) after that month.
One could be concerned with the inclusion of PSTK in our OPTINDX measure because the
PSTK-related question is worded in a way that may be difficult for an average respondent to understand. Relatedly, stock market beliefs may be inherently different from other macroeconomic
beliefs because investing in equities could be an unfamiliar or irrelevant topic for some households.
Moreover, a data-driven weighting of the 5 belief measures in OPTINDX may be preferable instead
of simply equally weighting them. In unreported results we experiment with alternative specifications of OPTINDX. In one case we exclude PSTK from our index; in another, we use the first
principal component weights to construct our OPTINDX. We find that these alternative constructions of the OPTINDX measure yield qualitatively similar results, both in terms of point estimates
and significance in our main regressions.
We choose income and education as indicators of the socioeconomic status of households. We
restrict our analysis to individuals 24- to 75-years old, because income or college degree completion
may not be meaningful SES measures for very old or very young adults. Next we create percentiles
of real income (in 2014 dollars) within each year and age group (25-29, 30-34, .. 70-74), which we
then divide by 100 and label Income rank. Therefore, a change of one percentile implies an income

12

Table 2: Summary Statistics
Expectations data are collected monthly during 1978-2014, with the exception of PSTK (stock market
expectations), which is available only during 2002-2014.

OPTINDX
PSTK
BUS12
BUS5
BEXP
UNEMP
Income Rank
College Degree
1-Yr Change in Personal Finances
County Unemployment Rate
County Personal Income (Real $)
Invest
Annual income (Real $)
Amt Inv(Real $)
Log(Amt Inv(Real $))
Log(Inv share)
HOM
DUR
CAR

N
189590
56821
173504
178834
186249
187984
189590
189590
189223
68548
68563
78825
189590
43168
43168
43168
186318
180019
180065

Mean
0.008
0.483
-0.014
-0.084
0.075
-0.195
0.476
0.341
0.057
6.419
43360
0.622
69926
232604
11.207
-0.157
0.384
0.466
0.307

Median
0.044
0.500
0.000
-0.500
0.000
0.000
0.47
0.000
0.000
5.800
41142
1.000
57591
80654
11.298
-0.077
1.000
1.000
1.000

StdDev
0.733
0.293
0.964
0.861
0.694
0.694
0.288
0.474
0.848
2.616
12211
0.485
61256
605282
1.591
1.402
0.913
0.858
0.936

Min
-1.540
0.000
-1.000
-1.000
-1.000
-1.000
0.01
0.000
-1.000
1.100
15119
0.000
1.6
985
6.893
-5.565
-1.000
-1.000
-1.000

Max
1.771
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
31.200
139516
1.000
1041090
14612452
16.497
5.085
1.000
1.000
1.000

rank change of 0.01. We use this as one the socioeconomic status variables because relative income
compared to peers may matter more than dollar income, but we obtain broadly similar effects if we
use dollar income rather than income rank. College Degree is a binary variable which takes value
1 if the respondent has at least a college degree.
To measure recent changes in an individual’s personal economic situation, we use the variable 1yr Change in Personal Situation, provided in the Michigan survey for each respondent, which takes
values -1, 0 or 1 if the individual reports being worse off, the same, or better-off than a year ago,
in terms of their personal finances. For a more objective measure of changes in the individual’s
economic environment, we use data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics on the unemployment
level and data on per-capita income from Bureau of Economic Analysis of the county where the
respondent resides.4
4

Because the county of residence is not publicly available in the Michigan survey, we had the county-level infor-

13

Table 2 presents summary statistics for the variables that capture the personal economic situation, beliefs, and household economic choices of the individuals in the sample. In our data, 34.1%
of people have completed at least a college degree. The median real household income (in 2014
dollars) of the participants in the survey is $57,591, but there are clear outliers in the income distribution, as can be seen in Table 2. The average value for the overall amount a person has invested
in equities as of the time of the survey is about 85% of the annual income of that individual.
Given the construction of the aggregate belief measure OP T IN DX as a mean of standardized
variables, in our sample spanning 1978-2014 the average OP T IN DX is close to zero. The average
estimates for BU S12 and BU S5, which are beliefs regarding whether there will be good or bad
economic times over the next 12 months or 5 year, are -0.014 and -0.084, respectively. Given that
the scale for these two variables spans -1 to 1, these averages indicate that expectations about
future economic times have not been overly pessimistic or overly optimistic during the 37 years
studied here. The same holds true for BEXP , the belief regarding general business conditions over
the next year, whose average in the sample is 0.075. The belief regarding whether unemployment
will be lower or higher over the next year, U N EM P , has the most negative sample average, -0.195,
indicating that survey participants were the most pessimistic about this particular aspect of future
economic conditions. During 2002-2014, the time frame for which this measure is available, the
average estimate of P ST K, the probability that the U.S. stock market would have a positive return
in the next 12 months, is 48.3%, with a standard deviation of 29.3%.
We also use several variables that capture the individuals’ decisions regarding stock market
investments, namely whether they invest in equity (Invest), as well as the share of income invested
in the stock market (Invest Share), and their attitudes at the time of the survey towards buying a
home (HOM ), buying durables (DU R) or cars (CAR). About 62% of individuals in our sample
participate in the stock market, and on average responses regarding whether it is a good time to
purchase a home, durables or cars are positive. For example, the variable HOM , which can take
mation merged in by the staff who oversee this survey, but the resulting dataset that we can use does not have the
actual county identifiers. The county level data could only be merged in for MSC observations during 2000-2014.
The merging is done such that the county unemployment level is as of the month preceeding the survey and the
county per-capita income is as of the year preceeding the survey. This is done to reflect the most current information
available to the respondents.

14

values of -1, 0 or 1, indicating either negative, neutral or positive attitudes towards buying a home,
has an average of 0.384, and thus is more tilted towards the positive end of the response scale.

4

Expectations Heterogeneity by Socioeconomic Status

4.1

Beliefs and SES

We start by examining differences in macroeconomic expectations by SES, measured along the
dimensions of income and education. Figure 1 plots the monthly average values of our optimism
index, OPTINDX, for individuals in the highest and lowest income quintiles (in their respective
age groups) from 1978 to 2014. The figure shows that there is a remarkably persistent wedge in
beliefs between high- and low-SES individuals: In almost every month during the sample period,
individuals with higher income or higher education had more optimistic macroeconomic expectations.
Moreover, the disagreement between households of different SES is pro-cyclical. During recessions, it shrinks to close to zero. This pro-cyclicality of the wedge is consistent with the prediction
we discussed in Section 2 for the case in which low-SES individuals are more prone of local thinking
based on extrapolation from personal economic circumstances than high-SES individuals.
Among the different macroeconomic expectations variables, we are particularly interested in
beliefs about future stock market returns, as we have the most direct measures of closely related
economic decisions—stock market investments—for this type of belief. Figure 2 plots the monthly
averages of PSTK, individuals’ stated probability that the US stock market will have a positive
return over the following 12 months, for high- and low-SES groups. As the figure shows, the time
series of the PSTK beliefs wedge looks very similar to the wedge in OPTINDX that we examined
earlier: High-SES individuals are more optimistic than low-SES individuals in virtually every month
throughout the whole sample in which PSTK is available and the wedge is pro-cyclical.
In the Appendix, we document that there exists an SES-induced wedge in beliefs for each
component of the optimism index OPTINDX (in addition to P ST K), namely, BU S5, BU S12,
BEXP and U N EM P , and that recessions lead to a lower SES-related gap for each of these types

15

Figure 1: Macroeconomic optimism during 1978-2014 by SES level. Monthly data. Income quintiles
are defined within year-age groups. Shaded areas represent NBER recession periods.

16

Figure 2: Stock market expectations during 2002-2014 by SES level. Expectations refer to individuals’ stated probability that the US stock market will have a positive return over the following
12 months. Monthly data. Income quintiles are defined within year-age groups. Shaded areas
represent NBER recession periods.

17

Table 3: Macroeconomic Expectations, Socioeconomic Status, and the Business Cycle
The table presents OLS regressions with macroeconomic expectations as the dependent variable (where
higher values indicate optimism). OPTINDX : Overall macroeconomic optimism index; PSTK: Probability
of stock market gain in next 1 year; BUS12: Financially good times in next 12 months; BUS5: Financially
good times in next 5 years; BEXP: Overall business environment in next 1 year; UNEMP: Unemployment
increase/decrease in next 1 year. Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital status.
Standard errors are clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

OPTINDX
0.304
(30.06)

PSTK
0.164
(28.02)

BUS12
0.317
(23.87)

BUS5
0.392
(34.85)

BEXP
0.133
(14.31)

UNEMP
0.141
(13.76)

College Degree

0.058
(10.42)

0.072
(23.75)

0.021
(3.34)

0.083
(14.93)

0.019
(3.76)

0.029
(5.53)

Recession × Income Rank

-0.076
(-2.57)

-0.053
(-2.58)

-0.242
(-7.21)

-0.067
(-2.28)

0.094
(3.00)

-0.110
(-3.53)

Recession × College Degree

-0.039
(-3.16)

-0.016
(-2.25)

-0.067
(-4.44)

-0.025
(-1.77)

0.012
(0.90)

-0.054
(-4.69)

Observations
Adjusted R2

188614
0.115

56747
0.114

172646
0.136

177951
0.082

185310
0.052

187032
0.071

Income Rank

of macroeconomic expectations.
Table 3 presents these results more formally in terms of a regression. Dependent variables
in the models in the table are measures of macroeconomic expectations: the aggregate optimism
measure OP T IN DX in the first column, and its separate components in the following five columns.
Independent variables include the person’s income rank as a percentile (defined with respect to
the person’s year-age group), an indicator for whether the person has a college degree or higher
education, and interactions of an NBER recession indicator with the two SES measures. All the
regressions in the paper also include fixed effects for the year-month of the survey, as well as
indicators for the respondents’ age, gender, and marital status. The standard errors are clustered
by time, specifically by year-month.
In line with the patterns seen in the figures, Table 3 shows that people’s SES characteristics are
highly significant predictors of their beliefs regarding future macroeconomic conditions (P ST K,

18

BU S12, BU S5, BEXP , U N EM P ), as well as of their aggregate optimism index OP T IN DX.
For each of our five measures of beliefs, we find that having a higher income rank among people in
the same age category and in the same year, and having a college degree are significant predictors
of the level of optimism in the respondents’ expectations. When the dependent variable captures
expectations about future stock market returns (P ST K), we find that during non-recession months,
for an increase from the bottom to the top most rank of respondents’ income, the probability they
estimate for the U.S. stock market to have a positive return over the next year increases by 16.4%.
People with at least a college degree, on average believe that the probability of positive stock market
return is 7.2% higher than people without a college education.
Similarly, we find that during non-recession months, those with higher SES have significantly
more optimistic expectations for BU S12, BU S5, BEXP , U N EM P and have higher values for
the overall belief measure OP T IN DX. For example, an increase of a person’s income rank from
bottom to top most rank leads to an average increase of 0.304 in OPTINDX. In other words, a
change of 20 percentile (or, 1 quintile) in income rank leads to and increase of 0.304x0.2= 0.06 in
OPTINDX. Having a college degree has a similar effect, as it leads to an increase in OPTINDX of
0.058. All of these effects are statistically significant at p < 0.05 or better.
Judging economic significance is not quite straightforward as the survey-based beliefs measures
we use as dependent variables have quite substantial measurement noise, including occasionally
non-sensical outliers. One way to gauge the economic significance is to compare the cross-sectional
variation related to the SES variables with typical business cycle time-variation in the macroeconomic belief variables. Based on Figure 1 we can see that OPTINDX averaged across high and low
income moves, at the most extreme, by about one unit from peak-to-trough during the business
cycle. In comparison, focusing on non-recession months (i.e., ignoring the interaction term for
now) the regression results in Table 3 imply that moving from the bottom percentile of the income distribution to the top percentile changes OPTINDX by a third, i.e., by about a third of the
peak-to-trough movement in OPTINDX. Having a college degree implies a change of about 6% of
peak-to-trough OPTINDX. For PSTK, the typical peak-to-through movement in Figure 2 is about
0.30, and so a change from the lowest to the highest income percentile implies a change in PSTK

19

of a little more than half this amount. A change in the college education status implies a change
in PSTK of about a quarter of the peak-to-trough movement. This comparison to business-cycle
variation shows that the SES-related heterogeneity in expectations is substantial and economically
significant.
The regression results in Table 3 further show that the size of the beliefs wedge between high- and
low-SES individuals is state-dependent. Consistent with Figures 1 and 2, the coefficient estimates
on the interaction terms of the NBER recession indicator and either SES measure show that the
SES-related wedge in expectations is significantly smaller during recessions. In the case of education,
the effect of a college degree on OPTINDX is two thirds smaller during recessions (instead of 0.058,
it is 0.058-0.039, or 0.019). The effect of income percentile rank is a quarter smaller (instead of
0.304 it is 0.304-0.076, or 0.228) during recessions, although Figure 1 shows that the wedge even
completely disappeared between the lowest and highest income quintiles for a few months during
the last three recessions.
Our analysis so far has documented two broad empirical patterns: first, lower SES people hold
more pessimistic macroeconomic beliefs, and second, during recessions the difference in macroeconomic beliefs between those with high and low SES diminishes considerably. These findings are
consistent with the simple model we sketched in Section 2 in which individuals are prone local
thinking shaped by their own personal circumstances and experiences and in which this tendency
for local thinking is particularly strong for low-SES individuals.

4.2

Heterogeneity in forecast bias

An additional implication of the specific local thinking framework we set up on in Section 2 is that
high-SES individuals’ forecasts should, on average, be closer to the “truth.” We now examine this
prediction. This is not quite a straightforward exercise, though.
First, it is not clear what the “truth”—i.e., the rational forecast—is. With learning about
parameters and model uncertainty, we, as econometricians, do not have knowledge of the true
model of macroeconomic dynamics. We deal with this issue by taking the median from the Survey
of Professional Forecasters (SPF) as our benchmark forecasts. These are arguably among the most

20

sophisticated macroeconomic forecasts available.5 The SPF does not have one-year stock market
return forecasts, so we need a different benchmark for PSTK. We assume that stock returns are
close to unpredictable, and so we use an estimate of the unconditional probability of a positive
12-month stock market returns as benchmark. We estimate it based on the fraction of positive
12-month returns (using overlapping monthly windows) of the CRSP value-weighted index since
1926.
Second, for some of the expectations variables in the Michigan Survey, there is no directly
corresponding forecast in the SPF. We deal with this issue as follows:
• UNEMP can be matched with the unemployment forecast in the SPF. Since the Michigan
Survey asks about the change in unemployment over the next 12 months, we compare it with
the difference between the three-quarter ahead forecast, t + 3 of the level of unemployment,
and the end of prior quarter t − 1 “nowcast”6 .
• For the three business conditions variables in the Michigan Survey, BEXP is the one that is
closest to a change in real GDP so we match BEXP with RGDP forecasts in the SPF. BEXP
is based on the question “And how about a year from now, do you expect that in the country
as a whole business conditions will be better, or worse than they are at present, or just about
the same?” (see Table 1). It seems reasonable to think of good business conditions as a
high RGDP growth rate and bad business conditions as a low RGDP growth rate, similar
to typical classifications into recessions and non-recession periods. Therefore, we calculate a
change in the forecasted growth rate of RGDP. Since the SPF contains RGDP level forecasts,
we calculate the average forecasted change in log GDP over the four quarters from the end
of the current quarter t to quarter t + 4 and we subtract the change from the end of the prior
quarter, t − 1 to t.
5

Carroll (2003) compares the time series of mean inflation forecasts from the SPF and the Michigan Survey with
subsequently realized inflation and finds that the SPF forecast has a much smaller mean-squared error than the
Michigan forecast. Croushore (1998) cannot reject unbiasedness of the mean SPF forecast and Mankiw, Reis, and
Wolfers (2003) cannot reject unbiasedness of the median forecast.
6
Using the prior quarter rate from the SPF rather than from published unemployment series avoids the problem
that current versions of the unemployment series have been revised ex-post and do not represent information that
was available in real time.

21

• PSTK is matched to a benchmark computed from realized stock returns as explained above.
The third issue is that the UNEMP and BEXP in the Michigan Survey of Consumers are
categorical and hence do not directly map into the continuous SPF unemployment and RGDP
forecasts. To make them comparable, we discretize the SPF forecast based on the assumption that
any forecasted change in the unemployment rate or the RGDP growth rate within one standard
deviation (calculated over the full sample since 1978) above or below zero corresponds to the “Same”
category for BEXP and UNEMP, while a change above or below corresponds to better or worse
conditions for BEXP and more or less unemployment for UNEMP.
Finally, the SPF is conducted only quarterly, while the Michigan Survey is monthly. The SPF is
carried out in the middle month each quarter. We match the first two Michigan Survey months each
quarter with the SPF from the prior quarter and the Michigan Survey wave from the third month
each quarter to the SPF from the same quarter. Thus, the Michigan Survey is lagged somewhat
relative to the SPF. This seems reasonable, as professionals are presumably faster in noticing and
reacting to very recent information.7
Based on these definitions, we now calculate each month a forecast bias by subtracting from
PSTK, BEXP, and UNEMP, the corresponding value of the professional forecast. We then average
these forecast biases for each (within age group-year) income percentile over the whole sample
period. The results are presented in Figure 3. The plots also include a local linear regression fitted
based on those income percentile averages.
The top panel shows that forecasts of individuals in all income ranks are, on average, too
pessimistic relative to historical stock market performance. But beliefs of high-income individuals
are closest to the historical frequencies. The middle panel presents the average forecast bias for
RGDP. In this case, high-income individuals have forecasts that are on average unbiased while lowincome individuals are too pessimistic. The bottom panel shows that high-income individuals are
close to getting the unemployment forecast right on average, while low-income individuals forecast
an unemployment rate that is too high, i.e., they are again too pessimistic.
In summary, the forecast bias results are consistent with the local thinking framework we set
7

For evidence on this, see Carroll (2003).

22

Figure 3: Average forecast bias by income percentile

23

Table 4: Changes in Macroeconomic Expectations and Changes in Socioeconomic Status: Evidence
from the Panel Sub-Sample
The table presents OLS regressions where the dependent variable is the within-individual change in a specific
macroeconomic expectation and the independent variable of interest is the the within-individual change
in income rank. Changes are calculated over six-month intervals between the two interview dates of the
Michigan Survey panel sub-sample. The regression includes dummies for year-month. Standard errors are
clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

Income Rank change

Observations
Adjusted R2

OPTINDX
0.0719
(3.36)

PSTK
0.0589
(3.07)

BUS12
0.0398
(1.21)

BUS5
0.0622
(2.16)

BEXP
0.0381
(1.58)

UNEMP
0.0711
(2.83)

67287
0.063

20896
0.021

57398
0.056

60807
0.018

65325
0.028

66397
0.033

up on in Section 2. Specifically, the fact that higher-income individuals’ forecasts are closer to the
“truth” is consistent with the notion that they are less prone to local thinking and extrapolation
from their own personal circumstances and experiences than low-income individuals.

4.3

Inspecting the mechanism

So far we have looked for a relationship between the level of SES and macroeconomic expectations.
Our local thinking hypothesis implies a causal effect of SES on beliefs. However, the correlation
between SES and expectations in levels could potentially be explained by alternative theories as
well. One potential alternative theory is that there is an underlying fixed personal characteristic—
e.g., vulnerability to depression—that causes both general pessimism as well as poor economic
choices that lead to low SES. Puri and Robinson (2007), for example, study the economic effects
of dispositional optimism. This type of theory would imply an unobserved person fixed effect.
To address this issue, we use the panel sub-sample of the MSC. While most of the MSC sample
consists of newly sampled respondents each month, a random sub-sample of them are re-interviewed
once six months after the initial interview. We can use this panel structure to difference out
unobserved fixed effects by looking at the relationship between changes in beliefs and changes in
SES.
Specifically, we use this panel dimension to re-run a version of the baseline regressions in Table
24

3 with the dependent variable (expectations) and explanatory variable (income rank) differenced
over the six-month window between the initial interview and the re-interview. As Table 4 shows,
with the change in OPTINDX as the dependent variable, we still obtain a positive coefficient that is
statistically significant. In terms of magnitude, it is about one-fourth of the coefficient in the levels
regression in Table 3, indicating that the change in personal income rank over a short period of six
months accounts for a substantial portion of the levels effect that we identified in Table 3. Given
that measurement noise in SES is magnified when regressions are run with short-run differences,
this is a large effect. Thus, the fixed effects alternative mechanism is at best a partial explanation of
the SES-expectations relationship. The regressions with the individual components of OPTINDX
in the other columns on Table 4 all have positive coefficients on the income rank change and the
difference from zero is statistically significant only for three out of the five variables.
These differenced results also address a potential reverse causality story for our findings. Pessimistic beliefs could perhaps directly cause poor economic choices (e.g., portfolio and human
capital investment decisions) that affect the SES measures that we use as explanatory variables in
our baseline regressions. However, given the differenced panel regression results, this type of story
seems a highly implausible explanation. To the extent that beliefs do affect choices, the effects of
these choices on SES would presumably take much longer than six months to materialize in any
significant way. Therefore, this story is an unlikely explanation for the contemporaneous correlation
of belief changes and SES changes that we find in Table 4.
We can use the full sample of the MSC, without relying the panel structure, to provide further
evidence that recent changes in economic circumstances affect individuals’ expectations. Instead of
direct measures of changes in income, we have to rely, however, on respondents’ statements about
past changes that they recall to have experienced. The survey variable we use for this purpose is
the 1-yr Change in Personal Situation, which can take the values -1, 0 or 1 to indicate whether
people feel their finances have gotten worse, stayed the same, or improved in the past year.
The regressions reported in Table 5 in the second column add this variable to our baseline
regression. Doing so raises the R2 substantially and it lowers the coefficients on income rank by
about a third. Thus, the change in economic situation captured by the added variable absorbs part

25

Table 5: Macroeconomic Expectations and Socioeconomic Status, controlling for Changes to Individuals’ Personal Circumstances
The table presents OLS regressions with the macroeconomic optimism index OPTINDX as the dependent
variable. Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital status. Standard errors are
clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

OPTINDX
0.304
(30.06)

OPTINX
0.214
(22.61)

OPTINDX
2000-2014
0.347
(22.78)

OPTINDX
2000-2014
0.221
(13.69)

College Degree

0.058
(10.42)

0.050
(9.34)

0.112
(13.71)

0.098
(12.35)

Recession × Income Rank

-0.076
(-2.57)

-0.057
(-2.01)

-0.224
(-5.68)

-0.191
(-5.07)

Recession × College Degree

-0.039
(-3.16)

-0.039
(-3.20)

-0.070
(-3.71)

-0.067
(-3.69)

Income Rank

1-yr Change in Personal Situation

0.159
(49.19)

0.184
(31.82)

County Unemployment(%)

-0.004
(-2.72)

County Personal Income(Real, $000)

0.002
(5.11)

Observations
Adjusted R2

188614
0.115

188252
0.145

68450
0.101

68386
0.145

of the SES level effect. While the interpretation is not as clean as in the differenced regression
in Table 4, it would be difficult to explain this strong relationship between OPTINDX and recent
changes in the survey respondents’ personal financial situation under a personal fixed effects or
reverse causality stories.
Finally, our baseline regressions are potentially subject to the concern that individual-specific
variation in mood could lead to spurious correlation between self-reported SES measures and reported macroeconomic beliefs. For example, someone who is depressed at the time of the interview
might report a pessimistic expectation and, at the same time, provide the interviewer with an

26

underestimate of her income. As a consequence, there could be a spurious positive correlation
between income rank and macroeconomic expectation. Our results already indicate to some extent
that this story is unlikely to be important since education, in addition to income rank, also plays
an important role in shaping expectations. While underestimation of income rank by an individual
in a depressed state may be plausible, underreporting of the own education level does not seem
plausible. Nonetheless, a concern about spurious correlation of beliefs and income could remain.
To address this concern, we add local economic condition variables to the regression that are
based on official economic statistics rather than on self-reports by survey respondents. Specifically,
we use county-level data on the unemployment rate (monthly, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics)
and the level of personal income (annually, in December 2014 dollars, from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis) for the 2000-2014 period.8 As Table 5 shows, these local economic condition variables
help explain cross-sectional variation in macroeconomic beliefs. Both are statistically significant,
and in terms of magnitudes a decrease of 0.5% in the local unemployment rate or an increase of
$1,000 in local income have the same effect as a one percentile increase in the personal income rank
of an individual. An alternative approach (untabulated) is to use the local economic conditions
variables as instruments for income rank. Instrumented in this way, income rank still enters the
regression significantly.
Overall, the results in this section are supportive of a causal effect of SES on beliefs. Unobserved
personal fixed effects, reverse causality, and spurious correlation through correlated measurement
error can at most play a partial role, but they cannot be the main reasons for the strong empirical
relationship between SES and macroeconomic expectations.

5

Importance of SES-driven expectations for household choices

The results so far indicate that a person’s socioeconomic situation shapes their beliefs about future
macro-level economic conditions, such that higher SES individuals hold more optimistic beliefs
about future stock returns, unemployment and business conditions. In the next step of the analysis,
8
This merge of the MSC with county-level data cannot be done for times prior to year 2000 since the MSC does
not include county identifiers before 2000.

27

our goal is to quantify the impact of SES, specifically through its influence on beliefs, on households’
economic choices.
It is natural to expect that aspects of a person’s SES will have a direct effect on that person’s
economic choices. For example, higher income individuals or those who are better educated are
likely to be in a better position to invest in stocks relative to lower income individuals, perhaps
because of access to retirement accounts at work, lower participation costs relative to wealth, or
simply because they have money left to save after paying their bills each months. Similarly, higher
SES individuals are less likely to face financial constraints and thus are more likely to consider
purchasing homes, cars or durable goods.
Therefore, the total effect of SES on household choices comes from two sources: (1) the direct
effect of SES on these choices—for example, because higher income leads to easier access to retirement accounts, and (2) the indirect effect of SES on these choices through the belief channel—for
example, because higher SES individuals hold more optimistic beliefs about the distribution of
stock returns, or other macroeconomic developments.
We can measure the relative importance of the direct and indirect effects of SES on people’s
economic choices using the analysis in Table 6. The dependent variables in columns two to six
capture the respondent’s investments in stocks (Invest and InvestShare) and their assessment
that it is a good time to purchase homes, durables or cars (HOM , DU R, CAR). The explanatory
variables include our two SES dimensions (income rank and education), as well as the person’s
aggregate belief about future macroeconomic conditions (OP T IN DX). If beliefs were measured
without error, we could use OLS estimates of the coefficients on OP T IN DX in these regressions
combined with the results from the regression of OP T IN DX on the SES variables in the first
column to calculate how much of the effect of SES on choices is direct (SES ⇒ Choice) and how
much of it is indirect (SES ⇒ Macroeconomic expectations ⇒ Choice).
There is, however, substantial measurement error in OP T IN DX. People’s willingness and
ability to carefully and precisely state their expectations in a survey is arguably limited and their
responses could be influenced by random mood fluctuations that are not substantial and persistent
enough to have consequences for economic choices. This measurement problem is likely much more

28

Table 6: Macroeconomic Expectations, SES, and Household Choices
The table presents IV regressions with the measures of investment choices and attitudes to consumption
decisions as dependent variable in the panel sub-sample. OPTINDX is instrumented with lagged OPTINDX.
Invest: Indicator for investment in equities; Invest Share: Log(Amt Invested/Income); HOM: Home buying
Attitude; DUR: Durables Buying Attitude; CAR: Car Buying Attitude. Controls include dummies for yearmonth, age, gender, and marital status. Standard errors are clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are
shown in parentheses.

Income Rank

OPTINDX
0.324
(24.90)

Invest
0.714
(64.48)

Invest Share
0.296
(5.37)

HOM
0.311
(19.03)

DUR
0.156
(10.15)

CAR
0.263
(16.07)

0.055
(7.70)

0.100
(18.33)

0.280
(13.08)

0.065
(8.53)

-0.010
(-1.32)

0.044
(5.28)

0.057
(9.02)

0.204
(7.59)

0.308
(27.54)

0.312
(28.70)

0.363
(31.92)

32143
0.287

18226
0.228

68492
0.181

66511
0.095

66540
0.084

College Degree

OPTINDX

Observations
Adjusted R2

69593
0.111

severe for a relatively elusive concept like expectations of “general business conditions” than for a
relatively clearly defined concept like family income or education level. In this sense, including a
substantially mis-measured OP T IN DX along with more precisely measured SES variables in the
regression could lead to a severe underestimation of the role of OP T IN DX. Alternatively, rather
than attenuation of the OP T IN DX coefficient, this type of measurement error could also induce
spurious correlation between the choice measures and OP T IN DX if the mood fluctuations of the
survey respondents affect the responses to the choice questions as well.
To address these issues, we return to the panel sub-sample of the MSC and we use each respondent’s lagged OP T IN DX from the prior interview six months earlier as a instrument for current
OPTINDX. This approach eliminates the effects of high-frequency mood fluctuations (e.g., due
to a bad night’s sleep) on survey responses. This approach is also reasonable in the sense that
only persistent beliefs variation (rather than high-frequency fluctuations) should have an effect on
investment decisions and consumption choices. The first stage of these regressions are reported in
the Appendix in Table A1.

29

The direct effects of the two SES measures on household choices are given by the estimated
regression coefficients in the models in Table 6 for each of the two measures. As expected, we
find that higher SES people are more likely to participate in the stock market, invest more money
relative to their income in equities, and are more likely to believe that it is a good time to purchase
homes, cars or durable goods. For example, the regression in the second column in Table 6 shows
that an income rank increase from the bottom to the top most rank corresponds to 71% (p < 0.01)
increase in the probability that the person invests in stocks. This is a large effect, considering that
in our data, as shown in the summary statistics in Table 2, 62% of respondents invest in the stock
market. Individuals with a college or higher education have a 10% (p < 0.01) higher probability
of investing in stocks, compared to those less educated. Similarly, the results in the third column
in Table 6 show that people with higher incomes and a college or higher education, conditional
on investing in equities, have a higher amount of money, expressed as a fraction of their annual
income, invested in stocks.
The regression models in the last three columns in Table 6 show that, in general, both dimensions
of SES are significant and positive predictors of people’s assessment that it is a good time to purchase
a home, or a car or durable goods. For example, having a college or higher education translates
into an improvement of 0.065 (p < 0.01) in the person’s attitude towards buying a home, which
is sizeable, given that the mean of this variable is 0.384 in our sample. The effect of increasing
one’s income rank by one quintile on the attitude towards buying a home is similar in magnitude
(0.311 × 0.2=0.06, p < 0.01) to that of having a college education. When the dependent variable
captures the attitude towards buying durables, or cars, the estimated direct effects of the bottom
to top income rank change are 0.156 and 0.263 respectively (both effects at p < 0.01). The only
exception is that college educated people are not significantly different than those without a college
degree to indicate that it is a good time to purchase durables. For car buying attitude, the direct
effect of college education is an increase of 0.044 (p < 0.01) in attitude.
Since in the regression models in Table 6 we control for the person’s beliefs about future macroeconomic conditions, as measured by their overall optimism, OP T IN DX, the above effects of SES
on the person’s decisions regarding investments and purchases represent the direct effects of SES

30

on these decisions, holding fixed any indirect effects of SES through the belief channel.
To measure the indirect effects of SES, and the relative importance of the direct versus the indirect effects, we follow standard methodology used in mediation analysis. The results are presented
in Table 7, and show that SES changes household choices through both the direct channel and the
indirect, belief-related, channel.
For example, looking at the decision to invest or not in stocks (first row in Table 7), the direct
effect of an increase of 100 percentile in a person’s income rank is an increase of 0.714 in the
probability of investing, as shown earlier in the regression analysis in Table 6. The indirect effect
of the same increase in the income rank, through the belief channel, is equal to the product of
two quantities: the coefficient estimate on Income Rank in the regression model predicting the
belief OP T IN DX in the first column of Table 6, and the coefficient estimate on OP T IN DX in
the regression model from Table 6 that predicts the Invest variable. Thus, the indirect effect is
0.324 × 0.057 = 0.0184. The total effect of an increase from bottom to top most income rank on
the probability of investing in stocks is the sum of the direct (0.714) and indirect (0.018) effects,
namely 0.733. The importance of the indirect, belief-related channel, is given by the ratio of the
indirect to total effect, which is equal to 2.52%. In other words, a person’s income rank is a positive
predictor of the decision to invest in stocks, and about 2.52% of the positive effect of income on the
probability to invest is attributable to the beliefs that the person holds about future macroeconomic
conditions. The rest of the effect is attributable to other income-related factors that are not about
differences in beliefs.
The importance of the indirect beliefs channel is higher for other SES measures and household
decisions. For example, analyzing the decision to invest in stocks, the indirect channel accounts for
3.06% of the positive effect of a college education. When analyzing the share of income invested
in stocks, the indirect, belief-related channel, accounts for 18.26% of the positive effect of higher
income rank, and 3.87% of the positive effect of a college education. When analyzing people’s
home buying attitude, the indirect, belief-related channel, accounts for 24.28% of the positive
effect of higher income rank, and 20.75% of the positive effect of a college education. The indirect,
belief-related channel accounts for 39.29% of the positive effect of higher income rank on attitudes

31

Table 7: SES effects on Choices and Attitudes, Direct and Indirect through Macroeconomic Expectations
Model
Invest: Income
Invest: Education
Invest Share: Income
Invest Share: Education
Home: Income
Home: Education
Durables: Income
Durables: Education
Car: Income
Car: Education

Direct
0.714
0.100
0.296
0.280
0.311
0.065
0.156
0
0.263
0.044

Indirect
0.018
0.003
0.066
0.011
0.100
0.017
0.101
0.017
0.117
0.020

Total
0.733
0.103
0.362
0.291
0.411
0.082
0.257
0.017
0.381
0.064

Indirect/Total (%)
2.52 %
3.06 %
18.26 %
3.87 %
24.28 %
20.75 %
39.29 %
100 %
30.82 %
31.07 %

towards durables purchases, and for 30.82% of the positive effects of either higher income rank,
or higher education, on attitudes towards car purchases. Thus, the effects of SES on household
choices and attitudes are in part driven by the differences in macroeconomic expectations of people
with different SES.9
So far in the analysis we have related several decisions of individuals to their aggregate belief
about future economic conditions, OP T IN DX. We will now turn towards analyzing a specific
aspect of these beliefs, namely, the subjective probability that the U.S. stock market return will
be positive over the next year (P ST K), to understand how it relates to the respondents’ decision
regarding making investments in stocks.
While SES-related variables such as income and participation costs impact whether a household
invests in the stock market (e.g., Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)), our results so far suggest that SESdriven variation in beliefs about stock returns may also explain the variation across SES levels in
terms of the decision to invest, and the fraction of income invested in stocks. We thus investigate
the relative importance of the SES-related stock market belief channel, relative to that of other
SES-related factors, on stock investment decisions.
The results in Table 8 indicate that SES measures, as well as P ST K, are positive predictors of a
9

An additional way to quantify the role of the SES-induced beliefs on household economic choices is to examine
the contribution of these beliefs to the standard deviation of households’ choices. In untabulated analyses, we find
that this alternate approach leads to similar results as documented here.

32

Table 8: Stock Market Expectations, SES, and Investment Choices
The table presents IV regressions with the measures of investment choices as dependent variable in panel
sub-sample. PSTK is instrumented with lagged PSTK. Invest: Indicator for investment in equities; Invest
Share: Log(Amt Invested/Income). Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital
status. Standard errors are clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

Income Rank

College Degree

PSTK
0.159
(17.05)

Invest
0.625
(43.10)

Invest Share
0.229
(3.48)

0.071
(15.95)

0.064
(9.89)

0.235
(8.83)

0.424
(14.95)

1.251
(11.00)

21400
0.251

13500
0.219

PSTK

Observations
Adjusted R2

23019
0.121

person’s decision to invest in equities, and conditional on investing, of the share of income invested
in stocks. The relative importance of the direct effect of SES measures, and their indirect effect
through expectations, is illustrated in the results in Table 9. In columns (2)-(6) in Table 8, P ST K
is instrumented with 6-month prior P ST K. The first stage of these regressions are reported in the
Appendix in Table A2.
As expected, the results in Table 8 show that, controlling for the belief about stock market
returns, our SES measures are positive and significant predictors of both the invest decision, as
well as of the share of income invested in stocks. In other words, income rank, and education directly
influence a household’s stock market investment decisions. However, as shown in our analysis in
Table 3 and in the first column in Table 8, these SES measures also impact P ST K, the belief
about whether the stock market return will be positive over the next year, which by itself, as seen
in Table 8, influences the households’ decision whether, and how much, to invest in stocks.10
10

A possible concern is that there is a mechanical correlation between the expectations expressed by survey respondents and their declared choices, stemming from people’s desire to look ”consistent” in their survey answers.
Specifically, an individual who declared that he does not invest in the stock market may later express pessimistic
expectations about future stock market returns, to justify to himself and the experimenter why he holds no equities.
Fortunately, the survey design used by the MSC staff alleviates this concern, because people are first asked to estimate
the probability that the stock market will have a positive return, and only later are asked to calculate how much

33

Table 9: SES effects on Investment Choices, Direct and Indirect through Stock Return Expectations
Model
Invest: Income
Invest: Education
Invest Share: Income
Invest Share: Education

Direct
0.625
0.064
0.229
0.235

Indirect
0.068
0.030
0.200
0.089

Total
0.693
0.094
0.428
0.324

Indirect/Total (%)
9.76 %
31.97 %
46.56 %
27.50 %

The coefficient estimates in Table 8 allow us to estimate the direct and indirect (via the belief
channel) effects of each of the SES measures on stock market investment decisions. Specifically,
increasing a person’s income rank by 100 percentile increases the probability of stock market participation by 0.625, and the share of income invested by 0.229. The indirect effects of the same change
in income rank on these two outcomes, through the belief channel, are obtained by multiplying the
coefficient estimates on P ST K in the first column in Table 8 and those in the second, and third
column, respectively. Namely, the indirect effects of increasing the income rank by 100 percentile
on the probability of participation and on the share of income invested in stocks are increases of
about 0.159 × 0.424=0.067 and 0.159 × 1.251=0.199, respectively. The indirect effect of higher
income, though inducing more optimistic beliefs about the stock market, represents 9.76% of the
total effect of income on the participation decision (= 0.625+0.067), and 46.56% of its total effect
on the share of income invested in stocks (=0.229+0.199).
When examining the effects of education on the decision to invest in stocks and on the share
of income invested, we also find sizeable indirect effects of this SES measure on the two decisions.
Specifically, following the same procedure described earlier for quantifying the direct and indirect
effects of income rank on stock investment decisions, we find that having a college degree increases
the probability of investing in stocks by 9.4%, and 31.97% of this total effect of education on
participation is coming from the indirect, belief-related channel. Also, having a college or better
education increases the share of income invested in stocks by 32.4% and the fraction of this total
effect that is driven by the belief channel is 27.50%. These results are summarized in Table 9.
Thus, we find that people who have higher incomes and are more educated are more likely to
invest in stocks, and are willing to invest more of their income in these assets, and this is in part
money, if any, they invest in stocks.

34

because they hold more optimistic beliefs about the stock market return distribution.

6

Robustness checks, caveats and limitations

In this section, we discuss several potential alternative explanations of our results and the extent
to which they are addressed by our evidence. We also discuss a number of caveats and limitations
that one should keep in mind in interpreting our findings.

6.1

Information flows

It is possible that the reason why there are differences across SES strata in the expectations people form about the macroeconomy is that low- and high-SES individuals have access to different
information sets, rather than having a different interpretation of the same information. While here
we can not fully control for the information set available to individuals, as could be done in an
experimental setting (e.g., Kuhnen and Miu (2017))), we are able to construct a proxy for the
information that the survey respondents have about business conditions. Specifically, we use MSC
data regarding the volume and tone of business news that survey respondents report to have heard
recently to construct the variable Business News Heard. This variable takes the value of -2,-1,0,1,or
2, depending on how many business news the responded reported having heard recently (0, 1, or 2),
and whether they were positive or negative in nature (as coded by the MSC interviewer). A value
of 2 means the respondent reported having heard 2 pieces of positive business news, while a value
of -2 means the respondent reported having heard 2 pieces of negative business news. A value of
1 indicates the responded only reported having heard one piece of business news, and that it was
positive. If the one piece of news heard was negative, the value of Business News Heard would be
-1. Finally, this variable has the value 0 if either the responded did not recall hearing any business
news lately, or whether one piece of news recalled was positive, and another was negative.
In Table 10 we estimate OLS regressions of various macroeconomic expectations on SES measures, as in Table 3, but we also include as a control the variable Business News Heard, to proxy
for the information available to each respondent. We find that the higher is the value of Business

35

Table 10: Macroeconomic Expectations, Socioeconomic Status, and News Heard
The table presents OLS regressions of macroeconomic expectations on SES measures while controlling for
the business news heard by the survey respondents. The variable Business News Heard takes the value of
-2,-1,0,1,or 2, depending on how many business news the respondents reported having heard recently (0, 1,
or 2), and whether they were positive or negative. Specifically, a value of 2 means the respondent reported
having heard 2 pieces of positive business news. A value of -2 means the respondent reported having heard 2
pieces of negative business news. A value of 1 indicates the responded only reported having heard one piece
of business news, and that it was positive. If the one piece of news heard was negative, the value of Business
News Heard is -1. Finally, this variable has the value 0 if either the respondent did not recall hearing any
business news lately, or whether one piece of news recalled was positive, and another was negative. Other
controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital status. Standard errors are clustered by
year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

OPTINDX
0.290
(33.25)

PSTK
0.161
(27.62)

BUS12
0.298
(24.41)

BUS5
0.380
(35.15)

BEXP
0.122
(14.32)

UNEMP
0.131
(14.34)

College Degree

0.057
(11.34)

0.071
(24.24)

0.019
(3.32)

0.082
(14.56)

0.018
(3.83)

0.028
(5.80)

Recession × Income Rank

-0.023
(-0.85)

-0.041
(-1.97)

-0.182
(-5.87)

-0.025
(-0.86)

0.134
(4.62)

-0.072
(-2.48)

Recession × College Degree

0.002
(0.17)

-0.007
(-0.94)

-0.020
(-1.37)

0.008
(0.50)

0.045
(3.59)

-0.024
(-2.22)

Business News Heard

0.210
(76.86)

0.031
(24.67)

0.233
(68.33)

0.167
(47.93)

0.163
(58.98)

0.154
(58.77)

Observations
Adjusted R2

188614
0.207

56747
0.128

172646
0.203

177951
0.125

185310
0.114

187032
0.126

Income Rank

News Heard, that is, the more positive economic news people have heard lately, the more optimistic
they are when assessing future macroeconomic conditions, which is a natural result. Importantly,
we continue to find that the respondents’ income rank and education continue to be strong and
positive drivers of their macroeconomic optimism, even after controlling for their information set as
proxied by the Business News Heard variable. This suggests that our main results are not simply
an indication of exposure of low- and high-SES individuals to different information sets.

36

Table 11: Macroeconomic Expectations and Socioeconomic Status in only College educated
The table presents OLS regressions with macroeconomic expectations as dependent variables on SES only
within the college-educated population. Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital
status. Standard errors are clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

OPTINDX
0.252
(17.48)

PSTK
0.140
(16.18)

BUS12
0.249
(12.94)

BUS5
0.320
(19.58)

BEXP
0.115
(8.13)

UNEMP
0.129
(8.83)

Recession × Income Rank

-0.077
(-2.00)

-0.009
(-0.36)

-0.236
(-4.60)

-0.054
(-1.22)

0.084
(2.45)

-0.148
(-3.50)

Observations
Adjusted R2

69448
0.114

25470
0.088

64272
0.155

66156
0.074

68405
0.061

69002
0.098

Income Rank

6.2

Financial literacy

Another possible concern regarding the finding that lower income individuals have more pessimistic
macroeconomic expectations is that the effect is driven by a lack of financial literacy, which might
induce low income people to be more confused, in a pessimistic manner, about the macroeconomy.
To address this concern, in the analysis in Table 11 we estimate similar models as in Table 3, but
only for people with a college degree. We continue to find a significant and positive effect (0.252,
p < 0.01) of IncomeRank on people’s aggregate expectations as measured by OP T IN DX. This
effect is similar in magnitude to that estimated in the specification in the first column in Table
3 (i.e., 0.304). In other words, even among those with high education, we find that individuals
earning more money are more optimistic about future macroeconomic developments than their
lower-income peers.

6.3

Indirectness of choice measures

We also interpret the respondents’ answers regarding household decisions—such as choices concerning investing in the stock market, or attitudes towards buying homes, cars and durable goods—as
good proxies for these individuals’ actual economic behavior. That being said, we do not have
administrative data to verify these survey answers. However, there are two reasons to believe that
people’s survey responses are truthful.

37

First, as shown earlier in our analysis, there is a clear relationship between respondents’ expectations and their own household decisions as reported during the survey, which implies that the
data on decisions can not be simply noise. This correlation between expectations and behavior is
also found at the aggregate level, as shown for example in Carroll, Fuhrer, and Wilcox (1994), who
document that the degree of optimism in MSC expectations is a strong positive predictor of the
change over the following year in the aggregate level of personal consumption, including purchases
of cars, other goods, and services.
Second, the survey measures of household behavior are strong predictors of aggregate macroeconomic outcomes. For example, Cai, Deggendorf, and Wilcox (2015) find that the MSC aggregate
response regarding whether it is a good time to buy a home is a strong and positive predictor of
the volume of transactions in the housing market measured over the following year. In additional
analyses of our own we find that the MSC respondents’ monthly aggregate attitude DU R regarding purchasing durables is highly correlated (ρ=0.5, p < 0.01) with the aggregate contemporaneous
monthly demand for durable goods, obtained from the FRED database of the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis. Similarly, we find that there is a high correlation (ρ=0.6, p < 0.01) between the MSC
aggregate monthly attitude CAR towards buying cars, and the contemporaneous total car sales
reported in the FRED database.11
Therefore, while we can not verify for each respondent whether their household decisions are
truthfully reported, at least we observe that in the aggregate, the reports of individuals in the MSC
correspond to actual macroeconomic outcomes.

7

Conclusion

Using a sample of more than 180,000 responses from participants in the Michigan Survey of Consumers each month from 1978 to 2014, we show that socioeconomic status (SES) has a strong
influence on individuals’ beliefs about future macroeconomic conditions such as changes in unemployment, business conditions in general, and stock market performance. Specifically, we find
11

The durable goods demand data and the total car sales data are available on the website of the Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis at https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DGORDER, and https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/TOTALSA,
respectively. For our analysis we detrend these monthly time series to account for population growth.

38

that higher SES individuals—namely, those with higher income and higher education—are more
optimistic about future macroeconomic conditions. Consistent with a model of asymmetric belief
updating in which low-SES individuals have a tendency to neglect good states of the world, we find
that the beliefs wedge between high- and low-SES individuals is strongly pro-cyclical: in recessions,
the beliefs wedge almost disappears.
This SES-related heterogeneity in macroeconomic expectations in turn has significant effects
on people’s economic choices. Specifically, we find that the relative macroeconomic optimism of
individuals with higher SES is in part responsible for these households’ higher propensity to invest
in stocks or to be inclined to purchase homes, cars or durable goods.
Our findings suggest that differences in macroeconomic expectations across people with different socioeconomic standing could potentially contribute to wealth inequality in the population over
time, since these expectations influence household decisions such as investing in stocks or in real
estate. An interesting avenue for future work is to quantify the importance of divergence in expectations across SES strata for the dynamics of the wealth distribution in the population, possibly by
incorporating the SES-related belief heterogeneity in models like those of Piketty (1995), Favilukis
(2013), and Gabaix, Lasry, Lions, and Moll (2016). The implications for the wealth distribution
are not quite straightforward. For example, while high-SES individuals’ beliefs about stock market
returns appear to be less biased on average than the more pessimistic beliefs of low-SES individuals,
the fact that the optimism about stock returns of high-SES people is more pro-cyclical may imply
that they mis-time the stock market, which tends to have counter-cyclical expected returns. We
believe that this is a fruitful direction for future research.

39

References
Amonlirdviman, K. (2007). Pessimism in household macroeconomic expectations. Working paper .
Andersen, S. and K. M. Nielsen (2011). Participation constraints in the stock market: Evidence
from unexpected inheritance due to sudden death. Review of Financial Studies 24 (5), 1667–
1697.
Bhandari, A., J. Borovička, and P. Ho (2016). Identifying ambiguity shocks in business cycle
models using survey data. Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Brunnermeier, M. K., A. Simsek, and W. Xiong (2014). A welfare criterion for models with
distorted beliefs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4), 1753–1797.
Cai, Q., S. Deggendorf, and J. A. Wilcox (2015). Building a home purchase sentiment index.
Fannie Mae White Paper .
Calvet, L. E., J. Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini (2007). Down or out: Assessing the welfare costs of
household investment mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5), 707–747.
Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household finance. Journal of Finance 61 (4), 1553–1604.
Carroll, C. D. (2003). Macroeconomic expectations of households and professional forecasters.
Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (1), 269–298.
Carroll, C. D., J. C. Fuhrer, and D. W. Wilcox (1994). Does consumer sentiment forecast household spending? If so, why? American Economic Review 84 (5), 1397–1408.
Croushore, D. (1998). Evaluating inflation forecasts. Working Paper, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia.
Curtin, R. and P. Dechaux (2015). University of Michigan’s Survey of Consumers: Measuring
and interpreting economic expectations. Working Paper, University of Michigan.
Curtin, R., S. Presser, and E. Singer (2002). The impact of nonresponse bias on the index of
consumer sentiment. Economic Surveys and Data Analysis, 307–323.
Dominitz, J. and C. F. Manski (2007). Expected equity returns and portfolio choice: Evidence

40

from the Health and Retirement Study. Journal of the European Economic Association 5 (23), 369–379.
Epstein, L. G. and M. Schneider (2008). Ambiguity, information quality, and asset pricing. The
Journal of Finance 63 (1), 197–228.
Favilukis, J. (2013). Inequality, stock market participation, and the equity premium. Journal of
Financial Economics 107 (3), 740–759.
Gabaix, X., J.-M. Lasry, P.-L. Lions, and B. Moll (2016). The dynamics of inequality. Econometrica 84 (6), 2071–2111.
Geanakoplos, J. (2009). The leverage cycle. In D. Acemoglu, K. Rogoff, and M. Woodford (Eds.),
NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Gennaioli, N. and A. Shleifer (2010). What comes to mind. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (4), 1399–1433.
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2012). Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
financial fragility. Journal of Financial Economics 104 (3), 452–468.
Gennaioli, N., A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny (2015). Neglected risks: The psychology of financial
crises. American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings 105 (5), 310–314.
Guzman, M. M. and J. E. Stiglitz (2015). Pseudo-wealth and consumption fluctuations. Working
Paper, Columbia University.
Hansen, L. P. and T. J. Sargent (2001). Robust control and model uncertainty. American Economic Review 91 (2), 60–66.
Heath, C. and A. Tversky (1991). Preference and belief: Ambiguity and Competence in Choice
under Uncertainty. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4 (1), 5–28.
Kearney, M. S. and P. B. Levine (2016). Income inequality, social mobility, and the decision to
drop out of high school. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Spring, 333–396.
Kezdi, G. and R. J. Willis (2011). Household stock market beliefs and learning. NBER Working
Paper .
41

Kuchler, T. and B. Zafar (2016). Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate outcomes. Working Paper, New York University.
Kuhnen, C. M. (2015). Asymmetric learning from financial information. Journal of Finance 70 (5), 2029–2062.
Kuhnen, C. M. and A. C. Miu (2017). Socioeconomic status and learning from financial information. Journal of Financial Economics 124 (2), 349–372.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression babies: Do macroeconomic experiences affect
risk-taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126, 373–416.
Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2015). Learning from Inflation Experiences. Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
Malmendier, U. and G. Tate (2005). CEO overconfidence and corporate investment. Journal of
Finance 60 (6), 2661–2700.
Malmendier, U., G. Tate, and J. Yan (2011). Overconfidence and early-life experiences: The effect
of managerial traits on corporate financial policies. Journal of Finance 66 (5), 1687–1733.
Mankiw, N. G., R. Reis, and J. Wolfers (2003). Disagreement about inflation expectations. In
M. Gertler and K. Rogoff (Eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2003.
Piazzesi, M. and M. Schneider (2012). Inflation and the price of real assets. Working Paper,
Stanford University.
Piketty, T. (1995). Social mobility and redistributive politics. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (3), 551–584.
Puri, M. and D. T. Robinson (2007). Optimism and economic choice. Journal of Financial
Economics 86 (1), 71–99.
Sims, C. A. (2008). Inflation expectations, uncertainty, and monetary policy. Working Paper,
Princeton University.
Souleles, N. S. (2004). Expectations, heterogeneous forecast errors, and consumption: Micro
evidence from the Michigan Consumer Sentiment Surveys. Journal of Money, Credit, and
42

Banking 36 (1), 39–72.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2002). Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice heterogeneity:
Nonfinancial income and participation cost structure. Working Paper, UC Berkeley.
Vissing-Jorgensen, A. (2003). Perspectives on Behavioral Finance: Does ”irrationality” disappear
with wealth? Evidence from expectations and actions. In NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

43

APPENDIX

Figure A1: UNEMP by SES, over time

44

Figure A2: BUS12 by SES, over time

45

Figure A3: BUS5 by SES, over time

46

Figure A4: BEXP by SES, over time

47

Table A1: Macroeconomic Expectations, SES, and Household Choices
The table presents the first stage results for each IV regression shown in Table 6 in the main text where
the dependent variable is a measure of investment choices or attitudes to consumption decisions (Invest,
Invest Share, HOM , DU R, CAR), using solely the panel sub-sample, that is, observations from the
same individual, acquired six months apart. The macroeconomic expectations index OP T IN DX is instrumented with lagged OP T IN DX. Invest: Indicator for investment in equities; Invest Share: Log(Amt
Invested/Income); HOM : Home buying attitude; DU R: Durables buying attitude; CAR: Car buying attitude. Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and marital status. Standard errors are
clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

Observations

Observations

Observations

Observations

Observations

for which
Invest
is available

for which
Invest Share
is available

for which
HOM
is available

for which
DU R
is available

for which
CAR
is available

0.532
(69.58)

0.538
(57.75)

OPTINDX
0.482
(91.83)

0.481
(90.67)

0.483
(91.27)

Income Rank

0.153
(9.24)

0.116
(5.33)

0.172
(15.87)

0.174
(15.62)

0.171
(15.48)

College Degree

0.045
(5.31)

0.044
(4.27)

0.026
(4.18)

0.024
(3.92)

0.026
(4.30)

Observations

32143

18226

68492

66511

66540

Dependent variable
Lagged OPTINDX

48

Table A2: Macroeconomic Expectations, SES, and Household Choices
The table presents the first stage results for each IV regression shown in Table 8 in the main text where
the dependent variable is a measure of investment choice (Invest or Invest Share), using solely the panel
sub-sample, that is, observations from the same individual, acquired six months apart. The stock market
belief variable P ST K is instrumented with lagged P ST K. Invest: Indicator for investment in equities;
InvestShare: Log(Amt Invested/Income). Controls include dummies for year-month, age, gender, and
marital status. Standard errors are clustered by year-month, and t−statistics are shown in parentheses.

Observations for which
Invest is available
Dependent variable
Lagged PSTK

Observations for which
Invest Share is available

PSTK
0.372
(50.36)

0.361
(39.39)

Income Rank

0.103
(11.45)

0.075
(6.94)

College Degree

0.048
(11.25)

0.045
(8.57)

Observations

21400

13500

49

