                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   ARE POOR INDIVIDUALS MAINLY FOUND IN POOR HOUSEHOLDS? EVIDENCE
                   USING NUTRITION DATA FOR AFRICA

                                       Caitlin S. Brown
                                      Martin Ravallion
                                    Dominique van de Walle

                                      Working Paper 24047
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24047


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




The authors are grateful to the World Bank’s Strategic Research Program for funding assistance.
Helpful comments were received from Harold Alderman, Arthur Alik-Lagrange, Denis Cogneau,
Emanuela Galasso, Sylvie Lambert, Kate Rybczynski, Adam Wagstaff and seminar participants
at Georgetown University, the University of California Riverside, the Paris School of Economics,
University of Guelph, and the IEA World Congress in Mexico. These are the views of the authors
and need not reflect those of their employers. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Caitlin S. Brown, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Are Poor Individuals Mainly Found in Poor Households? Evidence using Nutrition Data for
Africa
Caitlin S. Brown, Martin Ravallion, and Dominique van de Walle
NBER Working Paper No. 24047
November 2017
JEL No. I14,I32,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

Antipoverty policies assume that targeting poor households suffices in reaching poor individuals.
We question this assumption. Our comprehensive assessment for sub-Saharan Africa reveals that
undernourished women and children are spread widely across the household wealth and
consumption distributions. Roughly three-quarters of underweight women and undernourished
children are not found in the poorest 20% of households, and around half are not found in the
poorest 40%. Countries with higher undernutrition tend to have higher shares of undernourished
individuals in non-poor households. The results are consistent with intra-household inequality but
other factors also appear to be at work including common health risks.


Caitlin S. Brown                                Dominique van de Walle
Department of Economics                         World Bank
Georgetown University                           1818 H Street NW
cb575@georgetown.edu                            Washington DC 20433
                                                dvandewalle@worldbank.org
Martin Ravallion
Department of Economics
Georgetown University
cb575@georgetown.edu
1.      Introduction

        While it is widely appreciated that poverty is an individual deprivation, household aggregate data
are almost invariably used to infer individual poverty. It is assumed that each individual within the
household has the same level of economic welfare as measured by household aggregate consumption per
person (or per equivalent single adult). An array of antipoverty programs are targeted on this basis,
typically using readily available proxies for household consumption or income per person. 2 Partly in
response to concerns about chronic undernutrition in certain regions, including in Africa, there is an
expanding effort at social protection in developing countries and this effort is typically focused on
transfers targeted to poor families. 3 For its part, the World Bank has made reaching poor families—as
often identified by the poorest two quintiles of people based on household consumption per person—the
main objective of its social protection operations.
        Three main reasons can be identified as to why the idea of reaching deprived individuals using
antipoverty programs that explicitly target poor households is attractive to policy makers. First, there is a
data constraint, namely that standard data sources do not allow us to measure individual consumption.
Second, interventions at the individual level may be seen to be paternalistic and intrusive (as they
require intervention within families) and may well be costly (to the extent that they rely on fine
targeting, constrained by the fact that individual deprivations are not comprehensively observed in large
populations). Third, in supporting this idea, an appeal can be made to a large literature that has
documented that poorer households in terms of consumption, income or wealth are more likely to
include deprived individuals. 4 Aggregate household resources constrain consumption for all household
members. For these reasons, it is not surprising that, in practice, many social policies hope to reach
deprived individuals by targeting seemingly poor households.
        However, the existence of a household wealth effect on individual welfare does not imply that
targeting poor households will be very effective in reaching poor individuals. One can point to empirical
evidence casting doubt on that assumption, including the evidence that rejects a unitary model of the
household, suggesting there are sources of inequality within households that have been “assumed away”



2
  On these programs in developing countries see Coady et al. (2004), Fiszbein and Schady (2010), Ruel et al. (2013), Del
Ninno and Mills (2015), and Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10).
3
  For evidence on the expansion in social protection programs in developing countries see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10).
Various case studies of these programs in Africa are found in Del Ninno and Mills (2015).
4
  The evidence is reviewed in Ravallion (2016, Chapter 7). The present paper will return to the literature.

                                                             2
in much past thinking about antipoverty policies. 5 There is also evidence of discrimination against
certain household members such as orphans and widows and the evidence of unequal exposure to
transitory shocks. Heterogeneity in factors influencing individual poverty can also mean that transfers to
poor households often miss deprived individuals. It is important for policy makers to know whether
standard household data sources can be relied upon to reach poor individuals.
         This paper tries to throw light on how well widely-used household-based measures perform in
identifying disadvantaged individuals. Are we reaching such individuals adequately by simply targeting
“poor” households? Or do many of them live in households that are not identified as poor? Is it harder or
easier to reach vulnerable women and children using household data in poor-country settings in which
the incidence of individual level disadvantage is high and average income is low?
         Missing data on individual-level poverty present a significant hurdle to examining these issues.
However, there is one important dimension of individual welfare that can be observed in many surveys,
namely nutritional status as indicated by anthropometric measures. Undernutrition can stem from
inadequate caloric intakes or deficiencies in protein or micronutrient intakes, or from illness that
impedes nutritional absorption. Such nutritional deprivations are of direct and immediate concern, and
there is also evidence of longer-term social and economic costs, especially of low-birth weight and
chronic undernutrition in childhood. Although nutritional status admittedly represents only one
dimension of individual poverty there can be no doubt that it is an important dimension. It is also
frequently used as a proxy for individual welfare (Steckel 1995).
         The paper uses undernutrition as the measure of individual welfare to explore the questions
posed above. We use data for 30 countries in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), where chronic undernutrition
among children is a major policy concern. The latest data at the time of writing indicate that the count of
stunted children in SSA has risen by 12.5 million since 1990. The incidence of child stunting in SSA
today is probably the highest of any of the standard geographic groupings of countries. 6 We draw on
anthropometric data for 390,000 women and children from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).
These data can be used to identify nutritionally vulnerable women and children. The DHS also include a
household wealth index based on a household’s assets and living conditions. We use this index as a
proxy for household wealth. However, aggregate consumption may well be a better indicator of

5
 We elaborate on these points later and provide references to the literature.
6
 These observations are from the World Bank’s website on nutrition and the latest available estimates compiled by UNICEF.
Historically, South Asia has been the region with highest incidence but that region has been making greater progress than
SSA in this respect. See the discussion in Smith and Haddad (2015). Differences in population growth also affect this shift to
SSA of the global share of the undernourished.

                                                              3
household welfare than the DHS wealth index, which (for example) may not respond quickly to shocks.
We complement the DHS data with good-quality nationally-representative household consumption
surveys from the World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS).
           We acknowledge that nutritional status is not all that matters to individual welfare; our findings
may not hold for other dimensions of individual poverty. Yet, in the absence of better individual
poverty measures, and given considerable evidence of unequal intra-household allocation of resources, it
is important to investigate this issue. Our results are also relevant to policy makers who are specifically
interested in addressing health deprivations associated with undernutrition. There are various forms of
direct interventions with the aim of improving nutrition, including direct nutrition supplementation and
promoting better health practices. 7 Many of these are implemented through health clinics and delivery
points other than the household. However, there is a growing interest in doing so through household-
based policies—by integrating nutrition programs within anti-poverty policies more broadly. We throw
light on whether this might work well.
           Our principle finding is that, although the incidence of undernutrition tends to be higher in
poorer households, nutritional deprivations are spread quite widely through both the wealth and
consumption distributions, such that the joint probability of being an underweight woman or child and
living in the poorest household wealth quintile is low. We find that about 75% of underweight women
and undernourished children are not found in the poorest 20% of households, and half are not found in
the poorest 40%. This pattern is less pronounced but still holds when we use an augmented regression
to control for various individual- and household-level factors which may influence nutritional outcomes.
Our results point to the need for broad coverage in efforts to address undernutrition and, by extension,
individual poverty, rather than subsuming this problem within antipoverty interventions that are targeted
at the household-level. Data availability limits how far we can go in explaining our findings, but we
point to evidence suggesting that intra-household inequality and common health risks are important
factors.
           The following section considers relevant arguments and evidence from the literature. Section 3
outlines a simple theoretical model to help understand the relevant aspects of the joint distribution of
household poverty and individual undernutrition. Section 4 then reviews the data we shall be using.
Section 5 presents the main findings, while Section 6 discusses various possible explanations for our
results. Section 7 concludes.

7
    See for example the package of nutritional interventions described in Bhutta et al. (2013).

                                                                 4
2.       Insights from the literature

         A body of research on the economics of the household has focused on the wealth effect on
nutritional status, i.e., how much nutrition improves as a household’s economic welfare—income,
consumption or wealth—rises. One strand of this literature has estimated income elasticities of demand
for food and (hence) nutrition; an influential early example is Behrman and Deolalikar (1987). Rather
than focus on food consumption, as in consumer demand studies (such as Pitt, 1983), other work has
instead studied the income effect on nutritional adequacy, taking account of requirements for good
health and normal activities in society. A low income-elasticity of demand for food can be consistent
with a high responsiveness of nutritional adequacy to income gains, since even small gains in nutritional
intakes can make a big difference at low levels (Ravallion 1990, 1992). 8
         New evidence on this topic has emerged from analyses of the many micro data sets (including
the DHS) that have become available to researchers over the last 20 years or so. A limitation of the DHS
is that the surveys have not included the questions needed to measure consumption or income. (At the
same time, most surveys of the LSMS-type have not included anthropometrics.) The DHS wealth index
was developed to help address this deficiency (Filmer and Pritchett 2001). Some studies have argued
that the DHS wealth index is a good predictor of various human capital and other outcomes (Filmer and
Pritchett 1999, 2001; Filmer and Scott 2012; Sahn and Stifel 2003; Petrou and Kupek 2010). For
example, on comparing DHS wealth indices, Filmer and Scott (2012, p. 359) conclude that
“…inferences about inequalities in education, health care use, fertility and child mortality, as well as
labor market outcomes, are quite robust.” Similarly, Sahn and Stifel (2003, p. 463) argue that their
version of the wealth index “…is a valid predictor of a crucial manifestation of poverty—child health
and nutrition.” Some other studies have been less supportive and have found only seemingly modest
correlations between nutritional, health and other outcomes and wealth indices (Hong and Hong 2007;
Zere and McIntyre 2003; Howe et al. 2009). Different data sets tell different stories here, so a
comprehensive look at the evidence across multiple countries is needed.
         A strand of the literature has used the DHS wealth index to measure inequalities in child
nutritional status, mainly using the concentration curve which (in this context) gives the share of
undernourished children living in the poorest x% of households based on the wealth index (Kakwani et

8
 While it is not an issue taken up here, it is now well recognized that nutritional intakes can also be too high from the point
of view of good health and normal activity levels. A strand of the literature has focused on obesity and its relationship to
wealth in both rich and poor countries; for a review see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 7).

                                                                5
al. 1997; Wagstaff and Watanabe 2000; Wagstaff et al. 2014; Bredenkamp et al. 2014). 9 A widely-used
measure based on this curve is the concentration index, given by twice the area between the curve and
the diagonal (analogous to the Gini index). A key finding from this literature is that the concentration
indices for child stunting and wasting in developing countries are almost invariably negative. A typical
conclusion is that “Unsurprisingly, in all countries, undernutrition is concentrated among the poor.”
(Bredenkamp et al. 2014, p.1330).
        Such assessments appear to support the common, but often implicit, assumption among social
policy makers that targeting poor households will be effective in reaching undernourished individuals.
However, our review of the literature suggests that the concentration indices are rarely more negative
than -0.3, with median values typically around -0.15 to -0.10 (depending on the measure of
undernutrition). 10 While this confirms that children from wealthier households tend to be better
nourished (given that the index is negative), it also suggests that there is quite wide dispersion of
undernutrition across wealth strata.
        We also need to be aware of potential bias in anthropometric statistics that may affect the degree
to which undernourished children are found to be concentrated in the poorest households. Two main
factors can be noted. Excess mortality among malnourished children is well-established and may lead to
a survivorship bias (Boerma et al. 1992; Bozzoli et al. 2007; Moradi 2010). If the deceased belonged to
poor households, then the bias will result in a lower wealth gradient than would otherwise be the case.
Against that, a negative association between the number of children and child nutritional status has also
been documented (Desai 1995). Given that poorer households tend to have more children, this would
instead lead to a larger concentration of malnourished children in poor households and a steeper wealth
gradient.
        A number of recent papers review the existing evidence on the nutritional impacts of income
growth and income support to poor households. On the first, as already noted, several papers find
seemingly low income effects, particularly in the short-term (Grogan and Moers 2016; Haddad et al.
2003; Smith and Haddad 2015). With respect to the second, Alderman (2015) and Ruel and Alderman
(2013) conclude that social safety nets targeting poor households with food or cash transfers (whether
conditional or unconditional) have generally had limited impacts on children’s nutritional status. The
papers speculate that this may be because the targeted households are not those that have young children

9
 There has been far less focus on inequalities in malnutrition among women.
10
  The online Addendum to Bredenkamp et al. (2014) provides concentration indices across 80 developing countries for child
undernutrition using the wealth index as the ranking variable. The median for stunting is -0.15.

                                                            6
in the right age range. They do not question the practice of targeting poor households to reach
undernourished individuals. Manley et al. (2013) undertake a systematic review and meta-analysis on
conditional and unconditional cash transfers and child nutrition and come to similar conclusions.
       The existence of intra-household inequality is clearly relevant. The unitary model of the
household (characterized by a single utility function) has found little support empirically, and various
alternatives have been proposed (as recently reviewed by Chiappori and Mazzocco 2015; and Baland
and Ziparo 2017). These models point to sources of inequality within households, such as in reservation
utility levels, that will limit the scope for reaching poor individuals by targeting poor households. An
extensive literature details intra-household inequalities in resource allocations and outcomes (as
reviewed in World Bank 2012). There are two policy implications: targeting poor households may well
miss some significantly disadvantaged individuals and targeted households may not allocate the benefits
to the neediest within the household.
       It is well recognized in principle that household-level consumption or income-based measures
don’t allow for inequality within the household. There is also (largely qualitative) evidence that certain
individuals are poor and/or vulnerable, but do not live in households that would normally be considered
poor and so are hidden from view in standard data sources on poverty. Differentiation between men and
women has been widely documented in human capital, legal protection, constraints stemming from
social norms, roles and responsibilities, and control over resources (Ezememari et al. 2002). For Africa,
there is evidence that household shocks affect men and women differentially, with women bearing the
brunt of negative shocks (Dercon and Krishnan 2000). Such differentiation can be expected to have
consequences for measures of poverty and inequality. In an important early example, Haddad and
Kanbur (1990) find that such measures for the Philippines are appreciably underestimated using
standard household-level data, although the “profiles”— comparisons of these measures across sub-
groups such as urban and rural areas—are quite robust. Using a survey for Senegal that (unusually)
collected a relatively individualized measure of consumption, Lambert et al. (2014) find significant
inequalities within the household and a sizeable gender gap in consumption. Using the same data, De
Vreyer and Lambert (2016) estimate that about one in eight poor individuals live in non-poor
households. Using anthropometric data, Sahn and Younger (2009) find that about half of country-level
inequality in the body mass index is within households rather than between them.
       Other work has emphasized the poverty of specific types of individuals. Recent research on Mali
confirms that widows—most of whom are absorbed into male headed households and can be quite

                                                     7
young—experience significantly lower levels of individual (non-income) welfare indicators than women
of other marital statuses, and that the disadvantage persists through remarriage (van de Walle 2013).
Similarly, there is a large literature on orphans in the context of AIDS deaths, and the disadvantages
they may face, particularly in schooling (Bicego et al. 2003; Case et al. 2004; Evans and Miguel 2007).
There is also evidence to suggest a strong relationship between maternal and child health, with children
found to be more susceptible to adverse shocks if they are borne by women in poorer health (Bhalotra
and Rawlings 2011; 2013). While it may well be more likely that these disadvantaged groups live in
relatively poor households, they may also be spread quite widely across the wealth distribution.
        There are other sources of heterogeneity in individual health and nutrition at given levels of
household wealth. Wagstaff (2003) finds large differences across developing countries in the incidence
of underweight and stunted children even if one controls for wealth. Wagstaff also found that these
differences are negatively correlated with public health spending per capita. This is consistent with other
findings suggesting that cross-country differences in public health spending matter more for the poor
than for others (Bidani and Ravallion 1997); the well-off are better able to protect their children’s
nutrition and health status from weak public provisioning and poor health environments. However, the
powerful role of complementarities and externalities in water, sanitation and hygiene means that the
better off also remain vulnerable to these deficiencies (Duflo et al. 2015; Ngure et al. 2014). Cross-
country comparisons of stunting incidence have also pointed to the role played by access to health-
related infrastructure (such as water and sanitation facilities) in addition to household characteristics
such as food availability and maternal schooling (Smith and Haddad 2015). Spears (2013) argues that
differences in rates of open defecation explain much of the variation in child height across countries.
        In the light of these studies, prevailing methods of measuring poverty and designing antipoverty
policies using the household as the unit of observation may be inadequate. Economists and policymakers
have traditionally looked at poverty and vulnerability using the household as the unit of observation. The
gold standard for measuring poverty has long been household-based consumption normalized for
household size and (possibly) demographic composition. In the absence of data on such poverty
indicators and the costs of collecting them for the whole population, it has become common in policy
making to use proxy-means-testing (PMT) and other methods such as community-based targeting to
target anti-poverty programs. 11 A number of studies have assessed how well PMT does in targeting


11
  Using more easily observed correlates of consumption or income such as assets and household characteristics, PMT uses
the predicted values from multivariate regressions for consumption or income.

                                                            8
poor households (Brown et al. 2016; Alatas et al. 2012; Kidd and Wylde 2011), but there has been little
attention to how well such methods identify disadvantaged individuals.

3.     A simple expository model

       An important point that has not received adequate attention in the literature on antipoverty
policies is that heterogeneity in individual economic welfare at any given level of aggregate household
welfare can severely restrict the scope for reaching vulnerable women and children using household
poverty data. And this is the case even when there is a strong household income effect on individual
welfare.
       We elaborate this point in a simple expository model. To anticipate our empirical work, we shall
identify individual welfare by nutritional status. The nutritional attainments of an individual are denoted
n, while the wealth of the household to which the individual belongs is w. To keep notation simple, we
take n and w to be normalized by appropriate cut-off points (stipulated nutritional thresholds or poverty
lines) such that a person is undernourished if (and only if) n<1 and a household is wealth poor if w<1.
These two random variables have a (continuous) joint density f ( n, w) .
       Following the discussion in the previous section, the relationship between the two variables
depends on a number of factors, including (but not limited to) intra-household inequality, the local
health environment (including water and sanitation), access to relevant health and nutritional knowledge,
and child care. To keep the model simple, we collapse the heterogeneity into one composite factor
denoted ε , which we can take to be scaled such that it is bounded below by zero and above by unity. For
concreteness in interpreting the following results, we might suppose that ε is the share of the
household’s total nutritional intake devoted to other household members. The expected value of
individual nutritional status given w and ε is:
                       E ( n w, ε ) =n( w, ε )                                                       (1)

It is assumed that the function n(.) is strictly increasing in w—the slope of this function with respect to w
is the aforementioned wealth effect on undernutrition—and that the function is strictly decreasing in ε
at given w. (Continuing the previous example, we can have the special case n(.) = (1 − ε )φ ( w) where
φ (w) is aggregate household nutrition when wealth is w.)
       Motivated by the existence of a wealth effect on nutritional attainments, it is understandable that
a policy maker may be drawn to targeting wealth-poor households so as to reach nutritionally-deprived

                                                     9
individuals. However, the common finding in the literature (reviewed in Section 2) that the expected
value of nutritional status rises with wealth does not imply that household wealth provides a reliable
indicator of individual outcomes for the purposes of policy. It makes more sense to focus instead on the
conditional probability distribution Pr( w < 1 n < 1) , i.e., the probability of living in a wealth poor

household given that one is undernourished. (For example, if an antipoverty policy made a transfer
payment in a fixed amount to every poor household ( w < 1 ) then the proportion that reached poor
individuals will be Pr( w < 1 n < 1) .) By well-known properties of conditional probabilities: 12

                                                      Pr( n < 1, w < 1)
                              Pr( w < 1 n < 1) =                                                                             (2)
                                                         Pr( n < 1)
The numerator is the joint probability of being both undernourished and living in a poor household, and
the denominator is the overall rate of undernutrition. 13 Notice that, in the special case in which
Pr( w < 1) < Pr( n < 1) and all of the wealth poor are undernourished ( Pr( n < 1 w < 1) = 1), we have (on

applying Bayes’ theorem):
                                                      Pr( w < 1)
                              Pr( w < 1 n < 1) =                 <1
                                                      Pr( n < 1)
So the conditional probability is then bounded above by a number less than unity. Such cases will be
noted when we come to discuss our empirical results.
           We can now readily see how heterogeneity can confound a policy maker’s ability to reach
undernourished individuals using only household data. Let w* denote the minimum level of wealth that

is needed to not be undernourished given ε , i.e., n( w , ε ) = 1 . Plainly, w* is a strictly increasing function
                                                       *



of ε , which we write as w (ε ) . 14 Then we have:
                          *



                              Pr( w < 1 n < 1) = Pr[ w < 1 w < w* (ε )]                                                      (3)




12
     Alternatively, one might calculate Pr( n < 1 w < 1) . However, focusing on      Pr( w < 1 n < 1)   seems to accord more directly
with the relevant question for policy purposes. Of course the two conditional probabilities are linked by Bayes’ theorem.
Readers can back out Pr( n < 1 w < 1) from our results below.
                                          1 1                                  1∞
13
     More precisely Pr( n < 1, w < 1) ≡   ∫ ∫ f (n, w)dndw and Pr(n < 1) ≡ ∫ ∫ f (n, w)dwdn .
                                          0 0                                  0 0
14
     In the aforementioned example in which     ε   is the nutrient share going to others such that n = (1 − ε )φ ( w) we have
w* = φ −1 [(1 − ε ) −1 ] .

                                                                   10
Now consider the lower and upper bounds of ε . We assume that the wealth-poverty line is set such that
nutritional status is deemed to be adequate for someone at that line when ε = 0 . For example, when
intra-household inequality is the source of heterogeneity, a fair division of food should allow all those

living in households around the poverty line to be adequately nourished. Then w (0) ≤ 1 and
                                                                               *



Pr( w < 1 w < w* (0)) = 1 . That is, targeting the wealth poor when there is no intra-household inequality

assures that one reaches all those households with undernourished individuals. By contrast, given that
w* is an increasing function of ε , when ε approaches its maximum value, a high level of household
wealth will be needed to assure that enough of the household’s resources “trickle down” to avoid
undernutrition in women and children. (This is clear if one considers again the example when ε

represents intra-household inequality.) Specifically, w (1) = w and Pr( w < 1 w < w max ) = Pr( w < 1) .
                                                       *       max



As ε approaches its upper limit, the probability of reaching undernourished individuals by targeting
poor households is no higher than the overall poverty rate. By invoking continuity, it is clear that
Pr( w < 1 n < 1) must be a non-increasing function of ε over (0, 1) and strictly decreasing for some sub-

intervals. Thus we see that the value of ε determines whether targeting poor households is effective in
reaching poor individuals.
       We will study how the conditional probability varies across countries with the overall poverty
rate. Intuitively, the higher the household poverty rate the more likely it is that a policy that successfully
targeted poor households will reach poor individuals. But how much better will it be? To answer this
we assume that the empirical relationship can be written as:
                        Pr( w < 1 n < 1) = ψ [Pr( w < 1)]                                              (4)

where ψ is a continuous function estimable by regression. If we consider a uniform transfer to the
poorest p% of households then the function ψ can be interpreted as the share of those transfers going to
the poorest individuals, as assessed by their nutritional status. There are obvious boundary conditions to
impose on the function ψ . When nobody is wealth poor none of the undernourished will be wealth poor,
yet when everyone is wealth poor, this must of course also hold for the undernourished; in terms of
equation (4) we expect that ψ (0) = 0 and ψ (1) = 1 . So the empirical relationship must be increasing,
although not necessarily monotonically. We can also expect that ψ [Pr( w < 1)] ≥ Pr( w < 1) (given a
positive wealth effect on undernutrition).


                                                       11
        In our empirical implementation across 30 countries in SSA we will assume that ψ is a
quadratic function, which has an appealing interpretation. To see this not that, on imposing the boundary
conditions, ψ (0) = 0 and ψ (1) = 1 and allowing for an error term, (4) can be written as:

                Pr( w < 1 n < 1) − Pr( w < 1) = − β Pr( w < 1)[1 − Pr( w < 1)] + υ                      (5)

Where β > 0 is a parameter to be estimated using the estimates we obtain across countries. To help
interpret β it can be noted that its value is directly proportional to the concentration index:
                             1


                             ∫
                        C = ψ ( x )dx − 0.5
                             0
                                                                                                        (6)


For a quadratic ψ function (implying (5)), it is readily verified that β = 6C . Thus β can be interpreted
as an overall measure of how much more effective it is to target poor households (aiming to reach poor
individuals) when the overall household poverty rate is higher. When β = 0 , the conditional probability
of an undernourished person living in a wealth-poor household is no different (in expectation) to the
overall wealth-poverty rate as one varies the latter from 0 to 1. This will be the case if there is no wealth
effect on undernutrition. At the other extreme, when β = 6 ( C = 1 ), one finds that all undernourished
individuals are found in wealth poor households, and it is evident that (given our quadratic
parameterization) this holds at each and every point.
        It is less clear how the conditional probability in (2) varies with the overall rate of undernutrition,
Pr( n < 1) . In countries in which the rate of undernutrition is higher do we find that a higher proportion

of the undernourished also live in wealth-poor households? The value of Pr( w < 1 n < 1) is undefined at

the lower bound of undernutrition, Pr( n < 1) = 0 . Comparing strictly positive values, a higher Pr( n < 1)
can come with a change in the numerator of (2), so that it cannot be presumed that the conditional
probability will fall. To see why, suppose that there is a change in the joint distribution f ( n, w) , such
that Pr( n < 1) increases. Furthermore, suppose that the joint probability increases for all points with
n<1 and w<1, while the opposite happens at all other points in the (n, w) space. In this case, it is clear
that the joint conditional probability must also increase along with the marginal, with a theoretically
ambiguous implication for the conditional probability. (A similar argument can be made with respect to
how Pr( w < 1 n < 1) varies with Pr( w < 1) .)




                                                       12
        The model above formalizes the intuition that heterogeneity, such as due to intra-household
inequality or the local health environment, diminishes the scope for reaching poor individuals by
targeting poor households. It also shows that there is wide variation in how effective targeting poor
households will be for reaching undernourished individuals, and that higher rates of undernutrition have
an ambiguous effect on the conditional probabilities. But how much does this matter empirically? Is the
wealth effect on individual nutritional status strong enough to allow satisfactory targeting of vulnerable
women and children? The rest of this paper addresses these questions, also using some of the
measurement concepts above.

4.      Data

        Our data are drawn from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and the Living Standards
Measurement Study (LSMS). We use the most recent DHSs available at the time of writing and recent
LSMSs that collected nutrition data. 15 The Addendum to this paper gives details on the sample sizes and
years for all the DHS and LSMS surveys used in this study.
        Individual nutritional outcomes: We study the nutritional outcomes of women and children. For
women, the two variables we employ are the body mass index (BMI) (also known as the Quetelet index,
defined as a woman’s weight (in kilograms) divided by her height (in meters) squared) and an indicator
for being underweight, which is set equal to one if a woman’s BMI is lower than 18.5 and zero
otherwise. The DHSs exclude values of BMI that are smaller than 12 and greater than 60 on the grounds
that these are almost certainly measurement errors. We do the same for the consumption surveys. BMI is
computed by the DHSs for samples of women aged 15 through 49. For the LSMSs we restrict women to
the same age range. We exclude all women who report being pregnant at the survey date. 16, 17 On
average, pregnant women represent approximately 10 percent of all women aged between 15 and 49.
The Addendum gives the pregnancy incidence for each country in the DHS dataset.




15
   Several countries with DHSs had to be excluded due to older survey dates that did not contain many of the key variables
needed, namely the Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Madagascar, Sao Tome and Principe, and South Africa.
16
   Unfortunately, we are unable to exclude pregnant women for Tanzania’s consumption survey as it did not ask women
whether they were pregnant.
17
   We also dropped observations with missing values for any variables used in the paper, such that sample sizes are
consistently the same and comparable throughout the paper. However, we tested the effect of relaxing this constraint and
found that it makes negligible difference to the results.

                                                             13
         For children, we use the z-scores for height-for-age (stunting) and weight-for-height (wasting). 18
These anthropometric data are measured for all children aged under 5 in the DHSs and LSMSs. We then
create our measure for stunting (low height-for-age) and wasting (low weight-for-height). A child is
deemed to be stunted if his height-for-age z-score is two standard deviations below the median of the
reference group; wasting is defined similarly using weight-for-height. Stunting and wasting, while both
considered indicators of undernutrition, have different causes and effects. Stunting is an indicator of
persistent, longer-term, chronic undernutrition from which it is much harder for a child to recover.
Compared to wasting, it is known that stunting has adverse longer term consequences for child
development. 19 Wasting tends to be more responsive to short-term (possibly seasonal) food deprivations
or illnesses.
         Tables 1 and 2 give the summary statistics for the nutritional outcomes for women and children
using the DHSs and LSMSs. 20 Focusing on the larger sample of countries available in the DHSs and
taking population-weighted averages, we find that 11% of adult women are underweight, while 32% of
children are stunted and 9% are wasted (similar numbers are found for children in the LSMSs). Boys are
found to have a generally higher incidence of both stunting and wasting relative to girls although not all
the differences at the country level are statistically significant. 21 Across countries, a higher incidence of
underweight women is associated with a higher incidence of wasted children (r=0.40, significant at the
5% level 22). The correlation between women’s and children’s nutritional status is weaker for stunting
(r=0.14). 23 This is what we would expect if a woman being underweight and her children being wasted
are caused by similar short-term shocks, while stunting is a more long-term condition.
         For a subset of countries, the DHS additionally collected data on adult male anthropometrics
which provide an insight into the extent of intra-household inequality. Table 3 provides summary
statistics on the incidence of undernutrition for women and children stratified according to whether the
male head of household is underweight or not. We see that the incidence of undernutrition among


18
   These variables are already constructed in the DHSs. For the consumption surveys we use the Stata command zscore06 to
convert height and weight values into a standardized value. Z-scores are calculated using the WHO 2006 standard.
19
   See, for example, Walker et al. (2007) and Hoddinott et al. (2008).
20
   There are some discrepancies in the means between the two datasets, much of which is likely to do with the timing of the
surveys, although differences in sample selection and measurement may also be contributing.
21
   This result for the African context was first discussed in Svedberg (1990). Since then others report similar findings for Sub-
Saharan Africa (for example, WHO 2016 (Figure 8.7); Wamani et al. 2007).
22
   For prob.= 0.05, the critical value of the correlation coefficient is 0.306.
23
   This weak correlation between wasting and stunting is not surprising (Victora 1992). Although there is some evidence that
wasting in early childhood can cause subsequent stunting (Richard et al. 2012), the fact that stunting is a longer-term
condition while wasting tends to be more transient points to different causative factors.

                                                              14
women and children is lower when the male head is adequately nourished. However, substantial
inequality in nutritional status is also evident, and the gender inequality goes in both directions. The
majority of women in households where the male head is underweight are not undernourished, and there
is a high incidence of undernutrition among women and children in households where the male head is
not underweight. Table 3 also gives (in parentheses) the proportions of undernourished women and
children found in the two groups of households, identified by whether the male head is underweight or
not. (Note that the proportions sum to unity horizontally.) We see that the bulk of underweight women
(74%) are found in households where the male head is not underweight and similarly for stunted (80%)
and wasted (53%) children.
        Wealth and other covariates: When we say that a household is “wealth-poor” we are referring to
the DHS wealth index within a given country. The wealth index is a composite of variables related to a
household’s assets (including consumer durables) and amenities, including materials used for housing
construction and its access to water and sanitation. These variables are then aggregated by the DHS into
an index using factor-analytic methods, with the wealth index being identified as the first principal
component of the data. The DHS wealth index comes as a z-score, i.e., standardized with mean zero and
standard deviation of unity. So the index is country specific—not intended to be comparable across
countries. We take this index as given.
        We focus on the poorest 20% and 40% of households based on the wealth index. These are
arbitrary choices, although the 40% figure does coincide fairly closely with the overall poverty rate
found for SSA using the World Bank’s international line (Addendum). 24 The 20% figure allows us to
focus on the lower part of the wealth distribution. We also provide key results for the full range of the
distribution.
        It should not be forgotten that the DHS wealth index is a proxy, not a direct measure of wealth.
The index focuses on durable and productive asset wealth rather than labor or education wealth,
arguably the main assets of many among the poor. When compared to the results of a consumption
survey, the DHS index will undoubtedly count as poor some who are not (often called “inclusion
errors”) and count as non-poor some of those who are in fact poor (“exclusion errors”). Though in
practice, policy makers almost never have access to accurate measures of wealth or consumption, we
also conduct the analysis using household consumption per capita for the sub-set of countries for which


24
  Using the World Bank’s international line of $1.90 a day at 2011 purchasing power parity, 43% of the population of sub-
Saharan Africa are found to be poor in 2013 (based on PovcalNet).

                                                            15
this is feasible. Surveys that contain detailed household consumption data as well as anthropometrics for
women and children are not common, but some do exist including within the LSMSs (specifically the
LSMS Integrated Surveys on Agriculture) as listed in the Addendum. 25 The consumption variable is
spatially deflated and expressed in per capita terms.
           In an attempt to test whether controlling for additional information, including education and
labor assets, enhances predictive power, we draw on household and individual covariates from both
surveys. Variables based on the consumption surveys are constructed to be as similar as possible to
those available in the DHS data.
           The Addendum provides summary statistics for the wealth index and other key variables that are
typically included in the index or are standard in proxy-means-testing for each country. Descriptive
statistics for the variables from the consumption surveys are also shown in the Addendum. Overall,
means match reasonably well between the two datasets, though with some differences among the asset
variables.

5.         Individual outcomes and household wealth

           Wealth effects on nutritional status: Figure 1 plots the incidence of the three anthropometric
indices against percentiles of the household wealth index. Given that younger women typically have a
lower BMI, we plot incidence for all women 15 to 49 years of age, as well as for women 20 to 49 years
of age.. The wealth effect—whereby nutritional status improves with a higher DHS wealth index—is
generally evident. However, aside from child stunting, the wealth effect is clearly weak in most
countries. The incidence of being underweight is slightly higher for younger women, although the
relationship with household wealth is very similar. Child wasting in some countries shows little or no
sign of the wealth effect (notably Gabon, Gambia, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Swaziland). Figure 2 gives
the corresponding graphs using household consumption per capita. Similar comments apply.
           The overall strength of the household wealth effect for each country can be assessed by
regressing the standardized values for nutritional status (that is, the z-score for women’s BMI and
height-for-age and weight-for-height z-scores for children) on the wealth index, which (as noted) is also
a z-score. The regression coefficient gives the number of standard deviations of the nutritional indicator
attributed to a one standard deviation increase in wealth. Table 4 gives results using the DHS, and the
analogous results using standardized consumption z-scores from the LSMS. The estimated wealth

25
     Only the consumption survey from Ghana is not one of the Integrated Surveys on Agriculture within the LSMS.

                                                             16
effects are statistically significant in almost all cases (the exceptions are for child wasting in a few
countries). For women’s BMI the mean regression coefficient is 0.26, while it is 0.29 for the height-for-
age z-score and only 0.09 for weight-for-height. (The Addendum gives the coefficients separately for
boys and girls; the results are similar with no clear pattern in evidence.) For the countries where the
wealth effect on child stunting is highest (Burundi, Cameroon and Nigeria), a one standard deviation
increase in wealth is associated with a 0.5 standard deviation increase in the incidence of child stunting.
For about half the countries, the wealth effect on stunting is less than 0.3 standard deviations. The
overall incidence of undernutrition makes little different to the results, i.e. countries with low incidence
of undernutrition do not have stronger or weaker wealth effects relative to countries with a high
incidence of undernutrition.
       However, these results cannot tell us much about the efficacy of household wealth as a tool to
reach undernourished individuals. Low wealth effects such as evident in Table 4 need not imply that the
incidence of undernutrition is unresponsive to income or wealth differences (as demonstrated in
Ravallion, 1990). Moreover, as shown in Section 3, even if household wealth and individual nutritional
status are correlated it does not follow that a large proportion of undernourished individuals will be
found in the lower ends of the wealth distribution.
       Conditional and joint probabilities: Figure 3 gives the concentration curves, i.e., the cumulative
share of undernourished individuals by cumulative household wealth percentile ranked from the poorest
up. The greater the degree of concavity (intuitively meaning that the concentration curve is further above
the 45-degree line), the more undernourished individuals tend to be concentrated in the poorer strata of
household wealth. Similarly, Figure 4 displays the concentration curves using household consumption
per person as the ranking variable.
       We see in Figure 3 that there is marked concavity for some countries, notably Cameroon (for all
three indicators), Congo, Gabon and Ghana (for stunting), Gabon, Kenya, Uganda, Zambia and
Zimbabwe (for underweight women). However, in most cases the curves tend to be fairly close to the
diagonal line. The curve for underweight women tends to be above that for children in about half the
countries, though otherwise there is little sign of a clear ranking of the three indicators.
       For the rest of this discussion we focus on the points on the concentration curves corresponding
to the poorest 20% and 40% of the household wealth index. Table 5 presents the proportion of
undernourished women and children who falls into the bottom 20 and 40 percent of the household



                                                      17
wealth distribution. 26 Given the wealth effect on nutritional status, the values for underweight women
and stunted children are generally bounded below by Pr( w < 1) (either 0.2 or 0.4). The only exceptions
are for underweight women in Cote D’Ivoire, Gambia (for poorest 20%), and Gabon (for poorest 40%),
and child wasting in Gambia, Senegal, Sierra Leone and Swaziland, where the wealth effect is not
evident (Figure 1).
         There are a number of cases in which the rate of undernutrition exceeds the wealth poverty rate
i.e. Pr( w < 1) < Pr( n < 1) . Recall from Section 3 that in such cases the conditional probability is bounded
above by the ratio of the poverty rate to the rate of undernutrition. Indeed, this is true in most cases for
child stunting using the 20% cut off (though it is never the case for wasting) and in two cases for
women, namely Ethiopia and Senegal (Table 1). It follows then that the conditional probabilities will be
less than unity in these instances.
         However, what is striking about the results in Table 5 is how close the conditional probabilities
are to Pr( w < 1) . For 25 of the 30 countries less than 30% of underweight women are found in the
poorest 20% of households. This is true for 19 and 22 countries with regard to stunted and wasted
children (respectively). On average, roughly three-quarters of underweight women and undernourished
children are not found in the poorest 20% of households when judged by household wealth. And about
half of underweight women and undernourished children are not found in the poorest 40% of
households.
         We also did a breakdown of the conditional probabilities for stunting and wasting by gender.
Stunted and wasted girls are slightly more likely to be found in the bottom 20% and 40% of household
wealth than boys overall. However, this varies across countries. Boys have a slightly higher joint
probability on average; details can be found in the Addendum. However, the gender differences are
generally small.
         The countries with a higher percentage of undernourished women in the poorest strata of
households tend to also have a higher proportion of wasted children in that group; the correlation
coefficients are 0.62 and 0.64 for the poorest 20% and 40% respectively. This is also true for stunted
children although the correlations are somewhat weaker; the corresponding correlation coefficients are


26
   We also calculated the conditional probabilities for severely stunted children, where severe stunting is defined as three or
more standard deviations below the median height-for-age and weight-for-height z-scores respectively. Compared to Table 5,
we find that severely stunted children are more likely to be found in the poorest 20% and 40% of households; while on
average, 29% of stunted children are in the poorest wealth quintile this rises to 33% for severely stunted children. Full results
can be found in the Addendum.

                                                               18
0.33 and 0.43. There are only three countries (Cameroon, Ghana and Kenya) where more than 30% of
nutritionally deprived individuals are found in the poorest 20% for all three nutritional indicators.
       Table 6 provides the same statistics using the consumption indicator, with very similar results.
Overall, 70% of undernourished women are not found in the poorest 20% of households based on
consumption per person, while half of them are not found in the poorest 40%. For children, we similarly
find that about 70% of stunted and wasted children are not found in the poorest 20%. A little less than
half of stunted and wasted children are not found in the poorest 40%. Table 6 also lists the proportion of
undernourished women and children found in households deemed poor using the $1.90 per day poverty
rates. The pattern is similar to our findings using the wealth rankings, with conditional probabilities only
slightly higher than the national poverty rates in most cases. Even in countries with very high poverty
rates such as Burkina Faso and Malawi, the proportion of undernourished children found in poor
households is not much different to the poverty rate itself.
       On combining Tables 1 and 5, we can use equation (2) to infer the joint probabilities of being
both undernourished and wealth-poor, Pr( n < 1, w < 1) . The empirical values for the DHS data are given
in Table 7. For underweight women and the poorest 20%, the joint probability is under 0.04 for 26
countries. The mean joint probability of a woman being underweight and living in the poorest 20% of
households is only 0.03, rising to 0.05 for the poorest 40%. For child wasting, the probabilities are even
lower than for underweight women, at under 0.02 for two thirds of all countries. The joint probabilities
are higher for stunting, with a mean of 0.09 and 0.18 for the poorest 20% and 40%, respectively.
       As expected, the joint probabilities tend to be positively correlated with the marginals; the
bottom row of Table 7 gives the correlation coefficients. The table also gives the OLS elasticities across
countries (regression coefficients of the log joint probability on the log marginal probabilities). The
elasticities are all less than unity, implying that a higher rate of undernutrition should reduce the
conditional probability. On balance, we do find that countries with a higher overall incidence of
undernutrition tend to have a higher share of these disadvantageous outcomes among the “non-poor”
based on wealth. Figures 5, 6 and 7 plot the values from Tables 2 and 8 for the incidence of underweight
women, stunting and wasting respectively, highlighting the negative relationship between the joint and
marginal probabilities.
       These results suggest that when relatively few women or children are undernourished in a
country one tends to find them more concentrated in relatively poorer households. Conversely, when
there are many undernourished women and children one tends to find them more widely spread across

                                                     19
the household wealth distribution. From a policy perspective, these results suggest that targeting
relatively poor households will tend to work less well in reaching vulnerable women and children in
countries where the overall problem of undernutrition is greater. 27

6.       Explanations

         We comment on a number of possible explanations for our findings.
         Demographics of the poverty profile: As noted in Section 2, it might be conjectured that a
demographic imbalance between wealth fractiles is playing a role in our findings, given that poorer
households are often found to include more children. To account for the possibility that children (and
possibly women) are distributed unevenly across the household wealth distribution, we recalculate
wealth percentiles by balancing the demographic composition separately for women and children. In
other words, we rank all children (and similarly women) according to their household wealth and create
wealth percentiles such that x% of children fall into the bottom x% of the wealth distribution. We call
this the demographically-balanced wealth distribution.
         We found that the conditional probabilities using the demographically-balanced wealth fractiles
are very similar to those seen in Table 5 (full details are in the Addendum). On average, a slightly higher
proportion of undernourished women are located in the poorest 20 and 40 percent of the individual
wealth distribution relative to the household wealth distribution. The opposite is found for stunted and
wasted children (although this varies across countries), suggesting that poorer households do contain a
higher proportion of stunted and wasted children, though the difference is not large. The Addendum
gives the joint probabilities, with similar findings. The Addendum also provides both conditional and
joint probabilities for the consumption data. We conclude that demographic imbalance is not an
important factor in explaining our results.
         Selective child mortality: About 10% of children born in Sub-Saharan Africa die before they
reach five years of age. It is also known that mortality rates tend to be higher for poorer families. 28 As
noted in Section 2, there have been some studies of the effects of such selective mortality (also called
“survivor bias”) on various measures although the effects documented have tended to be small (Boerma


27
   This is also evident in the data for stunting in Africa assembled by Bredenkamp et al. (2014) (see the Africa data points in
their Figure 1), although across all developing countries Bredenkamp et al. find that inequalities in stunting are greater in
countries where stunting is more prevalent. Evidently Africa is different in this respect, though the reason is unclear.
28
   See, for example, UNICEF (2011, Figure 7). Ravallion (2016, Chapter 7) reviews past studies on the socio-economic
differentials in child mortality.

                                                              20
et al. 1992; Bozzoli et al. 2007; Alderman et al. 2012). How much are our results on the conditional
probabilities in Table 5 likely to have been affected by selective child mortality?
           We do not of course know what the nutritional status of the children who died would have been
had they lived. Child mortality is clearly more likely when children are undernourished, whether living
in a poor household or not. We assume that all those who died (whether living in poor households or
not) were undernourished. This is not likely to strictly hold, but it seems the most reasonable assumption
to make in this context. Naturally, child deaths among the undernourished living in non-poor households
will counteract to some extent the effect of selective mortality on the probability of living in a poor
household given that one is undernourished.
           Under this assumption one can readily derive the following formula for the counterfactual
conditional probability without child mortality:
                                             Pr( w < 1 n < 1) Pr( n < 1) + M ( w < 1) Pr( w < 1)
                     Pr * ( w < 1 n < 1) =                                                                                 (7)
                                                               Pr( n < 1) + M

Here M = CMR /(1 − CMR ) is the ratio of recorded child deaths to the number of live children, where
CMR is the overall child mortality rate (as a proportion of live births), while M ( w < 1) is the
corresponding odds ratio for poor households; 29 selective mortality here means that M ( w < 1) > M. Also,
Pr( w < 1) is defined as the poverty rate for children (the proportion of children under five living in poor

households). From equation (7) we can see that Pr ( w < 1 n < 1) > Pr( w < 1 n < 1) if and only if
                                                 *



M ( w < 1) / M > Pr * ( w < 1 n < 1) /(Pr( w < 1). Thus it is an empirical question as to whether selective
mortality increases the conditional probability under our assumptions.
           Averaged over all 30 countries we find M=0.140 while for the poorest 20% we obtain M ( w < 1)
=0.157. And we find that Pr( w < 1) = 0.235. On using our data to evaluate the above formula we find
that the counterfactual conditional probability for child stunting is 0.28, as compared to 0.29 in Table 5.
For the poorest 40%, the estimated counterfactual conditional probability is 0.54, as compared to 0.55
(Table 5). ( Pr( w < 1) = 0.459.) For child wasting, the mean counterfactual probabilities of 0.27 and 0.51
are essentially no different to that in Table 5 for the poorest 20% and 40% respectively. Thus, under our
assumptions, selective mortality is not attenuating the conditional probability of interest.



29
     Note that the odds ratio appears here because child mortality rates are usually expressed as a proportion of live births.

                                                                 21
       Measurement error in nutritional outcomes: Another potential explanation for the above results
is measurement error in the nutritional outcomes. This could be particularly true for very young
children, for which accurate anthropometric measurement can be difficult (Ulijaszek and Kerr 1999;
Larson et al. 2017; Agarwal et al. 2017). We re-estimate the conditional probabilities for stunting and
wasting for children 18 months and older only. We find very similar results to Table 8; on average, only
29% of stunted children and 28% of wasted children 18 months and over are found in the poorest 20%
of households. (Full results can be found in the Addendum.)
       We further consider the relationship between nutritional outcomes for mothers and their children.
If measurement error in outcomes is confounding the results, we might expect the relationship to be
quite weak. We first look at the difference in means for both height-for-age and weight-for-height z-
scores for children with underweight mothers and find that children whose mothers are underweight
have significantly lower height-for-age and weight-for-height z-scores across almost all countries (the
Addendum contains the full results). Correlation coefficients between mothers’ BMI and child height-
for-age and weight-for-height z-scores are positive and significant for all countries except Lesotho (see
the Addendum). While measurement error may be a factor, it is unlikely to fully explain our results.
       Intra-household inequality in nutritional status: Table 8 examines the variation in nutritional
outcomes within the household. Using the DHSs for which nutritional outcomes are available for all
household members, we construct a binary indicator variable set equal to one if an adult is considered
underweight, or if a child is either stunted and/or wasted, and zero otherwise. Using the mean and
variance from the Bernoulli distribution, we can look at average variation in undernutrition within the
household across countries for which we have nutritional data for all household members. For example,
the entry “0.338” under “Mean” for Ethiopia indicates that 34% of individuals in the sampled
households were deemed to be nutritionally deficient (either in terms of BMI for adults or one or both z-
scores for children); when stratified by whether the male head is underweight or not, the corresponding
percentages are 65% and 19%.
       The higher the mean rate of undernutrition, the higher the average variance within households.
However, when we break down variation within households by gender of the household head, we find
that even though the average rate of undernutrition is higher for households with underweight female
heads relative to underweight male heads, the average variation within the household in terms of
nutritional outcomes is much lower. A similar pattern emerges when we consider male and female heads



                                                    22
who are not underweight. This suggests that there is less intra-household inequality in terms of
nutritional outcomes in households headed by women relative to those with male heads.
         How much does intra-household inequality in nutritional status contribute to the seemingly low
conditional probabilities that we have found (such as in Table 5)? A straightforward way to assess this is
to re-calculate the conditional probabilities using artificial distributions in which we replace the
measured BMI of each adult by the household mean BMI, and similarly for children’s z-scores. That is,
every adult and child within the household has the same nutritional status. Table 9 gives the results. The
column “actual” refers to the calculated conditional probability from the original data. The numbers
under “regular cutoff” are the corresponding probabilities when we re-assign each adult the household
mean BMI and similarly for children. Given that the distribution functions are not linear, equalizing the
nutritional status within households does not assure that the overall rate of undernutrition is unchanged,
so the numbers in the “regular cutoff” column may be affected by the change in the mean undernutrition
rate. To check this possibility, we also give estimates under “new cutoff” in which we adjust the
nutritional thresholds to balance the overall rate of undernutrition. 30 In almost all cases we find that the
conditional probabilities are higher when we artificially eliminate intra-household inequality. However,
the effect is modest. While intra-household inequality is clearly lowering the conditional probabilities, it
is clear that other factors are in play.
         Common health risks: It is known that health shocks often impede nutritional absorption. While
it is likely that higher household wealth can help parents protect their children from health risks, there
are clear limits, leaving locally covariate health risks facing children in non-poor families. The DHS
provide some useful clues to the extent of these common health risks. For children under 5, Figure 8
plots the incidence of reported diarrhea in the past two weeks, the incidence of blood in the stool (when
diarrhea is reported), and the incidence of fever in the last two weeks. While there are signs of a wealth
effect in most cases, it is clearly not strong. It is evident that health risks are spread quite widely across
the distribution of households in all countries studied, which is likely to be a contributing factor in our
results on the conditional probabilities.
         Other sources of heterogeneity: Introducing other household-level factors can be expected to
enhance power for predicting individual outcomes. Separating out the components of the DHS wealth
index can also help address possible concerns with the weights used in constructing the index; for

30
  Recall that for two of the countries in Table 15 (Ethiopia and Senegal) the undernutrition rate for women exceeds 20%. For
these countries, the conditional probability cannot exceed 0.75 and 0.90. Even so, it remains clear that only a small share of
the gap between the estimated conditional probability and its maximum value can be attributed to intra-household inequality.

                                                             23
example, the index may not adequately adjust for economies of scale in consumption. Adding basic
individual-level variables such as age, education and marital status for women may also enhance
targeting capability. 31 For example, mother’s education is likely to be an important factor especially
through knowledge about nutrition and health care. To test these conjectures we use an augmented
regression to include such household- (and individual-) level variables. The regressions can be expected
to perform similarly to the widely-used PMT method based on the predicted values of regressions
calibrated to survey data (Brown et al. 2016).
        The first model we consider regresses nutritional outcomes on the household wealth index and
other household-level variables:
                         𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼𝑚𝑚 + 𝛽𝛽𝑚𝑚 𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 + 𝛾𝛾𝑚𝑚 𝑥𝑥𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖                             (8)
where 𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the anthropometric index for individual 𝑖𝑖 in household 𝑗𝑗 in country 𝑚𝑚 and 𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 is the
household wealth index. The vector 𝑥𝑥𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 includes the separate components of the wealth index
(essentially to allow a re-weighting of the index), as well as other household-level variables such as size
and composition, and characteristics of the head. Dummies for survey month and region of residence are
also entered as controls. Model 2 adds the observable individual-level variables, 𝑧𝑧𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 :
                        𝑦𝑦𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼𝑚𝑚 + 𝛽𝛽𝑚𝑚 𝑤𝑤𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 + 𝛾𝛾𝑚𝑚 𝑥𝑥𝑗𝑗𝑗𝑗 + 𝛿𝛿𝑚𝑚 𝑧𝑧𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝜀𝜀𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖              (9)
For the incidence of underweight women, the individual-level attributes include the woman’s age (BMI
tends to increase as women age), education and marital status. For children, age, gender, and
characteristics of the child’s mother are included. To avoid ad hoc functional form assumptions, age
and education variables as well as household size are broken into categories each of which is entered as
a dummy variable. OLS is used to estimate each model, with standard errors clustered at the PSU. (The
Addendum gives the actual regressions.)
        Tables 10 and 11 present the results for Models 1 and 2 for underweight women and
undernourished children respectively. The tables give the proportion of undernourished individuals who
fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the distribution of the predicted values based on wealth and (unlike
prior tables) the additional covariates. We find that, on average, 32% of underweight women are found
in the poorest 20% based on the predicted values from Model 1 (Table 10), as compared to 25% using
only the household wealth index (Table 5). Focusing instead on the poorest 40%, the proportion rises to
56% using Model 1, as compared to 48% using wealth alone. Adding the individual variables (Model 2)

31
  Recent research has argued that widows and remarried women often fare poorly when compared to married once women
(Anderson and Ray 2015; Djuikom and van de Walle 2017).

                                                                24
we now find that (on average) 37% of underweight women are found in the poorest 20% in terms of the
predicted values, rising to 61% for the poorest 40%. Similar improvements are evident for both stunting
and wasting in children (comparing Tables 11 and 5).
       Among all the changes we have considered, these augmented regressions do the most to raise the
conditional probabilities. This is possibly not surprising given the large amount of extra data used and
the fact that the predicted values are calibrated to explaining individual attainments. That appears to be
rare in practice; for example, popular PMT methods are calibrated to explain household consumption
rather than individual nutritional status (Brown et al., 2016). Nor is it surprising that the probabilities
generally reach their highest values when one includes individualized data; household data alone cannot
be expected to do as well. However, based on Tables 10 and 11 it cannot reasonably be said that even
these predicted values based on augmented regressions calibrated to nutritional status do a good job at
identifying undernourished individuals within households.

7.     Conclusions

       There are multiple constraints on effective policy interventions in practice. Focusing on a key but
neglected informational constraint, we have asked whether household poverty might provide a reliable
guide for policy efforts trying to reach deprived individuals, as indicated by anthropometric measures of
undernutrition, recognizing that poverty is an individual characteristic. We do not claim that
information is the only constraint. Even if undernourished women and children are mainly found in
wealth- or consumption-poor households, other factors such as the local health environment can play an
important role in determining policy effectiveness.
       Individual welfare clearly depends on more than nutritional status, and we cannot rule out the
possibility that household-level data are more revealing for other non-nutrition dimensions. That said,
undernutrition is an undeniably important dimension of individual poverty and it has long played a
central role in the measurement of poverty using household data. This dimension of welfare is also
emphasized by policy makers concerned with reducing both current and longer-term poverty. The
mounting evidence on the longer-term costs of stunting in young children adds force to that emphasis.
       A great deal has been learnt about the socioeconomic differentials in individual health and
nutrition from micro data, typically using cross-tabulations or regressions. This knowledge is valuable.
However, there is a risk that the differentials in mean attainments often found between rich and poor
households lead policy makers to be overly optimistic about the scope for reaching vulnerable

                                                      25
individuals using household-level data. Standard poverty data make ad hoc assumptions about equality
within households. Just how adequate household-level data are for the policy purpose of reaching
vulnerable women and children has been unclear.
       To help improve our knowledge about this informational constraint on policy, the paper has
provided a comprehensive study for 30 countries in sub-Saharan Africa. We find a reasonably robust
household-wealth effect on individual undernutrition indicators for women and children. Nonetheless,
on aggregating across the 30 countries studied here, about three-quarters of underweight women and
undernourished children are not found in the poorest 20% of households when judged by the household
wealth index in the Demographic and Health Surveys. A similar pattern is found in the available
household surveys that allow a comparison of individual nutritional measures with an estimate of the
household’s consumption per person, which is clearly the most widely used welfare metric in measuring
poverty in developing countries. Adding other household variables—interpreted as either a re-weighting
of the DHS wealth index or as supplementary variables—improves the performance of household data in
this respect, but we still find that a large share of undernourished individuals are not among those
predicted to be undernourished based on household variables. It is clear from this study that to have any
hope of reaching undernourished women and children, policy interventions in this setting will either
require much more individualized intra-household information or they will need to be nearly-universal
in coverage.
       This dispersion of undernourished individuals across the distributions of household wealth and
consumption entails that countries with a higher overall incidence of undernutrition tend to be countries
where a larger share of the undernourished are found in non-poor families. This suggests that the need
for broad coverage in social policies (rather than policies finely targeted to poor households) is
especially great in countries with a high incidence of undernutrition. Rather than folding nutrition
schemes into household-targeted antipoverty programs in such countries, emphasis should be given to
nutritional interventions with near universal coverage, such as comprehensive school feeding (with
explicit nutrition supplementation), maternal health care and universal sanitation services.
       In addition to documenting the limitations of relying on household poverty data to reach
nutritionally deprived individuals, we have thrown some light on why those limitations are so severe.
For the subset of countries for which we also know adult male BMI, we have shown that the extent of
intra-household inequality entails that the bulk of underweight women and undernourished children are
found in households where the male head appears to be adequately nourished. The data also reveal less

                                                    26
intra-household inequality in nutritional outcomes for households headed by women relative to those
headed by men irrespective of whether the head is undernourished or not. However, simulations to
quantify the contribution of intra-household inequality to lowering the conditional probabilities suggest
that other factors are also playing an important role. We find evidence consistent with the view that
covariate risks found in the local health environment help explain why undernutrition in children is
spread so widely across the distribution of household wealth.




                                                    27
References

Agarwal, Neha, Anaka Aiyer, Arpita Bhattacharjee, Joseph Cummins, Christian Gunadi, Deepak
       Singhania, Matthew Taylor and Evan Wigton-Jones. 2017. “Month of Birth and Child Height in
       40 Countries,” mimeo, Department of Economics, University of California, Riverside.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken and Julia Tobias. 2012. “Targeting the
       Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” American Economic Review 102(4):
       1206-1240.
Alderman, Harold. 2015. “Leveraging Social Protection Programs for Improved Nutrition: Summary of
       Evidence Prepared for the Global Forum on Nutrition-Sensitive Social Protection Programs,
       2015,” Available at SSRN 2831575 (2015).
Alderman, Harold, Michael Lokshin, and Sergiy Radyakin. 2011. "Tall Claims: Mortality Selection and
       the Height of Children in India," Economics & Human Biology 9(4): 393-406.
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. 2010. “Missing Women: Age and Disease,” Review of Economic
       Studies 77(4): 1262-1300.
_____________ and _________. 2015. “Missing Unmarried Women,” NBER Working Paper 21511.
Baland, Jean-Marie, and Roberta Ziparo. 2017. “The (In)-efficiency of Intra-household Bargaining in
       Poor Countries,” mimeo, University of Namur.
Behrman, Jere, and Anil Deolalikar. 1987. “Will Developing Country Nutrition Improve with Income?
       A Case Study for Rural South India,” Journal of Political Economy 95: 108-138.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Samantha B. Rawlings. 2011. “Intergenerational Persistence in Health in
       Developing Countries: The Penalty of Gender Inequality?” Journal of Public Economics 95(3):
       286-299.
Bhalotra, Sonia, and Samantha B. Rawlings. 2013. “Gradients of the Intergenerational Transmission of
       Health in Developing Countries.” Review of Economics and Statistics 95(2): 660-672.
Bhutta Zulfiqar, Jai Das, Arjumand Rizvi, Michelle Gaffey, Neff Walker, Susan Horton, Patrick Webb,
       Anna Lartey, and Robert Black. 2013. “Evidence-Based Interventions for Improvement of
       Maternal and Child Nutrition: What Can be Done and at What Cost?” Lancet 382(9890): 452-77.
Bicego, George, Shea Rutstein, and Kiersten Johnson. 2003. “Dimensions of the Emerging Orphan
       Crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Social Science and Medicine 56(6): 1235-1247.




                                                  28
Bidani, Benu and Martin Ravallion. 1997. “Decomposing Social Indicators Using Distributional Data,”
       Journal of Econometrics 77(1): 125-140.
Boerma, Ties, Elisabeth Sommerfelt, and George Bicego. 1992. “Child Anthropometry in Cross-Sectional
       Surveys in Developing Countries: An Assessment of the Survivor Bias,” American Journal of
       Epidemiology 135(4): 438–49.
Bozzoli, Carlos, Angus Deaton and Climent Quintanta-Domeque. 2007. “Adult Height and Childhood
       Disease,” Demography 46(4): 647–69.
Bredenkamp, Caryn, Leander R Buisman and Ellen Van de Poel. 2014. “Persistent Inequalities in Child
       Undernutrition: Evidence from 80 Countries, from 1990 to Today,” International Journal of
       Epidemiology 43(4): 1328–1335
Brown, Caitlin, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle. 2016. “A Poor Means Test?
       Econometric Targeting in Africa,” NBER Working Paper 22919.
Case, Anne, Christina Paxson and Joseph Ableidinger. 2004. “Orphans in Africa: Poverty and School
       Enrollment,” Demography 41(3): 483-508.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Maurizio Mazzocco. 2015. “Static and Intertemporal Household
       Decisions,” mimeo, Department of Economics, Columbia University.
Coady, David, Margaret Grosh and John Hoddinott. 2004. Targeting Transfers in Developing Countries:
       Review of Lessons and Experience, Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Del Ninno, Carlo and Bradford Mills. 2015 (Eds.). Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to
       Reach the Poor and Most Vulnerable. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Dercon, Stefan and Pramila Krishnan. 2000. “In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing within
       Households in Rural Ethiopia,” Journal of Political Economy 108(4): 688-727.
Desai, Sonalde. 1995."When are Children from Large Families Disadvantaged? Evidence from Cross-
       National Analyses." Population Studies 49(2): 195-210.
De Vreyer, Philippe, and Sylvie Lambert. 2016. “Intra-household Inequalities and Poverty in Senegal,”
       mimeo, Paris School of Economics.
Djuikom, Marie Albertine and Dominique van de Walle. 2017. “Marital Shocks and Women’s Welfare
       in Africa,” mimeo, World Bank, Washington, DC
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Raymond Guiteras and Thomas Clasen. 2015. “Toilets can Work:
       Short and Medium Run Health Impacts of Addressing Complementarities and Externalities in
       Water and Sanitation,” NBER Working Paper 21521.


                                                  29
Evans, David and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longitudinal Analysis,”
       Demography 44(1): 35-57.
Ezememari, Kene, Nazmul Chaudhury and Janet Owens. 2002. “Gender and Risk in the Design of
       Social Protection Interventions,” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series No. 0231, World
       Bank, Washington, DC.
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett. 2001. “Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data—or
       Tears: An Application to Educational Enrollments in States of India.” Demography 38(1): 115-
       132.
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett. 1999. “The Effect of Household Wealth on Educational Attainment:
       Evidence from 35 Countries.” Population and Development Review 25(1): 85-120.
Filmer, Deon and Kinnon Scott. 2012. “Assessing Asset Indices.” Demography 49(1): 359-392.
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2010. Conditional Cash Transfers for Attacking Present and
       Future Poverty, World Bank, Washington DC.
Grogan, Louise and Luc Moers. 2016. “Wealthier is not Healthier in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Mimeo,
       University of Guelph.
Haddad, Lawrence and Ravi Kanbur. 1990. “How Serious is the Neglect of Intra-Household
       Inequality?” Economic Journal 100: 866-881.
Haddad, Lawrence, Harold Alderman, Simon Appleton, Lina Song, and Yisehac Yohannes. 2003.
       “Reducing Child Malnutrition: How Far Does Income Growth Take Us?” World Bank Economic
       Review 17(1): 107-131.
Hoddinott, John, John Maluccio, Jere Behrman, Rafael Flores, and Reynaldo Martorell. 2008. “Effect of
       a Nutrition Intervention During Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan
       Adults,” Lancet 371:411–6.
Hong, Rathavuth and Rathmony Hong. 2007. “Economic Inequality and Undernutrition in Women:
       Multilevel Analysis of Individual, Household, and Community Levels in Cambodia.” Food and
       Nutrition Bulletin 28(1): 59-66.
Howe, Laura, James Hargreaves, Sabine Gabrysch, and Sharon Huttly. 2009. “Is the Wealth Index a
       Proxy for Consumption Expenditure? A Systematic Review.” Journal of Epidemiology and
       Community Health 63(11): 871-877.




                                                 30
Kakwani, Nanak, Adam Wagstaff and Eddy van Doorslaer. 1997. “Socioeconomic Inequalities in
       Health: Measurement, Computation and Statistical Inference,” Journal of Econometrics 77(1):
       87-103.
Kidd, Stephen and Emily Wylde. 2011. “Targeting the Poorest: An Assessment of the Proxy Means Test
       Methodology,” AusAid Research Paper, AusAid, Canberra.
Lambert, Sylvie, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle. 2014. “Intergenerational Mobility and
       Interpersonal Inequality in an African Economy,” Journal of Development Economics 110: 327-
       344.
Larsen, Anna Folke, Derek Headey, William A. Masters. 2017. “Misreporting Month of Birth:
       Implications for Nutrition Research,” IFPRI Discussion Paper 01617.
Madise, Nyovani, Zoe Matthews, and Barrie Margetts. 1999. “Heterogeneity of Child Nutritional Status
       between Households: A Comparison of Six Sub-Saharan African Countries.” Population Studies
       53(3): 331-43.
Manley, James, Seth Gitter, and Vanya Slavchevska. 2013. "How Effective are Cash Transfers at
       Improving Nutritional Status?" World Development 48: 133-155.
Moradi, Alexander. 2010. “Selective Mortality or Growth after Childhood? What Really is Key to
       Understand the Puzzling Tall Adult Heights in Sub-Saharan Africa?” mimeo, University of
       Sussex, UK.
Ngure, Francis, Brianna Reid, Jean Humphrey, Mduduzi Mbuya, Gretel Pelto and Rebecca Stoltzfus.
       2014. “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), Environmental Enteropathy, Nutrition, and
       Early Child Development: Making the Links,” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
       1308(1): 118-128.
O’Donnell, Owen, Eddy van Doorslaer, Adam Wagstaff and Magnus Lindelow. 2008. Analyzing Health
       Equity Using Household Survey Data, World Bank.
Petrou, Stavos, and Emil Kupek. 2010. “Poverty and Childhood Undernutrition in Developing
       Countries: A Multi-National Cohort Study,” Social Science and Medicine 71: 1366-1373.
Pitt, Mark. 1983. “Food Preferences and Nutrition in Rural Bangladesh,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics LXV: 105-114.
Ravallion, Martin. 1990. “Income Effects on Undernutrition,” Economic Development and Cultural
       Change 38: 490-515.



                                                 31
Ravallion, Martin. 1992. “Does Undernutrition Respond to Incomes and Prices? Dominance Tests for
       Indonesia,” World Bank Economic Review 6: 109-124.
Ravallion, Martin. 2009. “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of the Antipoverty Program?”
       World Bank Research Observer 24(3): 205-231.
Ravallion, Martin. 2016. The Economics of Poverty. History, Measurement, and Policy. New York:
       Oxford University Press.
Richard, Stephanie, Robert Black, Robert Gilman, Richard Guerrant, Gagandeep Kang, Claudio Lanata,
       Ka˚re Mølbak, Zeba Rasmussen, Bradley Sack, Palle Valentiner-Branth, William Checkley, and
       Childhood Infection and Malnutrition Network. 2012. “Wasting is Associated with Stunting in
       Early Childhood,” Journal of Nutrition: Nutritional Epidemiology 142: 1291–1296.
Ruel, Marie, Harold Alderman, and Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. "Nutrition-
       sensitive Interventions and Programmes: How can they Help to Accelerate Progress in
       Improving Maternal and Child Nutrition?" The Lancet 382: 536-551.
Sahn, David and David Stifel. 2003. “Exploring Alternative Measures of Welfare in the Absence of
       Expenditure Data.” Review of Income and Wealth 49: 463–489.
Sahn, David and Stephen Younger. 2009. “Measuring Intra-Household Health Inequality: Explorations
       Using the Body Mass Index.” Health Economics 18: S13-S36.
Smith, Lisa and Lawrence Haddad. 2015. “Reducing Child Undernutrition: Past Drivers and Priorities
       for the Post-MDG Era,” World Development 68: 180-204.
Spears, Dean. 2013. “How Much Intergenerational Variation in Child Height Can Sanitation Explain?”
       Policy Research Working Paper 6351, World Bank.
Steckel, Richard. 1995. “Stature and the Standard of Living,” Journal of Economic Literature 33(4):
       1903–1940.
Svedberg, Peter. 1990. “Undernutrition in Sub‐Saharan Africa: Is there a Gender Bias?” Journal of
       Development Studies 26(3): 469-486.
Ulijaszek, Stanley J. and Deborah A. Kerr. 1999. “Anthropometric Measurement Error and the
       Assessment of Nutritional Status,” British Journal of Nutrition 82: 165-177.
UNICEF. 2011. Levels and Trends in Child Mortality. UNICEF and collaborating agencies, New York.
van de Walle, Dominique. 2013. “Lasting Welfare Effects of Widowhood in Mali.” World Development
       51: 1-19.



                                                  32
Victora, Cesar. 1992. “The Association between Wasting and Stunting: An International Perspective.”
       Journal of Nutrition 122(5): 1105–10.
Wagstaff, Adam. 2003. “Child Health on a Dollar a Day: Some Tentative Cross-country Comparisons.”
       Social Science and Medicine 57(9): 1529-38.
Wagstaff, Adam, Caryn Bredenkamp, and Leander Buisman. 2014. “Progress on Global Health Goals:
       Are the Poor Being Left Behind?” World Bank Research Observer 29(2): 137-162.
Wagstaff, Adam and Naoko Watanabe. 2000. “Socioeconomic Inequalities in Child Malnutrition in the
       Developing World.” Policy Research Working Paper 2434, World Bank.
Walker, Susan, Theodore Wachs, Julie Gardner, Betsy Lozoff, Gail Wasserman, Ernesto Pollitt, and
       Julie Carter. 2007. “Child Development: Risk Factors for Adverse Outcomes in Developing
       Countries.” Lancet 369 (9556): 145–57.
Wamani, Henry, Anne Nordrehaug Åstrøm, Stefan Peterson, James K. Tumwine, and Thorkild
       Tylleskär. 2007. “Boys are more Stunted than Girls in Sub-Saharan Africa: a Meta-Analysis of
       16 Demographic and Health Surveys.” BMC Pediatrics. 7(1): 17-27.
World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington,
       DC.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2016. From Promise to Impact: Ending Malnutrition by 2030.
       Geneva: World Health Organization.
Zere, Eyob, and Diane McIntyre. 2003. “Inequities in Under-five Child Malnutrition in South Africa.”
       International Journal for Equity in Health 2 (1): 1.




                                                   33
Figure 1: Nutritional outcomes and household wealth




                                              34
Note: The graphs show proportions of underweight women and of stunted and wasted children aged between 0 and 5 across the distribution
of household wealth percentiles. Data are drawn from DHS. Observations with missing values and pregnant women have been dropped.
The solid line represents women aged 15 through 49; while the dashed line represents women aged 20 through 49. Households are ranked
by their wealth index and placed into wealth percentiles. A lowess regression is used to fit the lines.




                                                                 35
Figure 2: Nutritional outcomes and household consumption




Note: The graphs show proportions of underweight women and of stunted and wasted children aged between 0 and 5, across the
distribution of per capita consumption percentiles. Data are drawn from LSMSs. Observations with missing values and pregnant women in
Ghana have been dropped. The solid line represents women aged 15 through 49; while the dashed line represents women aged 20 through
49. Households are ranked by their spatially deflated per capita consumption and placed into consumption percentiles. A lowess regression
is used to fit the lines.




                                                                   36
Figure 3: Concentration curves for undernutrition and household wealth




                                              37
Note: The graphs show the concentration curves for the cumulative proportion of women aged 15-49 who are underweight, and children
aged 0-5 who are stunted and wasted at each household wealth percentile. Data is drawn from the DHS. Observations with missing values
and pregnant women have been dropped. Households are ranked by their wealth index and placed into wealth percentiles. The Stata
command glcurve is used to construct the lines.




                                                                 38
Figure 4: Concentration curves for undernutrition and household consumption




Note: The graphs show the concentration curves for the cumulative proportion of women aged 15-49 who are underweight, and children
aged 0-5 who are stunted and wasted at each household consumption percentile. Data is drawn from LSMSs. Observations with missing
values and pregnant women in Ghana have been dropped. Households are ranked by their spatially deflated per capita consumption and
placed into consumption percentiles. The Stata command glcurve is used to construct the lines.




                                                                 39
Figure 5: Countries with fewer underweight women tend to have a higher proportion of those
women in wealth-poor households

                                                 .7
         Proportion of underweight women found




                                                 .6


                                                 .5
                   in poor households




                                                                                                                                         Poorest 40%
                                                 .4
                                                                                                                                         (r=-0.31)

                                                 .3


                                                 .2                                                                                      Poorest 20%
                                                                                                                                         (r=-0.31)

                                                 .1


                                                 .0
                                                   .000   .025   .050   .075   .100   .125   .150   .175   .200   .225   .250   .275   .300

                                                                        Proportion of all women who are underweight

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a woman being both underweight and in a poor household against the share of
women who are underweight for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                             40
Figure 6: Countries with fewer stunted children tend to have a higher proportion of those children
in wealth-poor households


                                                .7
         Proportion of stunted children found




                                                .6
             in wealth-poor households




                                                .5

                                                .4                                                                                           Poorest 40%
                                                                                                                                             (r=-0.65)
                                                .3

                                                .2
                                                                                                                                             Poorest 20%
                                                .1                                                                                           (r=-0.61)


                                                .0
                                                     .00 .04   .08   .12   .16   .20   .24   .28 .32   .36   .40   .44   .48   .52   .56   .60

                                                                           Proportion of all children who are stunted

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a child being both stunted and in a poor household against the share of children
who are stunted for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                              41
Figure 7: Countries with fewer wasted children tend to have a higher proportion of those children
in wealth-poor households



                                               .7
         Proportion of wasted children found




                                               .6
             in wealth-poor households




                                               .5
                                                                                                                                Poorest 40%
                                                                                                                                (r=-0.33)
                                               .4

                                               .3
                                                                                                                                Poorest 20%
                                               .2                                                                               (r=-0.34)

                                               .1

                                               .0
                                                    .00   .02   .04        .06      .08        .10    .12         .14   .16   .18

                                                                      Proportion of all children who are wasted

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a child being both wasted and in a poor household against the share of children
who are wasted for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                          42
Figure 8: Health outcomes for children and household wealth




                                              43
Note: The graphs show the proportion of children aged between 0 and 5 who have suffered diarrhea in the past two weeks, the proportion
of children suffering from diarrhea who have had blood in their stool, and the proportion of children who have had a fever in the last two
weeks across the distribution of household wealth percentiles. Data are drawn from DHS. Households are ranked by their wealth index and
placed into wealth percentiles. A lowess regression is used to fit the lines.




                                                                   44
                       Table 1: Summary statistics for nutritional indicators using DHS

                 Underweight                       Stunted children                                     Wasted children
                   women
                                       Boys            Girls             Mean               Boys            Girls             Mean
Benin                 0.064            0.434           0.378             0.407             0.151            0.137             0.144
Burkina Faso          0.154            0.315           0.279             0.298             0.150            0.128             0.139
Burundi               0.160            0.553           0.478             0.516             0.051            0.050             0.051
Cameroon              0.068            0.292           0.267             0.279             0.059            0.041             0.050
Congo                 0.144            0.175           0.200             0.187             0.046            0.055             0.051
Cote D'Ivoire         0.078            0.258           0.220             0.238             0.078            0.065             0.071
DRC                   0.144            0.379           0.353             0.366             0.085            0.059             0.072
Ethiopia              0.266            0.393           0.383             0.388             0.096            0.076             0.086
Gabon                 0.074            0.147           0.115             0.131             0.035            0.029             0.032
Gambia                0.167            0.207           0.192             0.200             0.124            0.096             0.110
Ghana                 0.061            0.137           0.130             0.134             0.050            0.057             0.053
Guinea                0.122            0.280           0.257             0.269             0.102            0.096             0.099
Kenya                 0.122            0.301           0.285             0.293             0.064            0.051             0.058
Lesotho               0.058            0.332           0.274             0.302             0.039            0.022             0.030
Liberia               0.073            0.272           0.238             0.257             0.059            0.056             0.058
Malawi                0.087            0.445           0.382             0.413             0.040            0.035             0.038
Mali                  0.114            0.338           0.336             0.337             0.117            0.121             0.119
Mozambique            0.086            0.384           0.359             0.371             0.052            0.046             0.049
Namibia               0.140            0.184           0.169             0.176             0.108            0.054             0.081
Niger                 0.154            0.360           0.350             0.355             0.166            0.141             0.153
Nigeria               0.111            0.338           0.314             0.326             0.169            0.156             0.163
Rwanda                0.070            0.388           0.342             0.365             0.030            0.020             0.025
Senegal               0.222            0.156           0.144             0.159             0.083            0.070             0.090
Sierra Leone          0.090            0.330           0.324             0.327             0.082            0.082             0.082
Swaziland             0.033            0.250           0.202             0.226             0.022            0.018             0.020
Tanzania              0.113            0.373           0.338             0.355             0.043            0.038             0.040
Togo                  0.070            0.220           0.207             0.214             0.072            0.051             0.062
Uganda                0.117            0.307           0.256             0.281             0.038            0.039             0.039
Zambia                0.102            0.357           0.329             0.343             0.054            0.056             0.055
Zimbabwe              0.070            0.272           0.239             0.256             0.032            0.024             0.028
Mean                  0.114            0.334           0.307             0.321             0.092            0.081             0.086

Note: Observations with missing values and pregnant women are dropped. Means are population weighted. Women between 15 and 49
years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included. A woman is underweight if she has a BMI less than or equal to 18.5. A
child is stunted if she is two standard deviations below median height-for-age and wasted if she is two standard deviations below median
weight-for-height.




                                                                   45
                      Table 2: Summary statistics for nutritional indicators using LSMS

                 Underweight                       Stunted children                                    Wasted children
                   women
                                       Boys              Girls            Mean              Boys             Girls             Mean
Burkina Faso          n.a.             0.381            0.301             0.342             0.127            0.092             0.110
Ethiopia              n.a.             0.410            0.401             0.406             0.133            0.109             0.121
Ghana                0.081             0.388            0.382             0.385             0.209            0.196             0.202
Malawi                n.a.             0.281            0.238             0.260             0.080            0.079             0.079
Nigeria               n.a.             0.242            0.225             0.234             0.120            0.092             0.106
Tanzania             0.095             0.138            0.102             0.120             0.043            0.054             0.048
Uganda                n.a.             0.335            0.230             0.280             0.035            0.037             0.036
Mean                  n.a.             0.307            0.268             0.287             0.100            0.087             0.093

Note: Data are drawn from LSMSs. Observations with missing values have been dropped. Means are population weighted. Women
between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included in the sample. A woman is underweight if she has a
BMI less than or equal to 18.5. A child is stunted if she is two standard deviations below median height-for-age and wasted if she is two
standard deviations below median weight-for-height.




                                                                   46
                                              Table 3: Incidence of undernutrition for countries with data on male BMI

                Underweight                            Male head is underweight                                             Male head is not underweight
              Men       Women       Underweight         Stunted children           Wasted children        Underweight          Stunted children           Wasted children
                                      women                                                                 women
                                                       Boys          Girls         Boys        Girls                          Boys          Girls         Boys         Girls
Ethiopia      0.371      0.266          0.333          0.398         0.375        0.142        0.100          0.255          0.371          0.351         0.073        0.063
                                       (0.333)        (0.310)       (0.266)      (0.451)      (0.351)        (0.667)        (0.690)        (0.734)       (0.549)      (0.649)
Ghana         0.104      0.061          0.166          0.266         0.193        0.092        0.107          0.057          0.117          0.130         0.044        0.063
                                       (0.141)        (0.127)       (0.073)      (0.119)      (0.083)        (0.859)        (0.873)        (0.927)       (0.881)      (0.917)
Lesotho       0.188      0.062          0.067          0.541         0.220        0.065        0.016          0.044          0.259          0.246         0.033        0.026
                                       (0.136)        (0.212)       (0.113)      (0.204)      (0.082)        (0.864)        (0.788)        (0.887)       (0.796)      (0.918)
Namibia       0.232      0.137          0.265          0.207         0.219        0.118        0.000          0.102          0.172          0.170         0.085        0.049
                                       (0.266)        (0.193)       (0.169)      (0.214)      (0.000)        (0.734)        (0.807)        (0.831)       (0.786)      (1.000)
Rwanda        0.158      0.073          0.129          0.422         0.333        0.069        0.036          0.059          0.382          0.350         0.021        0.013
                                       (0.213)        (0.107)       (0.096)      (0.262)      (0.238)        (0.787)        (0.893)        (0.904)       (0.738)      (0.762)
Senegal       0.275      0.216          0.306          0.273         0.193        0.100        0.076          0.211          0.182          0.181         0.067        0.075
                                       (0.195)        (0.180)       (0.154)      (0.179)      (0.147)        (0.805)        (0.820)        (0.846)       (0.821)      (0.853)
Sierra
              0.155      0.091          0.144          0.267         0.288        0.103        0.063          0.085          0.279          0.279         0.060
Leone                                                                                                                                                                  0.061
                                       (0.128)        (0.070)       (0.082)      (0.118)      (0.082)        (0.872)        (0.930)        (0.918)       (0.882)      (0.918)
Mean          0.24       0.159          0.279          0.376         0.333        0.126        0.083          0.145          0.300          0.288         0.057        0.053
                                       (0.279)        (0.217)       (0.182)      (0.328)      (0.230)        (0.721)        (0.783)        (0.818)       (0.672)      (0.770)

Note: The table shows the proportion of undernourished women and children in male headed households separated by the nutritional status of the household head. The figures in
parentheses are the shares of those women or children who are undernourished found in each of the two groups of households according to whether the male head is underweight.
Men and women are between 15 and 49 years of age. Male heads of household are also restricted to 15 and 49 years of age. Children are between 0 and 5 years of age.
 Table 4: Regression coefficients of individual nutritional outcomes on the DHS household wealth
                          index and household consumption per person

                                          DHS                                                   LSMS
                                                        Weight-for-                                            Weight-for-
                       BMI           Height-for-age      height               BMI           Height-for-age      height
Benin                0.194***          0.189***           0.080***
Burkina Faso         0.279***          0.281***           0.097***             n/a            0.377***            -0.016
Burundi              0.242***          0.505***           0.115***
Cameroon             0.285***          0.451***           0.257***
Congo                0.265***          0.292***           0.051**
Cote D'Ivoire        0.203***          0.279***            0.043
DRC                  0.276***          0.378***           0.073***
Ethiopia             0.352***          0.374***           0.229***             n/a              0.037              0.025
Gabon                0.182***          0.397***           0.056**
Gambia               0.208***          0.297***           0.061**
Ghana                0.385***          0.299***           0.070***          0.120***           0.178**             0.172
Guinea               0.284***          0.285***            0.023
Kenya                0.331***          0.257***           0.210***
Lesotho              0.263***          0.182***            0.091*
Liberia              0.182***          0.183***            -0.024
Malawi               0.197***          0.224***           0.072***             n/a             0.103**             0.004
Mali                 0.025***          0.039***            0.002               n/a              0.044              0.006
Mozambique           0.344***          0.372***           0.156***
Namibia              0.289***          0.323***           0.217***
Niger                0.268***          0.254***           0.119***
Nigeria              0.291***          0.566***           0.042***             n/a            0.450***           0.200***
Rwanda               0.211***          0.395***            0.026
Senegal              0.157***          0.110***            -0.025
Sierra Leone         0.189***          0.253***            0.027
Swaziland            0.174***          0.305***           0.115***
Tanzania             0.295***          0.303***            -0.022           0.213***           0.111**             0.036
Togo                 0.323***          0.319***           0.073**
Uganda               0.364***          0.278***           0.175***
Zambia               0.284***          0.255***           0.070***
Zimbabwe             0.311***          0.147***           0.151***

Note: The table gives coefficients from a regression of standardized nutritional outcomes on the wealth index or standardized
consumption per capita. Robust standard errors are used; * prob.<.10 ** prob.<.05 *** prob.<.01.
 Table 5: Proportion of undernourished individuals who fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the
                                 household wealth distribution

                                  Poorest 20% of households                                Poorest 40% of households
                          Underweight       Stunted        Wasted                 Underweight       Stunted          Wasted
                            women          children        children                 women          children         children
Benin                         0.238             0.247*              0.235             0.434              0.473*               0.491
Burkina Faso                  0.289             0.259*              0.234             0.518               0.478               0.454
Burundi                       0.249             0.229*              0.264             0.437              0.436*               0.480
Cameroon                      0.367             0.404*              0.494             0.608               0.681               0.735
Congo                         0.202              0.370              0.271             0.439               0.600               0.510
Cote D'Ivoire                 0.186             0.337*              0.285             0.375               0.580               0.500
DRC                           0.220             0.259*              0.219             0.469               0.516               0.494
Ethiopia                     0.219*             0.267*              0.293             0.439               0.514               0.602
Gabon                         0.220              0.536              0.279             0.375               0.717               0.410
Gambia                        0.172              0.257              0.175             0.421               0.507               0.414
Ghana                         0.358              0.437              0.356             0.619               0.720               0.487
Guinea                        0.257             0.234*              0.315             0.467               0.536               0.547
Kenya                         0.318             0.368*              0.494             0.586               0.618               0.674
Lesotho                       0.241             0.376*              0.392             0.589               0.594               0.651
Liberia                       0.225             0.278*              0.283             0.460               0.541               0.552
Malawi                        0.204             0.230*              0.247             0.415              0.481*               0.495
Mali                          0.204             0.258*              0.253             0.404               0.518               0.519
Mozambique                    0.265             0.271*              0.368             0.505               0.541               0.584
Namibia                       0.273              0.391              0.383             0.497               0.639               0.590
Niger                         0.224             0.196*              0.227             0.460               0.435               0.409
Nigeria                       0.285             0.362*              0.277             0.519               0.644               0.517
Rwanda                        0.239             0.278*              0.270             0.453               0.528               0.530
Senegal                      0.216*              0.234              0.159             0.386               0.498               0.339
Sierra Leone                  0.206             0.258*              0.166             0.406               0.502               0.402
Swaziland                     0.267             0.349*              0.243             0.494               0.610               0.547
Tanzania                      0.291             0.275*              0.297             0.502               0.540               0.483
Togo                          0.350             0.348*              0.284             0.603               0.679               0.540
Uganda                        0.330             0.240*              0.300             0.600               0.487               0.611
Zambia                        0.260             0.293*              0.275             0.480               0.542               0.529
Zimbabwe                      0.285             0.284*              0.290             0.515               0.522               0.509
Mean                          0.253             0.292*              0.274             0.478               0.547               0.513
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of underweight women, stunted and
wasted children who fall below the bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of the household wealth distribution. For example, 23.8 percent of
underweight women live in households in the bottom 20th percentile of household wealth in Benin. Cases marked * are those in which the
undernutrition rate exceeds the corresponding wealth poverty rate, implying that the conditional probability has an upper bound less than
unity when all of the wealth poor are undernourished.
 Table 6: Proportion of undernourished individuals who fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the household consumption per
                                                    capita distribution

                           Poorest 20% of households                        Poorest 40% of households                   Poorest households by Poverty Rate
                  Underweight         Stunted         Wasted        Underweight        Stunted         Wasted        Underweight         Stunted        Wasted         Poverty
                    women             children        children        women            children        children        women             children       children        rate
Burkina Faso                           0.352*          0.310                            0.597           0.556                             0.591          0.549          0.553
Ethiopia                               0.276*          0.304                            0.502*          0.517                            0.387*          0.432          0.335
Ghana                 0.297            0.479*          0.392*           0.484           0.703           0.642            0.256           0.403*          0.341          0.253
Malawi                                 0.253*          0.273                            0.505           0.466                             0.701          0.706          0.709
Nigeria                                0.258*          0.309                            0.507           0.604                             0.552          0.657          0.535
Tanzania              0.348            0.512           0.382            0.574           0.689           0.637            0.539            0.642          0.546          0.466
Uganda                                 0.272*          0.269                            0.562           0.599                             0.379          0.478          0.332
Mean                  0.340            0.326*          0.325            0.559           0.560           0.566            0.492            0.471          0.488          0.418

Note: Data are drawn from LSMSs. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of underweight women, stunted and wasted children who live in households
ranked in the bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of the household consumption per capita distribution, along with the proportion who live in households with per capita consumption
below the $1.90 per day poverty line. Cases marked * are those in which the undernutrition rate exceeds the corresponding wealth poverty rate, implying that the conditional
probability has an upper bound less than unity when all of the wealth poor are undernourished.
                      Table 7: Joint probabilities of being undernourished and wealth poor

                                   Poorest 20% of households                               Poorest 40% of households
                           Underweight       Stunted         Wasted                Underweight      Stunted          Wasted
                             women           children       children                 women          children        children
Benin                          0.015              0.100             0.034              0.028              0.192              0.071
Burkina Faso                   0.044              0.077             0.033              0.080              0.142              0.063
Burundi                        0.040              0.118             0.013              0.070              0.225              0.024
Cameroon                       0.025              0.113             0.025              0.042              0.190              0.036
Congo                          0.029              0.069             0.014              0.063              0.112              0.026
Cote D'Ivoire                  0.015              0.080             0.020              0.029              0.138              0.036
DRC                            0.032              0.095             0.016              0.068              0.189              0.036
Ethiopia                       0.058              0.104             0.025              0.117              0.199              0.052
Gabon                          0.016              0.070             0.009              0.028              0.094              0.013
Gambia                         0.029              0.051             0.019              0.070              0.101              0.046
Ghana                          0.022              0.058             0.019              0.038              0.096              0.026
Guinea                         0.032              0.063             0.031              0.057              0.144              0.054
Kenya                          0.039              0.108             0.028              0.071              0.181              0.039
Lesotho                        0.014              0.114             0.012              0.034              0.180              0.020
Liberia                        0.016              0.071             0.016              0.033              0.139              0.032
Malawi                         0.018              0.095             0.009              0.036              0.199              0.019
Mali                           0.023              0.087             0.030              0.046              0.174              0.062
Mozambique                     0.023              0.101             0.018              0.043              0.201              0.029
Namibia                        0.038              0.069             0.031              0.070              0.113              0.047
Niger                          0.034              0.070             0.035              0.071              0.155              0.063
Nigeria                        0.032              0.118             0.045              0.058              0.210              0.084
Rwanda                         0.017              0.102             0.007              0.032              0.193              0.013
Senegal                        0.048              0.055             0.024              0.085              0.107              0.041
Sierra Leone                   0.018              0.084             0.014              0.036              0.164              0.033
Swaziland                      0.009              0.079             0.005              0.016              0.138              0.011
Tanzania                       0.033              0.098             0.012              0.057              0.192              0.019
Togo                           0.024              0.074             0.018              0.042              0.145              0.033
Uganda                         0.039              0.067             0.012              0.070              0.137              0.024
Zambia                         0.027              0.101             0.015              0.049              0.186              0.029
Zimbabwe                       0.020              0.073             0.008              0.036              0.133              0.014
Mean                           0.029              0.094             0.024              0.054              0.176              0.044
Corre. coeff.                  0.897              0.732             0.882              0.956              0.910              0.963
Elasticity of joint
to marginal                    0.873              0.511             0.872              0.905              0.681               0.926
                              (0.079)            (0.087)           (0.079)            (0.060)            (0.052)             (0.047)
Note: Data are drawn from the DHS. Means are population weighted. Wealth percentiles are created at the household level. The correlation
coefficient is that between the joint probability and the relevant undernutrition rate from Table 1. Elasticities estimated by double-log
regression. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
                           Table 8: Nutritional outcomes within the household by gender and nutritional status of the head

                                                 Male head is not              Female head is             Female head is not
               Male head is underweight           underweight                   underweight                 underweight                  All households
                  Mean         Variance        Mean         Variance        Mean         Variance        Mean         Variance        Mean         Variance
Ethiopia          0.649         0.163          0.192          0.105         0.773          0.112         0.161          0.084          0.338         0.106
Ghana             0.684         0.125          0.051          0.032         0.731          0.129         0.049          0.027          0.098         0.039
Lesotho           0.680         0.132          0.070          0.044         0.784          0.095         0.075          0.042          0.155         0.057
Namibia           0.676         0.131          0.064          0.040         0.651          0.148         0.112          0.065          0.161         0.064
Rwanda            0.531         0.186          0.123          0.077         0.673          0.146         0.144          0.078          0.171         0.082
Senegal           0.533         0.183          0.174          0.110         0.555          0.172         0.201          0.120          0.231         0.120
Sierra Leone      0.523         0.180          0.114          0.074         0.564          0.172         0.112          0.070          0.150         0.079
Mean               0.628          0.162           0.126            0.075        0.732          0.124           0.121          0.068         0.219     0.083
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs that collected BMI for male adults as well as for women and children. Statistics are population weighted. Each household
member is assigned a value of 1 if he or she is either underweight for adults or stunted or wasted if they are children and zero if the member is not
undernourished. Mean undernourished refers to the average rate of undernourishment within the household. The variance is calculated within the household
using the variance formula for the Bernoulli distribution, 𝑥𝑥̅ (1 − 𝑥𝑥̅ ).
Table 9: Conditional probabilities with and without intrahousehold inequality for poorest 20% of households

                                 Underweight                                          Stunted                                          Wasted
                                   Simulated without intra-                           Simulated without intra-                         Simulated without intra-
                                     household inequality                               household inequality                             household inequality

                                    Regular                                           Regular                                           Regular
                    Actual           cutoff       New cutoff          Actual           cutoff      New cutoff           Actual           cutoff      New cutoff
Poorest 20%
Ethiopia             0.225           0.232            0.231           0.271            0.273            0.270           0.287            0.295           0.298
Ghana                0.375           0.399            0.441           0.445            0.420            0.454           0.343            0.320           0.299
Lesotho              0.243           0.279            0.295           0.361            0.357            0.349           0.395            0.528           0.478
Namibia              0.292           0.362            0.368           0.381            0.434            0.419           0.387            0.293           0.356
Rwanda               0.235           0.241            0.239           0.272            0.278            0.272           0.256            0.274           0.216
Senegal              0.184           0.255            0.239           0.318            0.376            0.364           0.224            0.286           0.242
Sierra Leone         0.203           0.287            0.273           0.253            0.254            0.253           0.182            0.160           0.177
Mean                 0.228           0.253            0.258           0.291            0.294            0.293           0.270            0.276           0.269
Poorest 40%
Ethiopia             0.454           0.486            0.485           0.527            0.533            0.519           0.591            0.619           0.608
Ghana                0.621           0.634            0.677           0.708            0.698            0.711           0.489            0.453           0.443
Lesotho              0.521           0.566            0.573           0.617            0.614            0.617           0.588            0.668           0.600
Namibia              0.499           0.579            0.586           0.652            0.685            0.656           0.579            0.483           0.562
Rwanda               0.455           0.488            0.481           0.525            0.533            0.523           0.495            0.538           0.498
Senegal              0.380           0.495            0.472           0.589            0.624            0.636           0.468            0.508           0.533
Sierra Leone         0.394           0.528            0.509           0.491            0.495            0.484           0.417            0.442           0.481
Mean                 0.449           0.503            0.503           0.545            0.550            0.542           0.526            0.549           0.547

Note: Data are drawn from DHSs that collected BMI for male adults as well as for women and children. Actual refers to the incidence of undernourishment in the
population. To simulate the results without intra-household inequality, all individuals are assigned the household’s average value of BMI, height-for-age and
weight-for-height for adults and children respectively. With the “regular” cutoff, individuals are assigned to be underweight, stunted, and wasted if this value is
below 18.5 for BMI and -2 for height-for-age and weight-for-height. With the “new cutoff”, a cutoff point for undernourishment is chosen in order to minimize
the difference between average undernourishment and simulated nourishment. This cutoff is always above that of the standard cutoff points. Wealth percentiles
are at the household level. Statistics are population weighted.


                                                                                53
    Table 10: Conditional probabilities for underweight women using predicted wealth from the
                                      augmented regressions

                                                     Model 1                                         Model 2
                                      Bottom 20%              Bottom 40%              Bottom 20%              Bottom 40%

        Benin                             0.271                   0.482                   0.369                   0.620
        Burkina Faso                      0.351                   0.597                   0.368                   0.610
        Burundi                           0.287                   0.562                   0.318                   0.579
        Cameroon                          0.494                   0.746                   0.481                   0.749
        Congo                             0.287                   0.537                   0.358                   0.631
        Cote D'Ivoire                     0.254                   0.459                   0.346                   0.569
        DRC                               0.389                   0.654                   0.416                   0.669
        Ethiopia                          0.283                   0.515                   0.302                   0.511
        Gabon                             0.228                   0.513                   0.433                   0.755
        Gambia                            0.293                   0.528                   0.389                   0.618
        Ghana                             0.374                   0.624                   0.447                   0.673
        Guinea                            0.314                   0.553                   0.326                   0.575
        Kenya                             0.363                   0.629                   0.389                   0.654
        Lesotho                           0.408                   0.601                   0.484                   0.639
        Liberia                           0.301                   0.530                   0.350                   0.612
        Malawi                            0.302                   0.514                   0.378                   0.572
        Mali                              0.274                   0.490                   0.314                   0.541
        Mozambique                        0.303                   0.565                   0.365                   0.591
        Namibia                           0.350                   0.589                   0.397                   0.667
        Niger                             0.320                   0.582                   0.379                   0.630
        Nigeria                           0.335                   0.577                   0.418                   0.682
        Rwanda                            0.327                   0.584                   0.402                   0.608
        Senegal                           0.307                   0.537                   0.376                   0.629
        Sierra Leone                      0.280                   0.510                   0.333                   0.577
        Swaziland                         0.354                   0.588                   0.451                   0.759
        Tanzania                          0.346                   0.587                   0.360                   0.601
        Togo                              0.399                   0.652                   0.388                   0.645
        Uganda                            0.406                   0.636                   0.380                   0.629
        Zambia                            0.325                   0.549                   0.331                   0.573
        Zimbabwe                          0.343                   0.585                   0.432                   0.635
        Mean                              0.322                   0.562                   0.369                   0.611
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table gives the proportions of underweight women who fall into the
poorest 20 and 40% of the distribution of predicted values from regressions of log BMI on wealth, and additional household and individual
covariates. For example, 27.1% of underweight women in Benin have predicted BMI values that fall into the bottom 20% of all predicted
values for women.
 Table 11: Conditional probabilities for undernourished children using predicted wealth from the
                                      augmented regressions

                                              Stunting                                                         Wasting
                            Model 1                              Model 2                     Model 1                             Model 2

                 Bottom 20%      Bottom 40%        Bottom 20%        Bottom 40%    Bottom 20%    Bottom 40%        Bottom 20%        Bottom 40%

Benin               0.267             0.496              0.288             0.515     0.278             0.486             0.280             0.512
Burkina Faso        0.268             0.504              0.310             0.583     0.331             0.564             0.402             0.661
Burundi             0.252             0.483              0.289             0.522     0.298             0.497             0.434             0.596
Cameroon            0.352             0.605              0.407             0.663     0.527             0.768             0.561             0.802
Congo               0.355             0.571              0.419             0.633     0.335             0.536             0.352             0.616
Cote D'Ivoire       0.340             0.608              0.401             0.639     0.239             0.460             0.342             0.549
DRC                 0.303             0.543              0.346             0.603     0.320             0.563             0.314             0.566
Ethiopia            0.262             0.481              0.283             0.554     0.297             0.547             0.421             0.630
Gabon               0.416             0.713              0.431             0.635     0.294             0.575             0.303             0.504
Gambia              0.311             0.553              0.378             0.598     0.306             0.543             0.354             0.592
Ghana               0.374             0.646              0.453             0.706     0.203             0.484             0.443             0.679
Guinea              0.297             0.544              0.351             0.620     0.352             0.599             0.435             0.638
Kenya               0.274             0.520              0.324             0.588     0.448             0.641             0.419             0.628
Lesotho             0.355             0.586              0.379             0.668     0.645             0.812             0.634             0.655
Liberia             0.287             0.514              0.319             0.581     0.269             0.521             0.441             0.679
Malawi              0.253             0.478              0.283             0.526     0.291             0.541             0.284             0.526
Mali                0.283             0.514              0.313             0.588     0.289             0.495             0.351             0.574
Mozambique          0.286             0.498              0.301             0.537     0.352             0.558             0.442             0.626
Namibia             0.341             0.601              0.388             0.621     0.361             0.656             0.382             0.602
Niger               0.289             0.531              0.328             0.579     0.271             0.469             0.359             0.568
Nigeria             0.346             0.624              0.375             0.649     0.325             0.552             0.370             0.595
Rwanda              0.299             0.529              0.328             0.599     0.353             0.567             0.445             0.589
Senegal             0.392             0.593              0.474             0.689     0.401             0.637             0.273             0.599
Sierra Leone        0.250             0.471              0.264             0.511     0.218             0.492             0.278             0.545
Swaziland           0.337             0.556              0.387             0.646     0.370             0.594             0.362             0.636
Tanzania            0.274             0.517              0.327             0.581     0.383             0.645             0.415             0.566
Togo                0.361             0.607              0.390             0.650     0.338             0.575             0.445             0.641
Uganda              0.325             0.586              0.400             0.625     0.473             0.681             0.455             0.668
Zambia              0.254             0.477              0.291             0.536     0.337             0.555             0.342             0.537
Zimbabwe            0.276             0.486              0.321             0.579     0.355             0.525             0.389             0.546
Mean                 0.294          0.533            0.329           0.584          0.320           0.548          0.372           0.595
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table gives the proportions of stunted and wasted children who fall
into the poorest20 and 40% of the distribution of the predicted values from regressions height-for-age and weight-for-height on wealth, and
additional household and individual covariates. For example, 26.7% of stunted children in Benin have predicted values that fall into the
bottom 20% of all predicted values for children in the Model (2) regression with height-for-age as the dependent variable.




                                                                           55
