                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        MORAL HAZARD IN HEALTH INSURANCE:
                        WHAT WE KNOW AND HOW WE KNOW IT

                                          Liran Einav
                                         Amy Finkelstein

                                       Working Paper 24055
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24055


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




This paper is based on the Alfred Marshall Lecture delivered by Finkelstein at the EEA-- ESEM
meetings in Lisbon on August 24, 2017. We gratefully acknowledge support from the NIA for the
underlying work discussed (R01AG032449; P30AG012810, RC2AGO36631, and
R01AG0345151). We thank Neale Mahoney for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24055.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Liran Einav and Amy Finkelstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Moral Hazard in Health Insurance: What We Know and How We Know It
Liran Einav and Amy Finkelstein
NBER Working Paper No. 24055
November 2017
JEL No. D12,G22

                                          ABSTRACT

We describe research on the impact of health insurance on healthcare spending ("moral hazard"),
and use this context to illustrate the value of and important complementarities between different
empirical approaches. One common approach is to emphasize a credible research design; we
review results from two randomized experiments, as well as some quasi-experimental studies.
This work has produced compelling evidence that moral hazard in health insurance exists – that
is, individuals, on average, consume less healthcare when they are required to pay more for it out
of pocket – as well as qualitative evidence about its nature. These studies alone, however, provide
little guidance for forecasting healthcare spending under contracts not directly observed in the
data. Therefore, a second and complementary approach is to develop an economic model that can
be used out of sample. We note that modeling choices can be consequential: different economic
models may fit the reduced form but deliver different counterfactual predictions. An additional
role of the more descriptive analyses is therefore to provide guidance regarding model choice.


Liran Einav
Stanford University
Department of Economics
579 Serra Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
leinav@stanford.edu

Amy Finkelstein
Department of Economics, E52-442
MIT
77 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
afink@mit.edu
1. Introduction
Empirical work in applied microeconomics is often loosely classi…ed into two categories:
“reduced form” or “structural”.1 While this classi…cation is somewhat subjective, surely
imperfect, and to some extent arti…cial –there is a richer spectrum of empirical approaches
that could be broken down to many more than two categories –this simple classi…cation is
often used to imply two mutually exclusive approaches that are at odds with each other. And
the researcher - faced with a question and a data set - is portrayed as needing to make an
almost religious choice between the two approaches. In this paper we try to make the simple
point –appreciated by many, but perhaps not all –that these two empirical approaches are
in fact complements, not substitutes. Each has its own pros and cons. They should often be
used in tandem (within or across papers) as scholars embark on answering a speci…c research
question.
       To illustrate this point, we use the speci…c topic of moral hazard in health insurance, on
which there is a vast empirical literature (including our own) covering a range of empirical
approaches. In the context of health insurance, the term “moral hazard”is widely used (and
slightly abused) to capture the notion that insurance coverage, by lowering the marginal cost
of care to the individual (often referred to as the out-of-pocket price of care), may increase
healthcare use (Pauly 1968). In the United States – the context of all the work we cover
in this paper –a typical health insurance contract is annual and concave. It is designed so
that the out-of-pocket price declines during the year, as the cumulative use of healthcare
increases.
       We make no attempt to review the voluminous empirical literature on the topic. Rather,
we select only a few speci…c papers –drawing (grossly) disproportionately on our own work
–to illustrate the relationship and complementarities between di¤erent empirical approaches
used to study the same topic. Our focus is thus not only on describing (some of) what we
know, but also on how we know it.
       We begin by de…ning the object of interest: what “moral hazard” means in the context
   1
    The precise de…nitions of these two terms is not always clear but it’s safe to say that most current
empirical micro researchers would agree with Justice Potter Stewart’s assessment of hard-core pornography:
“I know it when I see it.” The reader can judge for herself in the speci…c applications we discuss below.



                                                    1
of health insurance, and why it is of interest to economists. We then discuss work on three
speci…c questions related to moral hazard in health insurance. First, we describe work
that has tested whether moral hazard in health insurance in fact exists. There is a clear
a¢ rmative answer, with much of the most-convincing existing evidence coming from large-
scale randomized experiments: Just like almost any other good, individuals increase their
healthcare utilization when the price they have to pay for it is lower. Second, we describe
work that tries to assess the nature of the consumer response. In particular, we ask whether
individuals respond to the dynamic incentives that arise from the non-linear health insurance
contracts. Again, the general …nding is positive, with much of the evidence driven by quasi-
experimental studies. Finally, we describe work that attempts to forecast what healthcare
spending would be under contracts we do not observe in the data. This requires a more
complete model of individual behavior.
   In the …nal section, we conclude by returning to our main goal in writing this paper, and
discuss the cross-pollination across the methods and approaches used in the three preceding
sections. While all methods were used in the context of the same broad topic, the more
speci…c questions they answer are slightly di¤erent. We highlight the value of each approach,
and the important interactions between them. In particular, compelling “reduced form”
causal estimates of the impact of health insurance contracts on healthcare spending are
invaluable for testing speci…c hypotheses, such as whether there is any behavioral response
or whether individuals respond to dynamic incentives. There are settings and questions in
which such reduced form estimates may be su¢ cient. In particular, if the variation used is
su¢ ciently close to prospective policies of interest, one might need to go no further. Yet,
many –perhaps most –questions of interest require us to make predictions out of sample,
for which economic models that rely on deeper economic primitives are important. These
modeling choices should not be made in a vacuum; the descriptive evidence from the reduced
form provides general motivation, as well as more speci…c guidance, as to which modeling
choices are more appropriate in a given context.
   We are clearly not the …rst to attempt to highlight the value of combining di¤erent
empirical approaches in the context of the same question. Very similar views are expressed
in Chetty (2009), Heckman (2010), Nevo and Whinston (2010), and Einav and Levin (2010),


                                             2
among others. While tastes or skill sets of individual researchers may understandably lead
them to disproportionately or exclusively pursue one particular style of empirical work, the
literature as a whole bene…ts enormously from attempts to incorporate and cross-pollinate
the two, within and across papers. Discussing these issues in the abstract is often di¢ cult,
so customizing the discussion to a speci…c context may be useful. Our modest goal in this
paper is to provide such a speci…c context within which to illustrate this more general point.



2. “Moral Hazard” in Health Insurance
Throughout this paper, we follow decades of health insurance literature and use the term
“moral hazard”to refer to the responsiveness of healthcare spending to insurance coverage.
The use of the term in this context dates back at least to Arrow (1963). Consistent with the
notion of hidden action, which is typically associated with the term “moral hazard,” it has
been conjectured that health insurance may induce individuals to exert less (unobserved)
e¤ort in maintaining their health. For example, Ehrlich and Becker (1972) modeled health
insurance as reducing individuals’(unobserved) e¤ort in maintaining their health; because
health insurance covers (some of) the …nancial costs that would be caused by poor health
behaviors, individuals may have less incentive to avoid them – they may exercise less, eat
more cheeseburgers, and smoke more –when they have insurance coverage.
       However, this so-called “ex ante moral hazard” has received very little subsequent at-
tention in empirical work from the literature.2 This may be because it is not empirically
relevant in many contexts – the increased …nancial cost associated with poor health is not
the only cost, and probably not the most important cost of being sick.
       The focus of the moral hazard literature has instead been on what is sometimes referred to
as “ex post moral hazard.”That is, on the responsiveness of consumer demand for healthcare
to the price she has to pay for it, conditional on her underlying health status (Pauly 1968;
   2
    Spenkuch (2012) provides one of the few pieces of evidence on “ex ante moral hazard.” He re-analyzes
King et al.’s (2009) randomized evaluation of the impact of encouraging individuals in some geographic areas
of Mexico but not in others to enroll in the then-newly introduced catastrophic health insurance program
for workers outside the formal sector, Seuguro Popular. Spenkuch (2012) …nds some evidence of declines
in preventive care, such as ‡u shots and mammograms, associated with experimentally-induced greater
insurance coverage.



                                                     3
Cutler and Zeckhauser 2000). In that sense, the use of the term “moral hazard” is a bit
of an abuse of the “hidden action” origin of the term. The “action” –i.e., the individual’s
healthcare utilization –is in fact observed (and contractible), and the asymmetric information
problem may be more naturally described as a problem of “hidden information”(regarding
the individual’s health status). Yet, to stay consistent with decades of abuse of terminology
in the entire health insurance literature, we use the term in a similar way and by “moral
hazard” refer to how consumer demand for healthcare responds to the out-of-pocket price
the consumer has to pay for that care.
   Consumer cost-sharing is the typical name used for determining the out-of-pocket price
the consumer has to pay for healthcare. Because the set of healthcare services is broad, and
the price of each service could vary, insurers often specify coverage as a percentage share of
the total healthcare spending. The share of total healthcare spending paid by the individual
is referred to as “consumer cost-sharing”; the remaining share is paid by the insurer. For
example, a 20% consumer co-insurance or cost-share means that for every dollar of healthcare
spending, the consumer pays 20 cents out of pocket and the insurer pays 80 cents.
   Typical health insurance contracts are annual and do not specify a constant consumer
cost-share. Rather, they specify the consumer cost-sharing as a function of the cumulative
(over the covered year) amount of healthcare spending. This function is typically concave.
Figure 1 shows a stylized example of a typical contract. This example shows a concave, piece-
wise linear schedule with three “arms.” In the …rst –the deductible range –the individual
faces an out-of-pocket price of 100%; every dollar of healthcare spending is paid fully out
of pocket. After the deductible is exhausted, which in this example occurs at $500 in total
spending, the individual enters the “co-insurance” arm, where she faces a price of 10%; for
every dollar of healthcare spending. Finally, once the individual has spent a total of $3,500
out of pocket (or $30,500 in total spending), she reaches the “out-of-pocket maximum”
(also known as “stop loss” or “catastrophic coverage”) arm, at which point she faces no
cost-sharing and has complete insurance coverage.
   Moral hazard is of economic interest because it creates an obstacle to the consumption-
smoothing purpose of insurance. Insurance is valuable because it creates a vehicle for trans-
ferring consumption from (contingent) states with low marginal utility of income (e.g. when


                                              4
one is healthy) to states with high marginal utility of income (e.g. when one is sick). The
…rst best insurance contract would equalize marginal utility across di¤erent states; the ex-
istence of moral hazard makes it infeasible to obtain the …rst best. As Pauly (1968) …rst
pointed out, if individuals’healthcare utilization responds to the price they have to pay for
it and the underlying health status is not contractible, the cost of providing insurance will
rise and individuals may no longer be willing to pay the break-even price of full insurance.
Therefore, as shown by Holmstrom (1979), the presence of moral hazard leads optimal insur-
ance contracts to be incomplete, striking a balance between reducing risk and maintaining
incentives.
   A declining out-of-pocket price schedule (see e.g. Figure 1) is a natural way to optimally
trade o¤ the goal of combating moral hazard through higher consumer cost-sharing with the
goal of providing risk protection through lower consumer-cost sharing. Since the value of
insurance is increasing in the total spending, it makes sense to provide a policy that provides
greater protection when spending is greater. While this concave feature is common in many
health insurance contracts in the United States, we will also discuss below settings where
contracts deviates from this pattern.
   The existence, magnitude, and nature of the moral hazard response is thus a key input
into the optimal design of private or public health insurance contracts. This is a natural
reason for the study of moral hazard to attract the considerable theoretical and empirical
attention that it has. However, moral hazard in health insurance has also attracted academic
and policy interest for the potential it raises that higher consumer cost-sharing could help
reduce the high - and rising - levels of healthcare spending as a share of GDP in most
developed countries. This has prompted, for example, policy interest in high-deductible
health insurance plans in the U.S. as a way of reducing aggregate healthcare spending levels.
The majority of healthcare spending, however, is accounted for by a small share of high-
cost individuals whose spending is largely in the “catastrophic” range where deductibles
and co-payments no longer bind. This suggests that - for meaningful impacts on health
care spending - the incentives for health insurance for providers - rather than for consumers
- may be more important. The impact of provider incentives in health insurance has, to
date, received comparatively less attention than consumer incentives, but there is hope that


                                              5
this may be changing (see e.g. Clemens and Gottlieb 2014; Eliason et al., 2016; Einav,
Finkelstein, and Mahoney 2017). The empirical approaches we discuss here in the context of

consumer incentives - and the strong complementarity across them - have natural application
to provider incentives.



3. Is There Moral Hazard in Health Insurance?
We now know what moral hazard in health insurance is (or at least what we’ve all come to
call it) and why it could be important for a¤ecting the optimal design of health insurance
contracts. But does it exist? Does health insurance actually increase healthcare spending?
Health insurance, by design, lowers the price individuals pay for their medical care. First-
year economics teaches us that demand curves tend to slope down, that when we make
something cheaper, people tend to buy more of it. So the answer may seem obvious. Yet, in
the context of healthcare, there are (at least) two views that are less sure.
   One view holds that healthcare cannot be analyzed like any other good. Demand for
healthcare, in this view, is determined by “needs,”not by economic factors, or as an econo-
mist might put it, the demand for healthcare is completely inelastic with respect to its price.
Malcolm Gladwell has expressed this view forcefully in a New Yorker article tellingly enti-
tled “The Moral Hazard Myth”(Gladwell 2005). Expounding his central premise –that the
“myth”of moral hazard in health insurance is a singularly American obsession that has cre-
ated our singular lack of universal coverage –he writes “The moral hazard argument makes
sense ... only if we consume healthcare in the same way that we consume other consumer
goods, and to [some] ... this assumption is plainly absurd. We go to the doctor grudgingly,
only because we’re sick.”
   There is also a second view, according to which the demand for healthcare in fact slopes
up! One version of this conjecture is that health insurance will improve people’s health by
increasing timely and e¤ective medical care (e.g. preventive care or better management of
chronic conditions), and that this improved health will in turn reduce healthcare utilization.
Another version points to the e¢ ciency of healthcare use as a channel through which health-
care spending will fall when insurance coverage becomes more generous. For example, while


                                              6
most healthcare providers in the United States can choose whether or not to see patients,
emergency rooms cannot; the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EM-
TALA) requires that hospitals provide emergency medical treatment to all patients. There
is therefore widespread speculation that one of the bene…ts of providing health insurance to
previously uninsured individuals is to get them out of the expensive emergency room and
into cheaper primary care (Dudiak 2013; Palm-Houser 2013; Snyder 2013). Indeed, this idea
that insuring the uninsured will reduce expensive (and presumably ine¢ cient or unneces-
sary) emergency room visits has been a leitmotif of advocates of expanding health insurance
coverage in the United States. For example, in making the case that Michigan should ex-
pand Medicaid coverage under the A¤ordable Care Act, Republican Governor Rick Snyder’s
policy team argued “Today, uninsured citizens often turn to emergency rooms for non-urgent
care because they don’t have access to primary care doctors –leading to crowded emergency
rooms, longer wait times and higher cost. By expanding Medicaid, those without insurance
will have access to primary care, lowering costs and improving overall health”(Snyder 2013).
   We thus have three widely-circulated competing claims: health insurance increases, de-
creases, or does not change healthcare spending. Research allows us to move from rhetoric
to reality. Ultimately, the existence and sign of any moral hazard e¤ects of health insurance
is an empirical question. It’s a challenging empirical question because people who have more
generous health insurance presumably di¤er in other ways from people with less generous
health insurance, and these di¤erences may be correlated with expected healthcare spending.
Indeed, the basic theory of adverse selection suggests that those who have more health in-
surance are on average in worse health (and hence face higher expected healthcare spending)
than those with less health insurance (Akerlof 1970; Rothschild and Stiglitz 1976; Einav and
Finkelstein 2011). How to separate such potential selection e¤ects from the treatment e¤ect
of interest, namely moral hazard?
   We describe evidence from two randomized evaluations of the impact of health insurance
on healthcare spending: the RAND Health Insurance Experiment from the 1970s, and the
2008 Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. We review the evidence from each, which shows
that moral hazard exists: health insurance increases healthcare spending. We then describe
quasi-experimental evidence of moral hazard that uses the existence of “bunching” at a


                                             7
convex kink in the budget set created by the health insurance contract to also establish
the presence of moral hazard (i.e. a behavioral spending response to the contract). We
discuss the institutional setting for the RAND Experiment and the “bunching”estimator in
some detail, since we will describe further analyses of both these settings in more depth in
subsequent sections.


3.1. Two Randomized Evaluations

The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. In 2008, the state of Oregon engaged in a limited
expansion of one of its Medicaid programs. Medicaid is the public health insurance pro-
gram for low-income individuals in the United States. The particular program in Oregon
was available to low-income, uninsured adults, aged 19-64, who were not already eligible for
Medicaid by virtue of meeting one of its categorical requirements. This Medicaid program
provided comprehensive health insurance coverage with zero consumer cost-sharing. Faced
with budgetary constraints that precluded their o¤ering the program to all eligible individ-
uals, policymakers in the state of Oregon decided that a random lottery drawing would be
the fairest way to allocate their limited Medicaid slots. The lottery was publicly advertised,
and eligible individuals were encouraged to sign up. About 75,000 individuals signed up
for the lottery, from which approximately 30,000 were randomly selected. Those who were
selected won the ability to apply for Medicaid, and to subsequently enroll in Medicaid if
found eligible. About 60% of those selected sent in applications, and about half of those
applications were deemed eligible for Medicaid, resulting in about 10,000 individuals who
won the lottery and enrolled in Medicaid. The remaining 45,000 who were not selected by
the lottery became the control group; they were essentially unable to apply for Medicaid.
About two years after the 2008 lottery, the state found additional resources and began to
o¤er the ability to apply to Medicaid to those in the control group.
   The lottery created the opportunity to use a randomized controlled design to study the
e¤ects of Medicaid coverage over its …rst two years. Speci…cally, random assignment by the
lottery can be used as an instrument for Medicaid coverage (Imbens and Angrist 1994). Over
the approximately two-year study period, lottery assignment increased the probability of
having health insurance coverage by about 25 percentage points. Using this experimentally-

                                              8
induced variation in insurance coverage, researchers have studied the short-term e¤ects of
Medicaid on a wide range of outcomes. The evidence indicates that Medicaid increases
healthcare spending, improves economic security, and improves some health measures. We
                                                                     3
focus here on a subset of the healthcare spending results
       The results from the experiment show that Medicaid increases healthcare spending across
the board, including hospital admissions, emergency department visits, primary care, pre-
ventive care, and prescription drugs. Illustrating a subset of these …ndings, Figure 2 shows
the increased use of the emergency department (top panel) and the increase in primary and
preventive care (bottom panel). Both panels plot the mean of the control group against that
mean plus the “local average treatment e¤ect”estimate of Medicaid, i.e. the estimate of the
impact of Medicaid on the outcome, using winning the lottery as an instrument for Medicaid
coverage. For example, the estimates indicate that Medicaid increases the probability of hav-
ing a primary care visit in the last 6 months by 21 percentage points, or over 35% relative to
the control group’s mean, and the probability of having a recommended mammogram in the
last 12 months by 19 percentage points, or about 65%. A back-of-the-envelope calculation
using the induced increases in healthcare utilization suggests that, in the …rst year, Medicaid
increases annual healthcare spending by about $775, or about 25% per year (Finkelstein et
al. 2012).
       The e¤ect appears to operate across all types of care, with estimated increase in both
“high value” care (such as preventive care) as well as in potentially “low value” care (such
as emergency room visits for non-emergency conditions).4 Indeed, contrary to the argu-
ment that Medicaid would decrease emergency department visits, the evidence indicates
that Medicaid in fact increased emergency department visits by 40%; this increase in emer-
gency department visits occurs across all kinds of patients (e.g. those who had used the
emergency room frequently prior to the experiment and those who had not recently been)
and all kinds of visits (e.g. on-hours care and o¤-hours care, or care classi…ed as “emergency”
   3
     J-PAL (2014) provides a brief overview of the experiment and some of its …ndings. More details on the
experimental design, as well as speci…c results can be found in the original papers: Finkelstein et al. (2012),
Baicker et al. (2013), Taubman et al. (2014), Baicker et al. (2014), and Finkelstein et al. (2016).
   4
     Brot-Goldberg et al. (2017) report qualitatively similar patterns in their (non-randomized) analysis of
the e¤ect of the introduction of a high deductible in the context of employer-provided health insurance: it
appears to reduce both "high value" and "low value" care similarly.



                                                      9
and care classi…ed as “non emergency”), and is persistent across the two years of the study
(Taubman et al., 2014; Finkelstein et al. 2016).
      The …nding that Medicaid increases use of the emergency department was greeted with
considerable attention and surprise (e.g., Beck 2014; Heintzman et al. 2014; Tavernise 2014).
Conceptually, however, the result should not be surprising. EMTALA requires hospitals to
provide emergency care on credit and prohibits them from delaying treatment to inquire
about insurance status or means of payment. Hospitals, however, can –and do –charge the
patient for such visits, and Medicaid coverage reduces the out-of-pocket price of the visit
to zero, presumably leading to an increase in demand for emergency department visits. At
the same time, Medicaid coverage also reduces the price of other care to zero, generating
additional, indirect e¤ects, which could go in either direction. Many conjecture that pri-
mary care can substitute for emergency department care, and thus cheaper primary care
may lead to a reduction in emergency department visits. Yet, the e¤ect could also go in the
other direction; for example, one may be more likely to seek emergency room care if one has
insurance to cover any recommended follow up treatments. Since the Oregon experiment
didn’t independently vary the price of primary care and emergency department care, it is not
designed to address whether the emergency department and primary care are substitutes or
complements. But the results indicate that, on net, Medicaid increases emergency depart-
ment use, suggesting that any substitution that may exist is not large enough to o¤set the
direct e¤ect of making the emergency department free.

      The RAND Health Insurance Experiment. The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment ex-
amined the impact of insurance compared to no insurance. A separate question is whether,
among those with health insurance, the comprehensiveness of that insurance a¤ects health-
care utilization. Over three decades earlier, in the late 1970s, the RAND Health Insurance
Experiment experimentally varied the extent of consumer cost-sharing across about 2,000
non-elderly families in order to study the e¤ect of consumer cost-sharing in health insur-
ance on healthcare spending and health. As before, we focus on the results for healthcare
spending only.5
  5
    Our discussion draws heavily on the overview and retrospective provided by Aron-Dine et al. (2013).
For more detail on the experimental design and results, readers should consult Newhouse (1993) and the
many original research papers discussed and cited therein.


                                                  10
   Unlike the Oregon experiment, which was conceived of by policymakers for fairness pur-
poses and capitalized on by academics for research purposes, the RAND Health Insurance
Experiment was prospectively designed by researchers to estimate the impact of consumer
cost-sharing. Families were randomly assigned to plans for 3-5 years. The plans di¤ered
solely in their consumer cost-sharing; for example, one plan had zero cost-sharing (“free
plan”) while others had 25, 50, or 95 percent cost-sharing (two others set di¤erent cost shar-
ing based on the type of care). Importantly, all plans had an out-of-pocket maximum in
order to limit the …nancial exposure of participants; above this maximum amount, families
in all plans had full insurance. Thus, referring back to Figure 1, the RAND plans had two
of the three coverage arms shown: the coinsurance arm (with coinsurance ranging from zero
to 95%), and the catastrophic arm that provides full coverage. The out-of-pocket maximum
amounts were set at a fairly low level, so that even the least generous plan had substantial
coverage. The exact amount of the out-of-pocket maximum was itself randomly assigned
within each co-insurance assignment. The top panel of Figure 3 shows some examples of
plans from the RAND experiment. We will return to this aspect of the design in subsequent
discussion.
   Once again, the results from the randomized evaluation clearly point to the existence of
a moral hazard e¤ect. Lower consumer cost-sharing leads to more spending. The bottom
panel of Figure 3 provides a ‡avor of these results, showing how the share of individuals
with any annual healthcare spending decreases as the health insurance coverage becomes
less generous.


3.2. Quasi-Experimental Evidence: Bunching in Medicare Part D

In addition to the randomized evaluations, a very large number of quasi-experimental studies
also show that health insurance coverage is associated with increased healthcare spending.
Here we focus on one such example, which is based on prescription drug spending responses
to the Medicare Part D prescription drug bene…t. It will serve as a subsequent point of
departure for the modeling of spending under alternative contracts that is the focus of
Section 5 below.
   Medicare Part D was launched in 2006 to add prescription drug coverage to the existing

                                             11
Medicare public health insurance program for the elderly and disabled in the United States.
In 2015, Medicare Part D covered about 42 million individuals and generated approximately
$77 billion in budgetary outlays (Congressional Budget O¢ ce 2015). The original Medicare
program – introduced in 1965 to cover hospital and physician services – o¤ers uniform,
publicly provided coverage. Medicare Part D, by contrast, is provided by private insurers
who are required to o¤er coverage that is actuarially equivalent or more generous than a
government-designed standard bene…t.
   The top panel of Figure 4 shows the government-de…ned standard bene…t design in 2008.
It shows the highly non-linear nature of the standard Part D contract. According to this
contract, the individual initially pays for all expenses out of pocket, until she has spent $275
(in cumulative drug spending within the covered year), at which point she pays only 25%
of subsequent drug spending until her total drug spending reaches $2,510. At this point
the individual enters the famed “donut hole,” within which she must once again pay for
all expenses out of pocket until total drug spending reaches $5,726, the amount at which
catastrophic coverage sets in and the marginal out-of-pocket price of additional spending
drops substantially, to about 7%.
   As noted, individuals may buy plans that are actuarially equivalent to, or have more
coverage than the standard plan, so that the exact contract design varies across individuals.
However, a common feature of these plans is the existence of substantial non-linearities that
are similar to the standard coverage we have just described. In particular, the location of the
“donut hole”at the government-set kink location is typical of most plans, although some of
these plans provide partial coverage within the donut hole region. Using data on Medicare
Part D bene…ciaries from 2007-2009, we estimated that a bene…ciary entering the coverage
gap experiences, on average, a price increase of almost 60 cents for every dollar of total
spending (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2015).
   As many economists have observed, the donut hole is incompatible with basic economic
theory, which would imply greater coverage for greater …nancial loss, or a concave coverage
function as in Figure 1. The donut hole apparently arose as a political compromise between
the objective of having a program in which even those who spend little on drugs receive
bene…ts and the need to keep projected expenditures below the legislated cap (Duggan,


                                              12
Healy and Scott Morton 2008).
    Whatever its theoretical demerits or political origins, the donut hole has proved a boon
for empirical research on the moral hazard e¤ects of insurance. Standard economic theory
suggests that, as long as preferences for healthcare and consumption are strictly convex and
smoothly distributed in the population, we should expect the distribution of individuals’
spending to bunch at a convex kink point of their budget set. This suggests a natural test
for a behavioral response to price. If moral hazard does not exist, individual spending will
be distributed smoothly in the population. With moral hazard, bunching will be observed
around the convex kink in the budget set at the start of the donut hole, where insurance
becomes discontinuously less generous on the margin.6 Indeed, the bottom panel of Figure
4 shows a histogram of total annual prescription drug spending in 2008. The response to
the convex kink at the donut hole is apparent: there appears to be a noticeable spike in the
distribution of annual spending around the kink location. Moreover, the government changes
the kink location each year and the location of the bunching moves in virtual lock step as
the location of the kink moves. Across all years, we estimate that the convex kink leads to
a statistically signi…cant 29% increase in the density of individuals whose annual spending
is around the kink location (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2015).



4. The Nature of Moral Hazard in Health Insurance

4.1.     What is “The Price” of Medical Care in The Presence of
Non-Linear Contracts?

We view the results summarized in the last section as presenting compelling evidence that
moral hazard in health insurance exists: healthcare spending is higher when insurance cov-
erage increases. This evidence seems a natural and necessary pre-condition for spending
time and e¤ort to model what spending would be under alternative contracts. This is one
   6
     This idea that individuals will bunch at convex kinks in their budget set has been present in the literature
since the late 1970s. In the last decade, the increased availability of large and detailed administrative data
has helped spur an explosion of empirical work on bunching, initially in the context of labor supply responses
to the non-linear income tax schedule (e.g. Saez, 2010), but also in other contexts. Kleven (2016) provides
an excellent review of this growing literature.


                                                       13
– presumably simple and obvious but important nonetheless – way in which reduced form
work can complement economic modeling.
   Yet, the evidence we have shown thus far provides little guidance regarding the nature
of this moral hazard response or, relatedly, regarding the appropriate economic model to
apply to the data. The non-linear nature of virtually all health insurance contracts in the
United States raises a key modeling question: what is the price of healthcare perceived by
the insured individual as she contemplates using a speci…c healthcare service? Put di¤erently,
to what extent do individuals respond to the dynamic incentives that are generated by the
non-linearity of the health insurance coverage?
   Until recently, this question had attracted relatively little attention in the moral hazard
literature. Instead, a large number of empirical studies endeavored to summarize the impact
of health insurance on healthcare utilization by reporting the price elasticity of the demand
for medical care with respect to “the” out-of-pocket price. A review article by Cutler and
Zeckhauser (2000), for example, summarizes about 30 such studies. A particularly famous
and widely-used estimate is the RAND Health Insurance Experiment’s estimate of the price
elasticity of demand for medical care of -0.2 (Manning et al. 1987; Keeler and Rolph 1988).
   However, in the presence of non-linear contracts, applying such single elasticity estimates
is challenging without some guidance as to whether and how one can map a non-linear
insurance coverage into a single price. For example, one cannot extrapolate from estimates
of the e¤ect of co-insurance on healthcare spending to the e¤ects of introducing a high-
deductible health insurance plan without knowing how forward looking individuals are in
their response to health insurance coverage and their beliefs about the distribution of future
health shocks. A completely myopic individual would respond to the introduction of a
deductible as if the price has sharply increased to 100%, whereas a fully forward looking
individual with annual healthcare spending that are likely to exceed the new deductible
would experience little change in the e¤ective marginal price of care.
   The original RAND investigators were, of course, acutely aware of this issue and spent
considerable e¤ort estimating and modeling how individuals respond to the non-linear in-
centives in the RAND contracts (Keeler and Rolph 1988). However, application of their
-0.2 estimate in a manner consistent with their model is a non-trivial manner. Although


                                             14
notable exceptions exist (e.g. Buchanan et al. 1991; Keeler et al. 1996), most subsequent
researchers have applied the RAND estimates in a much simpler fashion: they summarized
the non-linear insurance contracts with a single price to which the -0.2 elasticity was applied.
For example, researchers used the average out-of-pocket price (Newhouse 1992; Cutler 1995;
Cogan, Hubbard and Kessler 2005; Finkelstein 2007), the realized end-of-year price (Eichner
1998; Kowalski 2016), or the expected end-of-year price (Eichner 1997) as various ways to
summarize the non-linear contract with a single number.
   These choices can be consequential for the magnitude of the predicted spending response.
Consider for example an attempt to forecast the e¤ect of changing the plan from the RAND
plan with a 25% percent coinsurance plan (and its associated, randomly assigned out-of-
pocket maximums) to a plan with a constant 28% coinsurance plan. The price of medical
care under the constant 28% coinsurance plan is well-de…ned (0.28). But in order to directly
apply the RAND estimate of -0.2, we would also need to summarize the non-linear RAND
plan with a 25% coinsurance and a given out of pocket maximum with a single price; this
essentially means choosing the weights to construct an average price. In Aron-Dine et al.
(2013) we showed that three di¤erent ways to map the non-linear RAND contract to a single
price lead to out-of-sample spending predictions for the 28% constant co-insurance contract
that vary by a factor of 2.
   This shows that more work and care is needed to thoughtfully apply out-of-sample the
results from even a justi…ably famous and well-designed randomized experiment. While the
RAND health insurance experiment was prospectively designed to analyze the impact of cost
sharing, at the end what it delivers is estimates of the causal e¤ect of speci…c (non-linear)
health insurance plans. In order to move beyond what the experiment directly delivers -
estimates of speci…c plans’ "treatment e¤ects" - more assumptions regarding an economic
model of behavior are needed. The RAND estimates continue to be used to this day in
forecasting the e¤ects of actual and proposed policies. Given the hard work that went
into deriving those credible reduced form estimates, it seems hard to argue with devoting a
commensurate amount of e¤ort to considering how one might sensibly transform them out
of sample.



                                              15
4.2. Do Individuals Respond to Dynamic Incentives?

Once we recognize that the treatment of the non-linear budget set can be consequential
for this out-of-sample translation, the …rst question is whether in fact individuals take the
dynamic incentives that are associated with the non-linear budget set into account. A fully
rational, forward-looking individual who is not liquidity constrained should take into account
only the future price of medical care and recognize that (conditional on that future price)
the current spot price on care is not relevant, and should not a¤ect healthcare utilization
decisions. However, there are a number of reasons why individuals might respond only to
the spot price. They may be (or behave as if they are) unaware of or not understand the
non-linear budget set created by their health insurance contract, they may be a¤ected by
an extreme form of present bias and behave as if they are completely myopic, or they may
wish to factor in the future price but be a¤ected entirely by the spot price due to liquidity
constraints.
   The ideal way to test the null hypothesis of whether dynamic incentives matter would be
to hold the spot price of care constant while varying the future price of care. As it turns out,
the RAND Health Insurance Experiment did exactly that! As mentioned in Section 3 (see
Figure 3), the RAND experiment randomly assigned the co-insurance rate across families
and then, within each coinsurance rate, randomly assigned families to di¤erent levels of the
out-of-pocket maximum. In principle, this is precisely the variation needed to test the null
of whether individuals respond to the dynamic incentives: one would want to compare the
initial healthcare utilization decisions of individuals randomized into plans with the same
coinsurance rate but di¤erent out-of-pocket maximum. In practice, however, this approach
is hampered by the relatively small sample sizes in the RAND experiment as well as the
relatively low levels of the plans’maximum amounts (Aron-Dine et al. 2015).
   In the absence of the ideal experimental variation, in Aron-Dine et al. (2015) we instead
take advantage of a particular feature of many U.S. health insurance contracts that generates
quasi-experimental variation that is conceptually similar to this ideal. Most health insurance
contracts are annual and reset on January 1, regardless of when coverage began. When
individuals join a plan in the middle of the year, the deductible and other cost sharing features



                                               16
remain at the annual level, but are applied for a shorter coverage period. As a result, people
who join the same plan in di¤erent months of the year face di¤erent contract lengths and
therefore potentially di¤erent future prices, even though they all begin with the same spot
price. A test of whether individuals respond to dynamic incentives then becomes whether
individuals who join the same plan in di¤erent months of the year –and therefore face the
same initial spot price of care but di¤erent future prices – have di¤erent initial healthcare
utilization. We applied this idea in two settings: employer-provided health insurance and
Medicare Part D. In both settings we were able to reject the null that individuals respond
only to the spot price of care: individuals who faced the same spot price but higher future
prices used less healthcare initially.
   Figure 5 summarizes the nature of our …ndings in the Medicare Part D context. Medicare
Part D annual plan choices are typically made during the open enrollment period in Novem-
ber and December, and provide coverage from January to December of the following year.
However, when individuals become newly eligible for Part D at age 65, they can enroll in a
plan the month they turn 65; the plan’s cost-sharing features reset on January 1, regardless
of when in the year the individual enrolled. Variation in birth month thus generates variation
in contract duration, and hence potentially in expected end-of-year price among individuals
in a given plan in their …rst year.
   Figure 5 shows future prices and initial claims for 65 year olds who enrolled in Medicare
Part D between February and October. It shows the pattern of future prices and initial claims
by enrollment month, separately for bene…ciaries in two groups of plans: deductible and no-
deductible plans (recall that the standard bene…t design has a deductible, but insurers can
o¤er more generous coverage than the standard design; many o¤er no-deductible options).
We measure initial drug use by whether the individual had a prescription drug claim in the
…rst three months of coverage. We summarize the dynamic incentives in the contract with
the expected end-of-year price. The expected end-of-year price depends on three elements:
the cost-sharing features of the bene…ciary’s plan, the duration (number of months) of the
contract (which in turn is determined by their birth month), and the bene…ciary’s expected
spending (which we calculate based on the spending of all individuals who enrolled in that
plan in that month). Of course, if individuals do not believe their spending risk is drawn


                                             17
from the same distribution as everyone else who joined their plan in their month, there will
be measurement error in the expected end-of-year price; similarly, if individuals are not risk
neutral, other moments of the distribution of the end-of-year price may a¤ect their initial
utilization. Such modeling choices could be consequential if our goal were to estimate the
extent of forward looking behavior. They may also bias us against rejecting the null of no
forward looking behavior. However, if we do reject that null despite such potential sources
of measurement error, it is informative.
   The results provide evidence against the null that individuals do not respond to the
future price. In the deductible plan, Figure 5 shows that the expected end-of-year price is
increasing in the enrollment month; a later enrollment date gives the individual less time
to spend past the deductible and into the lower consumer cost-sharing arm. Recall that all
individuals in these plans face the same initial spot price of care; what varies is the contract
length and thus the expected end-of-year price. In these plans, we see that initial utilization
is decreasing with enrollment month. By contrast, in the no-deductible plan, the expected
end-of-year price is decreasing with the enrollment month; here, a later enrollment date gives
the individual less time to spend past the cost-sharing arm and into the donut hole. In these
plans, by contrast, the probability of an initial claim does not appear to vary systematically
with the enrollment month. Combined, the contrast suggests that, holding the spot price of
care constant, initial healthcare use is decreasing in the expected end-of-year price. In other
words, individuals appear to respond to the dynamic incentives.



5. Forecasting Healthcare Spending under Counterfac-
tual Contracts
The descriptive results from the last two sections suggest that individuals’decision making
regarding healthcare utilization responds to the insurance coverage, and that this response is
a¤ected by the dynamic incentives associated with the non-linear health insurance contracts
commonly o¤ered in the United States. One clear implication of these results is that assuming
that the spot price associated with a given medical treatment is the only relevant price is



                                              18
problematic. However, we cannot conclude from this evidence that consumers do not respond
at all to the spot price. Indeed, there is evidence to the contrary: Brot-Goldberg et al. (2017)
study the introduction of a high-deductible plan (where previously there was no deductible)
and present evidence that suggests a response to the spot price as well: predictably sick
consumers reduce their spending in response to the deductible, despite the fact that they are
likely to end the year outside of the deductible range. They conclude that changes in the
spot price –rather than the future price –are the primary drivers of the reduced spending
they observe when the high deductible is introduced.
   When individuals respond to both spot and future prices, summarizing a given contract
with a single price is not a sensible option. Therefore, when researchers want to use the
experimental (or quasi-experimental) results to provide predictions for spending under other,
counterfactual contracts not seen in the data, a more complete behavioral model is needed.
We undertook such exercises in two related papers (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2015;
Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2017). Our goal was to analyze spending under alternative
non-linear Part D contracts, and our motivating point of departure was the bunching at
the convex kink created by the donut hole, which we described earlier. We showed that
two di¤erent – and in our subjective opinion “reasonable” – models could both match the
observed bunching, but produce fairly di¤erent out-of-sample predictions. This underscores
the importance of modeling choices in extrapolating out of sample. Ideally, other evidence
can be brought to bear to guide model selection.
   In our context, we developed two alternative, non-nested models. One natural approach
we implement is to adapt the Saez (2010) framework to our context. In this in‡uential
paper, Saez (2010) showed how a stylized, static, frictionless model of labor supply can allow
for a simple mapping from the observed bunching around convex kinks in the income tax
schedule to an estimate of the elasticity of labor supply. In Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf
(2017) we translated Saez’s model of labor supply to a model of prescription drug spending
and applied his approach straightforwardly to the Medicare Part D setting. To do so, we
assumed that individual i has quasi-linear utility in drug spending (m) and residual income
(y): ui (m; y) = gi (m) + y. We chose a particular functional form for gi (m) so as to obtain a
constant elasticity form for drug spending as a function of the out-of-pocket price that would


                                              19
be similar to Saez’s constant elasticity form for hours of work with respect to the after-tax
wage. This allowed us to almost exactly follow his strategy and derive a mapping between
the observed extent of bunching around the donut hole and the elasticity of drug spending
with respect to the out-of-pocket price. This exercise resulted in an estimated elasticity of
drug spending with respect to the out-of-pocket price of about -0.05. Because this is based
on the bunching at the kink in annual drug spending, the spot and the future price of care
are the same for the “bunchers” at the end of the year, which makes this a well-de…ned
object.
   Of course, the simplicity of the Saez-style approach comes at the cost of potentially
abstracting from a host of real-world features that may be important in a particular con-
text. Our real-world problem is dynamic: individuals make sequential purchase decisions
throughout the year as information is revealed, and they make current healthcare utilization
decisions facing uncertain future health shocks. The reduced form evidence we discussed
in the previous section suggests that individuals do not ignore the future in making such
decisions. This reduced form evidence has implications for model selection. In particular,
it suggests that a static model - such as our adaptation of Saez (2010) - may miss some
important features of the consumer problem.
   We therefore also developed a dynamic model of drug use in which a (potentially) for-
ward looking individual facing uncertain future health shocks makes drug purchase decisions
(Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf 2015). We modeled weekly drug spending decisions, where
each week there is some chance of a health event that could be treated by a prescription; if
it occurs, the individual must decide whether or not to …ll the prescription that week. The
individual is covered by a non-linear prescription drug insurance contract over 52 weeks. A
coverage contract is given by a function, similar to the one depicted in the top panel of Figure
4, that speci…es the out-of-pocket amount the individual would be charged for a prescription
drug with a given list price given the cumulative out-of-pocket spending up until that point
in the coverage period. Optimal behavior can be characterized by a simple …nite horizon
dynamic problem. The three state variables are the number of weeks left until the end of
the coverage period, the total amount spent so far, and a health state, which accounts for
potential serial correlation in health.


                                              20
   In this model there are three economic objects. The …rst is a statistical description of
the distribution of health shocks. The second key object is the primitive price elasticity, or
“moral hazard,” that captures contemporaneous substitution between health and income.
The third object captures the extent to which individuals understand and respond to the
dynamic incentives associated with the non-linear contract. As discussed in the last section,
there is evidence that this response exists. The model allows us to quantify it, and to translate
it into implications for annual drug spending under alternative - potentially counterfactual
- contracts.
   We parameterized the model with distributional and functional form assumptions and
estimated it using simulated minimum distance. Importantly, one of the moments we …t
is the extent of bunching around the donut hole. We then used the estimates to simulate
the spending response to a uniform percentage price reduction in all arms of the standard,
government-de…ned plan; this yields implied elasticities of about -0.25. This elasticity esti-
mate is …ve times higher than what the Saez-style static model produced.
   Thus, both the static Saez-style model and the dynamic model match, by design, the
same observed bunching pattern, but they deliver very di¤erent out-of-sample predictions.
The appeal of the Saez-style model is the simple and transparent mapping from the de-
scriptive fact to the economic object of interest; relatedly, it can be implemented relatively
quickly and easily. The dynamic model is more computationally challenging and time con-
suming to implement; it also has (despite our best e¤orts) more of a “black box”relationship
between the underlying data objects and the economic objects of interest. However, it can
account for potentially important economic forces that the static model abstracts from. In
particular, it can account for anticipatory responses by forward looking agents to changes in
the future price. The static model imposes that any response to the donut hole is limited to
people around the donut hole. In contrast, the dynamic model allows for the possibility that
the set of people near the donut hole –and therefore “at risk”of bunching –may in fact be
endogenously a¤ected by the presence of the donut hole; forward-looking individuals, antici-
pating the increase in price if they experience a series of negative health shocks, are likely to
make purchase decisions that decrease their chance of ending up near the donut hole, even if
at that point they are far from reaching it. Indeed, when we considered the implications in


                                               21
the dynamic model of “…lling the donut hole” (i.e. providing 25% coinsurance in the donut
hole instead of 100% coinsurance as scheduled under the A¤ordable Care Act to occur by
2020), we estimated that about one-quarter of the resultant spending increase came from
“anticipatory” responses by individuals whose annual spending prior to this policy change
would have been well below the donut hole (Einav, Finkelstein and Schrimpf 2015).
   The comparison of the results from the static and dynamic model highlights a broader
point that should be neither novel nor surprising: modeling choices are consequential. In
this speci…c application, we show that an in-sample bunching pattern may be rationalized
by di¤erent modeling assumptions, and these assumptions can, at least in some contexts,
have very di¤erent quantitative implications out-of-sample. This issue is not unique to the
bunching literature. The phenomenon is more general. For example, our discussion of the
results of the RAND Health Insurance Experiment above illustrated that the assumptions
made in translating the experimental treatment e¤ects into economic objects that could be
applied out of sample were also consequential.
   More generally, the bunching literature following Saez (2010) is one speci…c application
of the in‡uential “su¢ cient statistics” literature popularized by Chetty (2009) – which at-
tempts to use simple models to directly and transparently map reduced form parameters into
economic primitives. Our analysis illustrates that two di¤erent models can map the same re-
duced form object into very di¤erent out-of-sample predictions. Su¢ cient statistics, in other
words, are su¢ cient conditional on the model (or set of models). This is an obvious point,
made clearly by Chetty (2009), but sometimes forgotten in applications and interpretations.



6. Conclusions
The title (and purpose) of our paper is to discuss both “what we know”and “how we know
it.” The research on moral hazard e¤ects of health insurance that we described (hopefully)
illustrates the claim we made at the outset: “reduced form”and “structural”work have their
di¤erent strengths and limitations, and are most powerful when used in tandem (within or
across papers) to answer a given question or a related set of questions.
   The reduced form evidence tells us unambiguously that health insurance increases health


                                             22
care utilization and spending. Moral hazard, in other words, irrefutably exists. The over-
whelming, compelling evidence on this point –from several randomized evaluations as well
as countless, well-crafted quasi-experimental studies –should give any informed reader con-
siderable pause when they hear claims to the contrary. Consider the rhetorical debate we
started with over whether moral hazard exists (e.g. Gladwell 2005) and if so whether it
might be of the opposite sign. These qualitative hypotheses are powerfully rejected by the
reduced form evidence. This is a particular illustration of a broader point: when the debate
is about sharp nulls, or qualitative signs, credible reduced form studies, which often rely
on fewer modeling assumptions, are very powerful in convincingly distinguishing between
competing hypotheses.
   Reduced form evidence can also be valuable for retrospective analysis when an existing
policy of interest is captured by the reduced form variation. If one is interested in the
question: what happened when Oregon expanded Medicaid coverage in 2008, there is no
better way to answer that than with the results of the lotteried expansion. Likewise, historical
interest in the impact of the original introduction of Medicare can be well-served by reduced
form analyses of the impact of that introduction (Finkelstein 2007; Finkelstein and McKnight
2008).
   One might also be tempted to use reduced form results for prospective analyses of policies
that are “close enough”to the reduced form variation. Here, however, it becomes challenging
without additional theory and evidence to know what dimensions of the setting are important
and how to judge “closeness”in those dimensions. For example, the low-income, able boded
uninsured adults covered by Medicaid through the 2008 Oregon Health Insurance Experiment
are a very similar population to the low-income able boded uninsured adults covered by
the 2014 Medicaid expansions under the A¤ordable Care Act; indeed, the only obvious
di¤erence is that in Oregon eligibility required the individual to be below 100% of the federal
poverty line while the state Medicaid expansions reached to 138% of the federal poverty line.
Yet a host of factors could produce di¤erential short-run impacts of Medicaid in Oregon
and in these other expansions. The most obvious is that the demographics of low income
adults and the nature of the healthcare system (including the healthcare safety net) di¤ers
across the country. One could perhaps shed some light on this (power permitting) through


                                              23
heterogeneity analysis in the Oregon experiment across types of people and places. Other
observable di¤erences –such as in the macro economy –would be harder to address. More
subtle conceptual di¤erences would require more thought and modeling. For example, the
partial equilibrium impacts of covering a small number of people in Oregon might di¤er from
the general equilibrium e¤ects of a market-wide expansion in insurance coverage under the
ACA (Finkelstein 2007). The impact of health insurance for individuals who voluntarily sign
up for the lottery may well be di¤erent than the impact when, as in the ACA, insurance
coverage is mandatory (Finkelstein et al. 2012; Einav et al. 2013).
   The limitations of prospective policy analysis with reduced form evidence points to the
need for economic modeling. More broadly, whenever we want to study the impact of
something not observed in the data, we need a model to extrapolate from reduced form
estimates to the setting of interest. The results from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment
that we described illustrated this point. The RAND experiment delivers causal estimates of
the spending impact of the particular health insurance contracts included in the experiment.
The literature has since extrapolated from these plan …xed e¤ects to forecast the spending
e¤ects of alternative contracts not observed in the data, such as high-deductible plans. As
we have seen, the modeling choices made in such extrapolations are quite consequential for
the translation of the reduced form estimates into spending forecasts. Since ad hoc choices
of how to extrapolate from reduced form estimates to contracts not observed in the data
can yield very di¤erent results, this suggests the value of more formal modeling in which one
speci…es and estimates a model of primitives that govern how an individual’s medical care
utilization responds to the entire non-linear budget set contracted by the health insurance
contract.
   This is a non-trivial exercise. It requires, among other things, estimating the individ-
ual’s beliefs about the arrival rate of medical shocks over the year, her discount rate of
future events, and her willingness to trade o¤ health and medical utilization against other
consumption. Naturally, as we illustrated, the modeling choices themselves will be conse-
quential, even when they can match the reduced form facts. Here, the reduced form evidence
that individuals are at least partly forward looking can motivate the use of a dynamic model.
   We thus see great complementarity between the reduced form analysis and economic


                                             24
modeling in ways that our examples have hopefully illustrated. Economic models allow us
to get more bang for our reduced form buck –analyzing, for example, not just whether the
current Part D contracts a¤ect drug spending but forecasting what that spending would
be like under alternative policies. In turn, reduced form evidence allows us to focus our
questions – it’s useful to verify that moral hazard exists before trying to model it – and
make more informed modeling choices.
   It’s a great time to be an empirical economist. We have a rich tradition of economic mod-
eling and structural estimation to draw upon. And we are the bene…ciaries of an improved
(and improving!) reduced form tool kit for identifying causal e¤ects (Angrist and Pischke
2010). Both can be applied to the large, and rich administrative data sets that researchers
are increasingly accessing. By combining these approaches –within and across papers –our
production possibility frontier will expand even further.



References
 Akerlof, George (1970). “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
     Mechanism.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 84(3), 488–500.

 Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn-Ste¤en Pischke (2010). “The Credibility Revolution in Empir-
     ical Economics: How Better Research Design is Taking the Con out of Econometrics.”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 3-30.

 Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, and Amy Finkelstein (2013). “The RAND Health Insurance
     Experiment, Three Decades Later.”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 27(1), 197-222.

 Aron-Dine, Aviva, Liran Einav, Amy Finkelstein, and Mark Cullen (2015). “Moral Haz-
     ard in Health Insurance: Do Dynamic Incentives Matter?” Review of Economics and
     Statistics, 97(4), 725-741.

 Arrow, Kenneth J. (1963). “Uncertainty and The Welfare Economics of Medical Care.”
     American Economic Review, 53(5), 941-973.

 Baicker, Katherine, Sarah Taubman, Heidi Allen, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
     P. Newhouse, Eric C. Schneider, Bill Wright, Alan M. Zaslabsky, and Amy Finkelstein
     (2013). “The Oregon experiment - e¤ects of Medicaid on clinical outcomes.” New
     England Journal of Medicine, 386(18), 1713-1722.




                                             25
Baicker, Katherine, Amy Finkelstein, Jae Song, and Sarah Taubman (2014). “The Impact
    of Medicaid on Labor Market Activity and Program Participation: Evidence from
    the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment.” American Economic Review Papers and
    Proceedings, 104(5), 322-328.

Beck M (2014). “Medicaid expansion drives up visits to ER.”Wall Street Journal, January
    3.

Brot-Goldberg, Zarek C., Amitabh Chandra, Benjamin R. Handel, and Jonathan T. Kolstad
    (2017). “What Does a Deductible Do? The Impact of Cost-Sharing on Health Care
    Prices, Quantities, and Spending Dynamics.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(3),
    1261-1318.

Buchanan, Joan L., Emmett B. Keeler, John E. Rolph, and Martin R. Holmer (1991).
    “Simulating Health Expenditures under Alternative Insurance Plans.” Management
    Science, 37(9): 1067-1090.

Clemens, Je¤rey, and Joshua D. Gottlieb (2014). ”Do Physicians’ Financial Incentives
    A¤ect Medical Treatment and Patient Health?” American Economic Review, 104(4),
    1320-1349.

Cogan, John F., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Daniel P. Kessler (2005). Healthy, Wealthy, and
    Wise: Five Steps to a Better Healthcare System. 1st ed. Washington, DC: AEI Press.

Chetty, Raj (2009). “Su¢ cient Statistics for Welfare Analysis: A Bridge Between Structural
    and Reduced-Form Methods.”Annual Review of Economics, 1, 451-488.

Cutler, David M. (1995). “Technology, Health Costs, and the NIH.”Paper prepared for the
    National Institutes of Health Economics Roundtable on Biomedical Research. http://
    www.economics.harvard.edu/…les/faculty/13 _Technology,%20Health%20Costs%20and%20
    the%20NIH.pdf.

Cutler, David M., and Richard J. Zeckhauser (2000). “The Anatomy of Health Insurance.”
    In Handbook of Health Economics, edited by A. J. Culyer and J. P. Newhouse, volume
    1, 563-643. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Duggan, Mark, Patrick Healy, and Fiona Scott Morton (2008). “Providing Prescription
   Drug Coverage to the Elderly: America’s Experiment with Medicare Part D.”Journal
   of Economic Perspectives, 22(4), 69-92.

Dudiak, Z. “Pittsburgh area legislators react to governor’s budget proposals, ” (2013);
   http://foresthills-regentsquare.patch.com/groups/politics-and-elections/p/pittsburgh-area-
   legislators-react-to-governor-s-budge5c772c0e4b.



                                           26
Ehrlich, Isaac, and Gary S. Becker (1972). “Market insurance, self-insurance, and self-
    protection.”Journal of Political Economy, 80(4), 623-648.

Eichner, Matthew J. (1997). “Medical Expenditures and Major Risk Health Insurance.”
    PhD Dissertation, Chapter 1, MIT.

Eichner, Matthew J. (1998). “The Demand for Medical Care: What People Pay Does
    Matter.”American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 88(2), 117-121.

Einav, Liran, and Amy Finkelstein (2011). “Selection in Insurance Markets: Theory and
    Evidence in Pictures.”Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(1): 115-138.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, Steven P. Ryan, Paul Schrimpf, and Mark R. Cullen (2013).
    “Selection on moral hazard in health insurance.”American Economic Review, 103(1),
    178-219.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf (2015). “The Response of Drug Ex-
    penditure to Nonlinear Contract Design: Evidence from Medicare Part D.”Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 130(2), 841-899.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Paul Schrimpf (2017). “Bunching at the kink: im-
    plications for spending responses to health insurance contracts.” Journal of Public
    Economics, 146, 27-40.

Einav, Liran, Amy Finkelstein, and Neale Mahoney (2017). “Provider Incentives and
    Healthcare Costs: Evidence from Long-Term Care Hospitals.” NBER Working Paper
    No. 23100.

Einav, Liran, and Jonathan Levin (2010). “Empirical Industrial Organization: A Progress
    Report.”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2), 145-162.

Eliason, Paul J., Paul L. E. Grieco, Ryan C. McDevitt, and James W. Roberts (2016).
     “Strategic Patient Discharge: The Case of Long-Term Care Hospitals.”NBER Working
     Paper No. 22598.

Feldstein, Martin (1973). “The Welfare Loss of Excess Health Insurance.” Journal of Po-
    litical Economy, 81(2), 251-280.

Finkelstein, Amy (2007). “The Aggregate E¤ects of Health Insurance: Evidence from the
    Introduction of Medicare.”Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(1), 1-37.

Finkelstein, Amy, and Robin McKnight (2008). “What did Medicare do? The initial impact
    of Medicare on mortality and out of pocket spending.” Journal of Public Economics,
    92(7), 1644-1668.



                                          27
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph
    E. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker (2012). “The Oregon Health In-
    surance Experiment: evidence from the …rst year.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    127(3), 1057-1106.

Finkelstein, Amy N., Sarah L. Taubman, Heidi L. Allen, Bill J. Wright, and Katherine
    Baicker (2016). “E¤ect of Medicaid Coverage on ED Use - Further Evidence from
    Oregon’s Experiment.”New England Journal of Medicine, 375(16), 1505-1507.

Gladwell, Malcolm (2005). “The Moral-Hazard Myth.”New Yorker, August 29.

Heckman James J. (2010). “Building Bridges between Structural and Program Evaluation
    Approaches to Evaluating Policy.”Journal of Economic Literature, 48(2), 356-398.

Heintzman John, Rachel Gold, Ste¤ani R. Bailey, and Jennifer E. DeVoe (2014). The
    Oregon experiment re-examined: the need to bolster primary care. BMJ, 349.

Holmstrom, Bengt (1979). “Moral Hazard and Observability.”Bell Journal of Economics,
    10(1), 74-91.

Imbens, Guido W. , and Joshua D. Angrist (1994). “Identi…cation and Estimation of Local
    Average Treatment E¤ects”Econometrica, 62(2), 467-475.

J-PAL (2014). “Insuring the Uninsured.”https://www.povertyactionlab.org/sites/default/…les/
    publications/Insuring_the_Uninsured.pdf.

Keeler, Emmett B., and John E. Rolph (1988). “The Demand for Episodes of Treatment
    in the Health Insurance Experiment.”Journal of Health Economics, 7(4), 337-367.

Keeler, Emmet B., Jesse D. Malkin, Dana P. Goldman, and Joan L. Buchanan (1996). "Can
    Medical Savings Accounts for the Nonelderly Reduce Health Care Costs?" ” Jounral
    of American Medical Association, 275(21), 1666-1671.

King, Gary, Emmanuela Gakidou, Kosuke Imai, Jason Lakin, Ryan T. Moore, Clayton
    Nall, Nirmala Ravishankar, Manett Vargas, Martha María Téllez-Rojo, Juan Eugenio
    Hernández-Ávila, Mauricio Hernández-Ávila, and Hector Hernández Llamas (2009).
    “Public Policy for the Poor? A randomised assessment of the Mexican universal health
    insurance programme,”The Lancet, 9673(373), 1447-1454.

Kleven, Henrik (2016). “Bunching.”Annual Review of Economics, 8, 435-464.

Kowalski, Amanda E. (2016). “Censored Quantile Instrumental Variable Estimates of the
   Price Elasticity of Expenditure on Medical Care.” Journal of Business and Economic
   Statistics, 34(1), 107-117.



                                          28
Manning, Willard G., Joseph P. Newhouse, Naihua Duan, Emmett B. Keeler, and Arleen
   Leibowitz(1987). “Health Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence from
   a Randomized Experiment.”American Economic Review, 77(3), 251–77.

Nevo, Aviv, and Michael D. Whinston (2010). “Taking the Dogma Out of Econometrics:
    Structural Modeling and Credible Inference.”Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(2),
    69-82.

Newhouse, Joseph P (1992). “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?” Journal of
   Economic Perspectives, 6(3), 3-21.

Newhouse, Joseph P. (1993). Free for All? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance
   Experiment. Harvard University Press: Cambridge, MA.

Palm-Houser, S. “Governor Kasich includes Medicaid expansion in proposed Ohio bud-
    get”(2013); www.examiner.com/article/governor-kasich-includes-medicaid-expansion-
    proposed-ohio-budget.

Pauly, Mark V. (1968). “The Economics of Moral Hazard: Comment.”American Economic
    Review, 58(3), 531-537.

Rothschild, Michael, and Joseph E. Stiglitz (1976). “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance
    Markets: An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information.”Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 90(4), 629-649.

Saez, Emmanuel (2010). “Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?” American Economic
    Journals: Economic Policy, 2(3), 180-212.

Snyder, R. “Facts about Medicaid expansion: Improving care, saving money” (2013);
    www.michigan.gov/documents/snyder/Medicaid_expansion_-_factsheet_ …nal_2-6-
    13_410658_7.pdf.

Spenkuch, Jorg L. (2012). “Moral Hazard and Selection among the Poor: Evidence from a
    Randomized Experiment.”Journal of Health Economics, 31, 72-85.

Taubman, Sarah L., Heidi L. Allen, Bill J. Wright, Katherine Baicker, and Amy N. Finkel-
    stein (2014). “Medicaid Increases Emergency Department Use: Evidence from Ore-
    gon’s Health Insurance Experiment.”Science, 343(6168), 263-268.

Tavernise S. (2014) “Emergency visits seen increasing with health law.” New York Times,
    January 2.




                                          29
Figure 1: A Typical Health Insurance Contract in the United States




Figure shows a stylized annual health insurance contract, illustrating the mapping the contract creates from
total medical spending to out of pocket medical spending. The x-axis shows total medical spending for the
year and the y-axis shows the out-of-pocket medical spending for the year.




                                                    30
Figure 2: Selective Results from The Oregon Experiment




Figure shows selected results from the Oregon Health Insurance Experiment. "Control mean " shows mean
for lottery participants who were not selected. "Treatment e¤ect" represents the IV estimate of the impact of
Medicaid, using selection by the lottery as an instrument for Medicaid coverage (the …rst stage is about 0.25).
95 percent con…dence intervals are shown with the whisker plot. Top panel shows results for Emergency
Room use based on administrative data in the 18 months following the lottery (source: Taubman et al.,
2014). Bottom panel shows results for primary and preventive care based on a mail survey administered
approximately one year after the lottery (Finkelstein et al. 2012).




                                                      31
Figure 3: Contracts and Outcomes in The RAND Experiment




Top panel shows several of the contracts that were randomly assigned to di¤erent families in the RAND
health insurance experiment; these contracts vary both in their co-insurance and (within coinsurance rates)
in their out-of-pocket maximum. Bottom panel reports the estimated treatment e¤ects of the di¤erent plans
(de…ned by their coinsurance rate) on the probability of the individual having any medical spending in the
year. Source (Aron-Dine et al., 2013, Table 2; see notes therein for more details).




                                                     32
Figure 4: Contract Design and Bunching in Medicare Part D




This …gure replicates Figure I and Figure II in Einav, Finkelstein, and Schrimpf (2015). Top panel shows the
standard bene…t design in 2008. “Pre-Kink coverage” refers to coverage prior to the Initial Coverage Limit
(ICL) which is where there is a kink in the budget set and the gap, or donut hole, begins. As described in the
text, the actual level at which the catastrophic coverage kicks in is de…ned in terms of out-of-pocket spending
(of $4,050), which we convert to the total expenditure amount provided in the …gure. Once catastrophic
coverage kicks in, the actual standard coverage speci…es a set of co-pays (dollar amounts) for particular types
of drugs, while in the …gure we use instead a 7% co-insurance rate, which is the empirical average of these
co-pays in our data. Bottom panel displays the distribution of total annual prescription drug spending in
2008 for our baseline sample. Each bar represents the set of people that spent up to $100 above the value
that is on the x-axis, so that the …rst bar represents individuals who spent less than $100 during the year,
the second bar represents $100-200 spending, and so on. For visual clarity, we omit from the graph the 3%
of the sample whose spending exceeds $6,500. The kink location (in 2008) is at $2,510. N =1,251,984.


                                                      33
Figure 5: Initial Healthcare Utilization and Future Price




This …gure replicates Figure 2 in Aron-Dine et al. (2015). It graphs the pattern of expected end-of-year
price and of any initial drug claim by enrollment month for individuals in Medicare Part D during their …rst
year of eligibility (once they turn 65). We graph results separately for individuals in deductible plans and
no deductible plans. We calculate the expected end-of-year price separately for each individual based on his
plan and birth month, using all other individuals who enrolled in the same plan that month. The fraction
with initial claim is measured as the share of individuals (by plan type and enrollment month) who had at
least one claim over the …rst three months. N =137,536 (N=108,577 for no deductible plans, and N=28,959
for deductible plans).




                                                    34
