                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         LEARNING FROM COWORKERS:
               PEER EFFECTS ON INDIVIDUAL INVESTMENT DECISIONS

                                          Paige Ouimet
                                          Geoffrey Tate

                                       Working Paper 24058
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24058


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Paige Ouimet and Geoffrey Tate. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Learning from Coworkers: Peer Effects on Individual Investment Decisions
Paige Ouimet and Geoffrey Tate
NBER Working Paper No. 24058
November 2017
JEL No. D14,G02,G11

                                         ABSTRACT

We use unique data on employee decisions in the employee stock purchase plans (ESPPs) of U.S.
public firms to measure the influence of networks on investment decisions. Comparing only
employees within a firm during the same election window and controlling for a metro area fixed
effect, we find that the local choices of coworkers to participate in the firm’s ESPP exert a
significant influence on employees’ own decisions to participate. Local coworkers’ trading
patterns also disseminate to colleagues through the network. In the cross-section, we find that
some employees (men, younger workers) are particularly susceptible to peer influence. Generally,
we find that more similar employees exert greater influence on each other’s decisions and,
particularly, that high (low) information employees are most affected by other high (low)
information employees. However, we also find that the presence of high information employees
magnifies the effects of peer networks. We trace a value-increasing investment choice through
employee networks. Thus, our analysis suggests the potential of networks and targeted investor
education to improve financial decision-making.


Paige Ouimet
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Paige_Ouimet@kenan-flagler.unc.edu

Geoffrey Tate
Kenan-Flagler Business School
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
CB3490
McColl Building
Chapel HILL, NC 27599-3490
and NBER
Geoffrey_Tate@kenan-flagler.unc.edu
1. Introduction

      How do people learn about investments? U.S. households hold roughly one third of
their net worth in stocks and mutual fund shares.1 Thus, personal financial decisions have
important consequences for their wealth and welfare. Yet there is extensive evidence that
individuals do not always make wise choices when managing their financial investments
(Barber and Odean, 2013). We ask whether the choices made by their peers influence
investors’ individual financial decisions. Using data from the employee stock purchase
plans (ESPPs) of U.S. corporations, we compare the trading and participation decisions
of employees who work for a firm in the same core-based statistical area (CBSA) to the
decisions among employees who simultaneously work for the same firm in different
CBSAs. We find that employees are more likely to participate in ESPPs and to quickly
sell acquired shares if their nearby colleagues are also doing so. We also find that high
information employees facilitate the flow of information through peer networks, thereby
identifying a set of employees that firms can target to broadly influence participation and
trading behavior. Because ESPP shares are sold to employees at a discount to current
market prices, the decisions induced by peer effects are likely to be profitable and to
increase individual welfare.
      There are many reasons to believe that people’s decisions are influenced by those
with whom they interact. Social network connections can serve as conduits for the flow
of information between individuals (Ellison and Fudenberg, 1995; Banerjee, 1992;
Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer, and Welch, 1992). Alternatively, individuals could have
preferences that weight relative differences between their own consumption and the
consumption of their peers, causing them to mimic external consumption patterns in
order to “keep up with the Joneses” (Abel, 1990; Bernheim, 1994). Generally, models of
both types predict heightened conformity of choices within peer groups compared to the
general population.
      Participation and trading decisions within employer sponsored plans – and ESPPs in
particular – provide a fertile testing ground for the presence of peer influence on financial
choices. The influence of peer decisions is likely to be maximized in an environment in
1
    Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2011 Survey of Income and Program Participation.

                                                    1
which the decisions faced by different individuals are the same – a similar decision
setting both facilitates cross-individual comparisons and also maximizes the relevance of
information that can be transferred between individuals. Within a single firm’s ESPP, all
employees simultaneously face the same choice to participate or not to participate given
an identical set of plan properties (e.g., the discount from the current market price at
which company stock is available for purchase).2 Similarly, conditional on participating
in an employer sponsored plan, all employees hold the same financial security (company
stock) and thus their decisions of when to sell are affected by the same fundamental
information. Moreover, ESPPs offer employees the opportunity to purchase stock at a
discount from current market prices and typically do not place restrictions on the timing
of sales. Thus, it is common to observe employees selling shares in the initial days
following their election to purchase. These correlated trades, which are likely to be
largely unrelated to fundamentals, make it easier to detect peer influence statistically.
    We use data provided by an equity compensation administration services provider to
test for the presence of peer influence on participation and trading decisions in employer
sponsored plans in a sample of more than 500 U.S. firms. We consider a biannual choice
for each worker whether to purchase company stock within her firm’s ESPP as well as
the subsequent decision of if and when to sell any acquired shares. 3 An immediate
challenge for our analysis is to separate the influence of peer decisions on employee
choices from the effects of selection and the exposure to common shocks (Manski, 1993).
To begin to address these concerns, we exploit a unique feature of our data relative to
other samples of investor trading decisions that have been used in prior research: its
inclusion of worker-firm matches. Many prior studies define peer groups using the
locations in which people reside, but as a result face the challenge of separating peer
influence from the effects of local shocks. We instead define each individual’s peer group
(or network) by identifying sets of workers within a metropolitan area who work for the
same firm. In all of our regressions, we include fixed effects for each metropolitan area-
participation window pair. Thus, we remove the influence of shocks to the local economy

2
  The only difference between employees is the maximum size of participation allowed, which is typically
set based on a fraction of pay. Most firms also have a hard ceiling on the maximum participation allowed,
which will limit participation for high-income employees.
3
  The biannual time frame is an aggregation choice we make to facilitate consistent analysis across firms,
but does not necessarily correspond to the frequency of plan purchases within a given firm’s plan.

                                                     2
that might have correlated effects on the investment decisions of investors living in the
metropolitan area. We instead exploit variation in the behavior of workers within the
metropolitan area who work at different firms. Of course, coworkers in a firm could also
be subject to common firm-level shocks. To address this concern, we also include a fixed
effect for each firm-participation window pair. Thus, we compare each worker’s decision
to participate (or trade) to the simultaneous decisions of other workers in the same firm.
The fixed effects capture shocks (such as shocks to the value of company stock) that are
common to all investors in the plan, and our identification comes from differences in the
behavior of groups of workers within the firm who are located in different metropolitan
areas.
   Including controls for worker characteristics (gender, age, income), we find a
significant positive relation between the participation rate in the firm’s ESPP in a firm-
location and an individual worker’s decision to participate. Economically, a ten
percentage point increase in local participation is associated with a 1.5 percentage point
increase in the likelihood a worker will choose to participate in a given participation
window. We find that peer effects also matter for trading decisions. We find a positive
association between the average number of days to first trade among employees in the
worker’s firm-location and the number of days until she makes her first trade, conditional
on acquiring shares in the firm’s ESPP. Moreover, the likelihood an employee sells the
shares acquired in the ESPP within the first two weeks significantly increases with the
frequency with which the employee’s local co-workers make the same type of sale.
   Though our baseline empirical strategy addresses the most obvious sources of
confounding common shocks, it is possible that workers in a specific firm-location might
be subject to different shocks from their colleagues at other locations in the firm. Firms
could segregate different business activities in different geographic locations (e.g.,
finance versus production) and the workers who conduct those activities might be
exposed to different shocks (in a way that is not reflected by differences in the observable
demographics for which we control). Following a strategy similar to Duflo and Saez
(2002) and Case and Katz (1991), we construct an additional instrumental variables test
that exploits the predictive power of demographics for participation and trading




                                             3
decisions.4 For example, we use the proportion of an employee’s local co-workers who
are in different five-year bins of the age distribution to instrument for the average
participation rate in the firm’s ESPP in a given location. The identifying assumption is
that the proportion of workers of a certain age group in the office does not directly affect
a worker’s own decision to participate in the plan once we control for her own age. We
confirm the findings of significant positive peer effects on both participation and trading
decisions using this approach. It is important to note, however, that the identification
strategy is not valid if there are positive exogenous peer effects. Though this mechanism
does not appear to be compelling in our setting (e.g., ESPP choices are private and
unobserved absent communication between peers), we nevertheless conduct additional
tests to address the concern. We find evidence supportive of our identifying assumption.
    As a first step toward identifying the economic mechanisms driving the peer effects,
we test for cross-sectional differences in the influence of peers depending on observable
employee characteristics. We consider interactions of the average participation rate (or
propensity to trade shares in the first two weeks conditional on participation) with worker
gender, age, and income. We find that women respond significantly less to the decisions
of local co-workers than men. We also find that younger workers – particularly workers
who are younger than 40 – respond more to the decisions of co-workers than employees
of other age groups do. Peer influence is the strongest on workers in the middle portion of
the income distribution. Though the gender differences could have many interpretations,
the age and income patterns are broadly consistent with a larger peer influence on
employees that are likely to have less information about effective trading in ESPPs.
    Building on these findings, we turn to our main hypothesis: peer networks serve as
conduits for the flow of information between colleagues. To test the hypothesis, we
consider three proxies for employee information. First, we identify employees who work
in occupations that are likely to be associated with high general knowledge of financial
products (finance, accounting, and engineering) or with strong knowledge of the firm’s
specific compensation plans (human resources). Second, we consider employees who
self-report “excellent” or “good” prior investment experience. Third, we consider
employees in the highest reported income bin. Using each measure of “high information”
4
  Notably, we find an inverted U-shaped relation between age and ESPP participation and a lower
propensity to trade among women and lower-income workers.

                                              4
employees, we measure separately the average ESPP participation decision among high
and low information employees. We then regress an indicator for each employee’s
decision to participate on the average decisions of high and low information peers as well
as the interaction of the average decisions with an indicator for whether the employee
herself is a high information employee. Consistent with prior research and the
endogenous peer effects mechanism, we generally find the strongest influence of “like on
like” (i.e., the decisions of high (low) information employees exert the greatest influence
on the choices of other high (low) information employees); however, we also find
evidence of significant cross-group influence. We find that the choices of high
information employees affect the decisions of low information colleagues, consistent
with the learning channel. Though we also find that the choices of low information
workers affect the choices of their colleagues, we find that the influence is strongly and
significantly muted when there are no high information employees present at the firm-
location. Thus, peer interactions with low information colleagues appear to affect choices
more strongly when it is more likely that information has diffused from high information
colleagues through the network.
   Our results identify ESPP participation as a setting in which peer influence serves to
spread welfare-increasing practices among employees. As a final test of the endogenous
peer effects mechanism, we assess whether peers exert more influence on investment
choices among employees who work in CBSAs with higher population density. We find
that peer effects are indeed weaker in CBSAs with lower density, suggesting that peer-to-
peer learning is less effective when there is less personal contact between individuals.
Overall, the results suggest significant potential externalities from educating small
numbers of workers on making better financial choices within firm-offered plans.
   Our results contribute to the finance literature that studies peer influences on
investment decisions. A small subset of these papers uses field data to measure the
relation between peers’ choices (Brown, Ivkovic, Smith, and Weisbenner, 2008; Hong,
Kubik, and Stein, 2004). These studies face a number of empirical challenges due to the
limitations of available data. For example, they observe stock market participation, but
cannot make more precise statements about how individuals invest. Moreover, they have
no means to identify peer groups beyond exploiting geographic variation. One approach


                                            5
to sidestep these challenges, though at the potential expense of generalizability, is to
conduct a field experiment. Bursztyn, Ederer, Ferman, and Yuchtman (2014) study the
financial choices made by peer pairs who are clients of a Brazilian financial brokerage.
They use randomly assigned treatment to identify peer influence, finding evidence
consistent with both the information transfer and “keeping up with the Joneses”
mechanisms. We instead introduce a richer set of field data. We study a setting in which
we can clearly identify investors’ asset choices and social network links within
geographic partitions (co-worker relationships). The latter feature of the data in particular
helps to mitigate the challenge of separating peer influence from exposure to common
shocks.
   A parallel literature studies how peers influence coworkers’ choices in retirement
plans. Duflo and Saez (2002) find evidence of endogenous peer influence on enrollment
decisions in a Tax Deferred Account plan using field data from employees in a single
university. Duflo and Saez (2003) use randomized treatment in a field experiment to
confirm the presence of social effects on enrollment choices within a large university’s
Tax Deferred Account plan. Beshears, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Milkman (2015) also
use field experiment methodology to study savings choices, finding evidence of a
countervailing force: disseminating information about peer investments in the 401(k)
retirement plan of a large manufacturing firm causes nonparticipants to decrease their
savings, perhaps due to discouragement from unfavorable social comparisons. To our
knowledge, ours is the first study to measure the effects of employee networks on
investment choices in a large, multi-firm panel of field data. Though participation
decisions in retirement plans may have some similarity to the choices employees make to
participate in ESPPs, the scope of our data allows us to analyze cross-firm heterogeneity
in peer influence and to analyze not only participation, but also repeated trading choices
within plans.
   Finally, our work contributes to the large literature studying how social influence
through network ties affects investment choices. Consistent with an information channel,
Cohen, Frazzini, and Malloy (2008) find that portfolio managers outperform when they
invest in the stocks of firms that employ managers or directors with whom they share
school ties. In a corporate context, Malmendier and Lerner (2013) exploit the random


                                             6
assignment of Harvard MBA students to core sections to show that exposure to more
entrepreneurial colleagues as a student decreases the likelihood of engaging in
unsuccessful entrepreneurship. Shue (2013) uses a similar empirical strategy to show
evidence consistent with a mimicking channel: M&A decisions of CEOs who were
classroom peers are more correlated with each other than with other CEOs, though the
evidence does not suggest that these mergers are more efficient than typical M&A deals.
Moreover, pay for luck also appears to propagate through executive peer networks.

2. Data
    To measure peer influence on investors’ choices, we use aggregated, non-identifiable
data provided by an equity compensation administration services provider, hereafter
referred to as “Company X”. The data include information on participation and selling
decisions in employee stock purchase plans (ESPPs). We observe information for over
500 publicly-traded firms between 2004 and 2013. We also observe ticker symbols for
the firms included in the data allowing us to align employee equity ownership
information with company accounting information from Compustat and stock price
information from CRSP.
    We construct several variables to measure how employees behave within their firms’
ESPPs. Participation in ESPPs is at the employee’s discretion. In a qualified ESPP plan,
all full time employees are eligible to participate, meaning they have the right to purchase
the firm’s stock at a specified discount of up to 15% from the market price. 5 An
employee who elects to participate must actively choose a portion of her compensation to
be withheld in the plan during each pay period for the purchase of stock under the plan.
The typical allowable range of contribution, conditional on participating, is 1% to 15% of
compensation. There is typically also a cap on the total investment any employee can
make into the plan. Purchases during a purchase period then occur on a single date for all
employees inside the firm. In some cases, participants receive favorable tax treatment on
long term capital gains (only) if they hold the stock for certain minimum holding periods.
However, once stock is purchased, the employee can sell it at any time. Thus, we

5
 The discount may be calculated relative to the market price on the pre-determined purchase date or may
be subject to a lookback provision, in which case it is calculated relative to the minimum of the price at the
beginning and end of the purchase period.

                                                      7
consider variation both in employees’ decisions to participate and in their holding periods
conditional on participation. Given the discount at which these shares can be purchased,
combined with the flexibility to immediately sell the stake, we interpret failure to
participate to be an investment mistake, as in Babenko and Sen (2014).
    We consider two main dependent variables in our analysis. First, we construct an
indicator variable that takes the value of one if an employee chooses to participate in her
firm’s ESPP during a given election window. We analyze two participation decisions per
firm-year.6 Our data only includes employees who receive some form of equity-based
compensation from their employer within a plan managed by Company X. These plans
include stock options, restricted stock plans, and ESPPs. Though we know for certain
whether employees elect to participate in their firms’ ESPPs (we observe the associated
share purchases), we do not necessarily observe all employees within the firm who were
eligible, but declined to participate. In each six month window for each sample firm, we
proxy for the set of eligible employees with the set of employees who participated in any
of the plans managed by Company X and who received a grant during or before the
window in question as well as during or after. The final restrictions maximize the
likelihood that the employee remains with the firm in question. Because ESPPs are
typically open to all employees, we can be confident that the set of employees we analyze
in each decision window is eligible to participate. In our sample, we find a participation
rate of 43%, which is higher than the 30% rate reported by Babenko and Sen (2014).
Some of the difference likely arises from employees at firms in our sample who never
receive a grant of any kind from the firm, though some of it could also arise from our
more recent sample period. The 43% participation rate implies that we observe a
substantial set of eligible employees who fail to participate. Employees we do not
observe because they do not receive grants may be less financially knowledgeable and,
therefore, more prone to peer influence on financial decisions. If so, our results could
understate the importance of peer choices for participation decisions.
    Our second outcome of interest is the timing of employees’ decisions to sell ESPP
shares conditional on participating in the plan. A benefit of studying trading decisions

6
 The frequency of purchase periods can vary across plans. We aggregate the data to two per firm-year to
enforce consistency of the analysis across firms. Given the observed frequency of purchases in the data,
two periods per year appears to be a reasonable level of aggregation.

                                                   8
within an ESPP compared to general stock trading decisions is that the features of the
plan create focal periods within which we expect to see heightened trading that does not
necessarily correlate with information about stock fundamentals. One such period is the
time immediately after the initial purchase of ESPP shares. Because shares within an
ESPP are purchased at a discount to the current market price, it is reasonable to expect
some investors to sell the shares within the first few days of acquiring them to lock in the
discount. In our data, we observe that more than 20% of ESPP participants sell acquired
shares within the first two weeks following purchase. The high volume of trades during
this window makes it statistically easier to identify potential peer effects than it might be
if we instead were to focus on periods with lower trading base rates. The measurement
problem would likely be particularly severe, for example, in an analysis of retail trade
data. To exploit this feature of ESPPs, we define an indicator variable that takes the value
one if the employee sells shares acquired in a given biannual ESPP grant window within
two weeks of purchase. Though this is the main independent variable in our analysis of
trading decisions, we also consider indicator variables for trades within different horizons
(one week, one month, two months, three months, six months, and one year) as well as a
continuous measure of time to first sale (in natural log form).
   In Table 1, we present summary statistics of the data. In Panel A, we provide some
demographic information on our sample. 28% of the workers in our sample are female
and the average worker is 40 years old. Roughly 2.5% of the workers in the sample report
income less than $25,000 annually. 8% report income between $25,000 and $50,000, 32%
report income between $50,000 and $100,000, 40% report income between $100,000 and
$200,000, and 17% report income greater than $200,000. Thus, our sample over-
represents high income employees relative to the U.S. population. We also report
summary statistics on employees’ holdings of company stock options and restricted stock.
We calculate these holdings monthly within our sample by adding new grants and then
subtracting exercises or shares month by month. We begin the computation at the
beginning of 2004, which is the first year for which we observe transactions in our data.
As a result, employees who had grants prior to 2004 can have negative calculated
holdings in our data. We set these negative values to 0 in our measure of holdings. To




                                             9
account for this censoring in our analysis, we include an indicator variable for employees
with holdings of each type that are exactly equal to 0.
   In Panel B, we present the distribution of the days to first trade for the subsample of
employee biannual observations in which we observe ESPP participation. As noted above,
it is relatively common for employees to sell their shares quickly. More than 20% of
employees sell within 2 weeks and roughly half within the first year. However, there are
employees who hold shares more than seven years without selling.

3. Peer Effects on ESPP Participation and Trading Decisions
   We use the data on employee participation and trading within firms’ ESPPs to test
whether peers influence financial decision-making. Our setting is a natural one in which
to test for network effects. For many employees, financial choices are difficult and
outside their area of expertise. Moreover, the features of ESPPs, though relatively
straightforward, are unlikely to be common knowledge to workers before they accept a
job that grants them access to one. Thus, they are likely to value outside sources of
information or guidance, including from their local peer groups.

3.1. Identification Strategy
   The key challenge for our analysis is to separate the influence of employees’ peers on
choices from the effects of common shocks. We eliminate the influence of the most
obvious common shocks that affect ESPP participation and trading choices by choosing
appropriate treatment and control groups. For each employee, we define her peer group to
be the set of employees who work at the same firm and who live in the same CBSA.
Then we compare the employee’s choices only to simultaneous choices by other
employees of the same firm from different CBSAs. All employees who work at the same
firm buy and sell the same company stock within the firm’s ESPP. But by focusing on
within-firm variation in peer groups, we eliminate the influence of shocks to firm
fundamentals on employees’ trading choices. It is also highly unlikely that employees
select into different geographic locations inside the firm because of any factor having to
do with the ESPP of the firm. Because we use within-firm geographic variation to
identify peer groups, shocks to the local economy are another potential source of
confounding variation. We eliminate the effect of these shocks on our inference by

                                            10
including fixed effects for each CBSA-month that we observe in our sample. The fixed
effects capture any variation that is common to all employees who live in the same CBSA.
Thus, our identification relies on the set of CBSAs in our data in which we observe
workers from at least two sample firms. Given this discussion, our baseline linear
probability model takes the following form:7
                                                                                    .             (1)
    The dependent variable y is either an indicator that equals one if the employee
participates in the ESPP during period t or an indicator that equals one if the employee
sells shares within two weeks of purchase conditional on acquiring them in the ESPP
during period t. The time horizon is six months (i.e., the regressions include two
observations per year for each employee in a sample firm) and t indexes the month in
which the firms’ ESPP purchases occur.                     is a firm-month fixed effect and                is a
CBSA-month fixed effect. The month in which ESPP share purchases occur does not
vary within-firm, but can vary across firms in any given six month window. Instead of
biannual location fixed effects, our specification is more stringent, implying comparison
within any six month window only across firms in which ESPP elections occur in the
same month. This approach accommodates differences in location-specific conditions
that might arise within six month windows.                       is a vector of control variables that
typically includes controls for employee demographics (age, gender, income) and
holdings of company securities in other employer-sponsored plans (stock options,
restricted shares).         is the average choice made by workers in employee i’s peer group
– the other workers in her firm in the same CBSA in month t. We cluster standard errors
at the firm-month level to account for the lack of independence of choices across
employees in a given month, for example due to the same fundamentals of the underlying
investment in company stock. Our null hypothesis is that δ = 0; that is, employees’
participation and trading choices are unaffected by the choices of their peers.
    A second challenge to identifying δ is the mechanical correlation between                              and
      because the choice of employee i influences both quantities. If employee i

7
  The linear probability model is not only useful for avoiding the incidental parameters problem, given our
inclusion of two different high dimensional fixed effects, but also for facilitating the interpretation of
interaction terms that we include in the regressions later in the paper to assess cross-sectional differences in
the influence of peers on employee choices.

                                                      11
participates, for example, there is tendency towards observing a positive value of δ
because this choice to participate also increases the average participation rate in the firm-
location. A potential way to address this problem is to calculate the average peer outcome
by excluding the decision of employee i observation by observation. However, this
approach biases the estimate of δ, particularly in a context with a binary outcome and a
large difference in the frequencies of the two outcomes. To see this, consider the case in
which i has an outcome of 1, which occurs with low frequency. By excluding i’s choice,
we measure a lower value of the average for the observation corresponding to i. In the
other observations in i’s peer group for which the outcome is 0, however, we measure a
higher value of the average because i’s choice is included. To avoid this problem, we use
a uniform distribution to randomly select half of the observations in each firm-location.
We then measure the average outcome in the firm-location using half of the sample and
estimate equation (1) in the other half. Thus, the average choice in a firm-location is the
same for all workers in that location, but no employee in the estimation sample
contributes directly to the measurement of that average.
   The firm-month and CBSA-month fixed effects in Equation (1) address the concern
that common shocks to firm fundamentals or the local economy generate similarities in
choices that would otherwise be reflected in the estimate of δ. The remaining concern is
that there are other sources of common shocks or similarities in unobservable
characteristics that might lead to a rejection of the null hypothesis. This could occur, for
example, if a firm locates its finance division in a different CBSA from its sales or
production offices and those workers are subject to unique shocks. To address this
concern, we follow a strategy similar to Duflo and Saez (2002) and Case and Katz (1991).
Specifically, we exploit demographic patterns to identify δ. In Table 2, we demonstrate
the strength of these patterns on ESPP participation.
   In Column 1, we report the results of regressing the indicator variable for ESPP
participation on control variables for holdings of restricted stock and stock options (see
Section 2) and various employee demographic characteristics. We include indicator
variables for five year increments of employee age (30≤ age <35; 35≤ age <40; 40≤ age
<45; 45≤ age <50; 50≤ age <55; 55≤ age <60; age >60). The omitted category is workers
younger than 30. We also include an indicator for female workers and indicator variables


                                             12
for four categories of reported annual income ($25K < income ≤ $50K; $50K < income ≤
$100K; $100K < income ≤ $200K; income > $200K). The omitted category is workers
who earn less than $25K. We find a nonmonotonic pattern in worker age. Workers who
are in their early thirties are significantly more likely to participate than younger workers.
Starting at age 40, each older group of workers participates at significantly lower rates
than the youngest workers and the magnitude of the differences increases monotonically
as age increases. We also find that women are significantly less likely to participate than
men. And, we see that workers with income levels in the middle two regions are
significantly more likely to participate in an ESPP than the lowest and highest earning
workers. All of these demographic differences are significant at the 1% level. In Column
2, we repeat the estimation, but add in firm-month and CBSA-month fixed effects. Thus,
the effects are identified using only variation across employees in the same firm during
the same participation window and who are observed in the same month in the same
CBSA. We observe the same significant demographic patterns using the within variation
as we observe in Column 1 in a pooled specification. A minor difference is that the
heightened participation rates now exist for all workers in their thirties, compared to
workers who are in their twenties. Finally, in Column 3, we reestimate the Column 2
specification, but using only the randomly chosen half of the sample in which we later
identify peer effects. As expected given the random selection, we do not observe any
notable differences from Column 2.
   Given these patterns, our final identification strategy is to use differences in average
demographics to instrument for average participation rates by firm-location-month. When
we do so, we continue to control for individual demographics. Thus, identification of the
peer effect comes from differences within a firm in the likelihood of participation (or
trading) that depend only on differences in the average participation rate across firm-
locations that are predicted by differences in average demographics across those locations.
So, for example, consider a hypothetical firm with an office in Durham, NC in which the
average employee age is 35 and a second office in College Park, MD in which the
average employee age is 55. Given the age-pattern in participation from Table 2, we
could identify a positive peer effect on ESPP participation using our IV strategy if a
randomly selected employee of the firm in Durham is significantly more likely to


                                             13
participate in the ESPP than a randomly selected employee in College Park, controlling
for the employees’ own ages. Though this strategy allays remaining concerns about
common shocks, it relies on the assumption that peer demographics affect individual
choices only through their influence on peer choices. This assumption could fail in the
presence of contextual peer effects. While it is difficult to construct a mechanism by
which such effects would exist in our setting, we perform a number of supplementary
analyses to assuage concerns about the instruments throughout our analysis. Moreover,
even in this case, we would confirm that peers indeed matter for financial choices.

3.2. Baseline Peer Effects

   Our first step is to test if peers – whether by providing information or merely an
example – influence workers’ ESPP participation and trading choices. To begin, we
estimate Equation (1) using an indicator variable that equals one if an employee
participates in her firm’s ESPP as the dependent variable. We report results in Table 3.
   In Column 1, we present the baseline estimates of Equation (1). Among the controls,
the demographic variables exhibit the same patterns we observe in Table 2. Workers in
their thirties are more likely to participate than younger workers, but after age 50,
participation rates decline below those of younger workers. Women are also less likely to
participate and workers with annual incomes between $50K and $200K are more likely to
participate. We also find that workers with larger stock option or restricted stock holdings
are more likely to participate. The indicators for having exactly zero holdings of
restricted stock or options come in significant and with roughly equal magnitude, though
opposite signs. This pattern likely reflects the high positive correlation of the two
variables (if an employee had no holdings of restricted stock prior to 2004, they are likely
to have no option holdings as well). Our results are insensitive to the choice to include or
exclude these controls. The coefficient on the mean participation rate in the firm-location
(δ) is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. Economically, a ten percentage
point increase in the mean participation rate among an employee’s peers would increase
her likelihood of participating in the ESPP by roughly 1.5 percentage points.
   In the remaining columns of Table 3, we report estimates from three specifications of
instrumental variables regressions using different combinations of average demographic
characteristics at the firm-location to instrument for average participation rates. In

                                             14
Column 2, we report the first stage regression using only the age distribution to construct
the instruments. We include as instruments for average ESPP participation in a firm-
location-month the average of each of the age category dummies at the firm-location-
month. The instruments can also be interpreted as the fraction of employees in the firm-
location-month that fall into each age category. To conserve space, we report the
coefficient estimates for the instruments in the rows in which we report the estimates of
the age dummies in Column 1. Though we do not report the estimates on the age
dummies, we do include them in the regression (along with all the other control variables
from Column 1). Consistent with the effects of employee age on individual participation
rates, we observe that locations with more employees in their thirties have higher average
participation rates compared to locations with more employees under the age of thirty and
that locations with more employees over the age of sixty have lower participation rates.
We also see heightened participation rates where the fraction of employees in their forties
and early fifties is higher. This difference from the pattern in individual age comes
mostly from not including other average demographics in the specification. Six of the
seven instruments are statistically significant at the 10% level or higher (three at the 1%
level) and the set of instruments as a whole is strongly statistically significant. The
Hansen J test also fails to reject the exogeneity of the instruments. In Column 3, we
report the second stage estimates, using only the variation in the instruments to identify
the coefficient on the average participation rate in the firm-location-month (i.e., the peer
effect). The coefficients estimates on all of the included controls are very similar to those
we report in Column 1. Our estimate of δ remains positive and significant (now at the 5%
level). Economically, the magnitude of the estimate is slightly larger: here the estimate
implies that a ten percentage point increase in average participation in a firm-location
would increase the likelihood that a randomly chosen individual employee at that location
participates by roughly 2.5 percentage points.
   In Columns 4 and 5, we repeat the IV estimation, but expanding the set of instruments
to include the mean of the indicator for worker gender (female), or the fraction of women
observed in the firm-location-month, as an additional instrument. The additional
instrument has a significant negative effect on the endogenous variable (the average
participation rate in the firm location), consistent with the effect of the gender control in


                                             15
Column 1. We find almost no difference in our estimate of δ from expanding the set of
instruments. Similarly, in Columns 6 and 7, we add the average of the income category
dummies in the firm-location-month, or the fraction of employees in the location in each
income category, as additional instruments. Here, we find larger discrepancies between
the coefficients on the instruments and the estimates on the corresponding categories in
Column 1, perhaps raising some concern as to the source of the variation that the income
instruments capture in the participation sample. Nevertheless, we find little difference in
our estimate of δ in the second stage, though it is now statistically significant at the 1%
level. In all three IV specifications, we continue to find that peers’ choices positively
influence the decision to participate in an ESPP even when we isolate only the plausibly
exogenous variation in coworkers’ choices that is due to general tendencies to participate
among their demographic groups. This source of variation is unlikely to be contaminated
by any kind of unobserved location-specific common shock.
   As discussed in Section 3.1, a potential threat to our identification strategy is the
presence of contextual peer effects (i.e., that the mean characteristics of an employee’s
peers directly affect her choices, independently from peers’ choices). One way to assess
whether our IV strategy can separate endogenous peer effects from contextual ones is to
construct a placebo test to see whether it fails to detect an endogenous peer effect in a
context in which we know such an effect cannot exist. We do this by considering the
effect of the average gender in a firm-location-month on an employee’s gender. It could
be the case that there are contextual peer effects in this setting; for example, women (or
men) might choose to work in certain locations because of the presence of other women
(or men) there. However, there is unlikely to be an endogenous peer effect (i.e.,
employees choose to be a woman because other employees in the office have chosen to
be women). First, we confirm in a linear probability model that mirrors Column 1 that it
is indeed the case that the likelihood a worker is a woman significantly increases with the
fraction of women in a firm-location-month (i.e., it includes all controls and fixed effects,
besides the gender dummy, from Column 1). We find a positive coefficient estimate of
0.0943 that is statistically significant at the 1% level. Next, we run an IV specification
that mirrors our main specification in Columns 2 and 3, instrumenting for the fraction of
female workers in the firm-location-month with the age category instruments. In the first


                                             16
stage, we find that the instruments are even stronger predictors of the fraction of women
in the firm-location-month than they are of average participation in Column 2. All seven
instruments are statistically significant at the 5% level or greater (six at the 1% level).
The coefficient estimates are all negative, implying that locations with younger workers
have significantly higher fractions of female workers. Yet, despite the strength of the first
stage, we do not find a significant effect of the instrumented fraction of female workers in
the firm-location-month on the likelihood of an employee being female in the second
stage (δ = 0.016; standard error = 0.101). Though not definitive, this evidence increases
our confidence in the ability of our identification strategy to isolate the endogenous peer
effects of interest.
    Next we test whether the information or model provided by peers’ choices also affect
the way that employees trade stock conditional on participating in the firm’s ESPP.
Following the discussion in Section 2, we begin by analyzing the likelihood an employee
sells ESPP shares within two weeks of purchase. We follow an approach that mirrors the
analysis in Tables 2 and 3. To set the baseline, we estimate a pooled linear probability
model on the full set of employees who participate in ESPPs, using an indicator variable
that equals one if the employee sells shares within the first two weeks following purchase
as the dependent variable. We include the full set of control variables for employee
demographics and stock option and restricted stock holdings from Table 3. We report the
results in Column 1 of Table 4. Generally, we find that younger workers are more likely
to sell ESPP shares within two weeks than older workers. Beginning with workers with
ages between 30 and 35, the likelihood of early sales declines monotonically in each
successive age grouping. We also find that women are significantly less likely to sell
within two weeks than men. Workers in the middle income groupings (annual income
between $25K and $200K) are more likely to quickly sell ESPP shares than workers with
the highest or lowest incomes. We also find significant effects of restricted stock and
stock option holdings, however, the estimates change signs once we include firm-month
and CBSA-month fixed effects in the remainder of the table. Generally, it appears that
workers with larger holdings of restricted stock or stock options are less likely to
promptly sell their ESPP shares. In Column 2, we restrict our analysis to ESPP
participants within the random analysis subsample from Table 3 and include the full set


                                             17
of fixed effects from Equation (1). We also include the average of the indicator for ESPP
share sales within two weeks in the firm-location-month as the explanatory variable of
interest. We find similar effects of the control variables in the within specification. The
exceptions are the already noted differences in the estimates on the restricted stock and
option holdings controls and a weaker difference between the trading behavior of
employees with incomes between $25K and $100K from the lowest income workers. As
for the effect of interest, we find a positive and statistically significant estimate of δ – a
randomly chosen worker in a firm-location-month is significantly more likely to sell
acquired ESPP shares within two weeks if more of her local colleagues also do so,
compared only to other workers in the same firm and adjusting for contemporaneous
CBSA effects. Economically, a ten percentage point increase in the rate at which local
employees sell shares in the first two weeks following purchase would increase the
likelihood a random employee in that location would sell in the first two weeks by
roughly 0.73 percentage points.
   As in Table 3, we next use differences in average demographics across firm-locations
to identify the peer effects. Here, we use the means of all of the demographic controls
(age group indicators, female indicator, and income group indicators) as instruments. We
report the coefficient estimates on the instruments in the first stage regression in Column
3 (all of the individual level controls from Column 2 are also included, but we omit the
estimates from the table to increase readability). In this context, we do not find as much
power to explain average trading rates from the age distribution in the firm-location as we
did for participation choices (it is not possible to identify the second stage using only the
age instruments). However, the gender and income group instruments are significant
predictors of average trading rates, in directions consistent with the effects of gender and
income in the baseline specification in Column 1. Jointly, the instruments are statistically
significant, with an F-statistic of 54. In Column 4, we report the second stage estimates.
We find that the instrumented rate at which peers sell within two weeks of the purchase
of ESPP shares has a positive and significant effect on the likelihood an employee sells
acquired ESPP shares within two weeks. A ten percentage point increase in the fraction
of local colleagues who sell within two weeks is associated with a 2.5 percentage point
increase in the likelihood an employee sells within two weeks. Interestingly, in this


                                             18
specification the economic magnitude of the peer effect is very similar to the magnitude
of the instrumented peer effect in the participation regressions.
    In Table 5, we extend our analysis of trading beyond the specific decision to sell
ESPP shares within two weeks of purchase. We replicate the specification from Column
2 of Table 4, but with a series of alternative dependent variables. First, we consider five
different specific horizons for the employee’s first sale of ESPP shares: one week, one
month, two months, three months, and one year. Second, we consider a continuous
dependent variable: the natural logarithm of the number of days to the employee’s first
sale. In general, there is a tradeoff in defining the length of the trading window between
choosing a narrow enough window that correlated trading across individuals is
meaningful (at the extreme, if we considered a ten-year window, the fact that two
employees both trade within the window would not indicate any meaningful
commonality in their trading behavior) and choosing a wide enough window that we have
enough power to conduct statistical tests. To a certain extent, the results in Table 5 reflect
this tradeoff. Over all five alternative horizons, we observe a significant positive effect of
local coworkers’ tendency to trade in the given window on the likelihood an employee
also trades in that window. The magnitude of the effect is slightly smaller at the one-
week horizon than the effect we observe at the two week horizon in Table 4. Likewise,
the magnitude of the effect monotonically declines as we go from two weeks to one
month and beyond. Notably, the magnitude of the effect increases again slightly at the
one-year horizon. This effect could reflect tax advantages that are sometimes available
from holding shares up to a year, making one year another focal point for trading. In
Column 6, we observe that the average of the log number of days to first trade among
local coworkers is also a significant positive predictor of the log number of days to an
individual employee’s first trade. Thus, our basic conclusion holds even without
identifying a specific horizon in which trades must occur. We generally find that our
instruments have less power to identify the effects in these alternative specifications, with
the most success in the specifications in which the peer effect in Table 5 is the most
significant.




                                             19
   Overall, our evidence suggests that the investment decisions coworkers make in
employer sponsored plans provide a significant guide to the decisions employees make
regarding their own investments.

3.3. Cross-sectional Differences by Worker Demographics

   Given a significant influence of coworkers’ choices on investment decisions within
ESPPs, a natural question is whether some types of workers are more influenced by their
peers than others. To answer this question, we modify Equation (1) to allow for an
interaction term between       , the mean outcome among an employee’s peer group, and
measures of the employee’s characteristics. We consider differences by employee gender,
age, and income levels. Though we do not generally invoke our instrumental variables
strategy in the remainder of our analysis, it is more difficult than in our baseline setting to
generate plausible concerns about common shocks that might drive the results. For
example, it is unclear what kind of shock would affect men differently from women who
simultaneously work in the same firm and same location. We view the econometric
concerns stemming from low power of the instruments and the need to instrument for a
binary interaction with the endogenous variable as potentially more severe than the
remaining identification concerns.
   We present the results in Table 6. In Columns 1 and 2, we report the effect of the
interaction of employee gender with peer choices on ESPP participation decisions and the
decision to sell shares within two weeks conditional on participating, respectively. To
ease readability of the table, we report only the baseline coefficient on         (δ) and the
interaction term with the indicator variable that equals one if the worker is female.
However, all controls from our prior analysis are included and have similar effects to
those we report in Tables 3 and 4. We find that the investment choices of women are
significantly less sensitive to the choices of their local peers than are the investment
choices of men. We find that a ten percentage point increase in the local participation rate
would have roughly 0.4 percentage points smaller of an effect on the decision of a female
employee to participate than the decision of a male employee (Column 1). The difference
is even more pronounced on the decision to sell shares within two weeks conditional on
participating. We find a significant positive effect of local coworkers’ tendency to do
such sales on the decisions of men, but we do not observe an effect on the decisions of

                                              20
women (Column 2). The estimated interaction term of the female indicator with the local
rate at which employees sell within two weeks fully offsets the baseline effect δ. On the
one hand, larger peer effects among men might be surprising given that men on average
are more prone to be overconfident in their own abilities (Lundeberg, Fox, and Punccohar,
1994). However, men also tend to have a greater affinity for competition than women
(Niederle and Vesterlund, 2007), which could result in a greater awareness of the
behavior of their peers.
   In Columns 3 and 4, we consider instead employee age, interacting             (average
participation in the firm-location-month and the fraction of participators who sell within
two weeks, respectively) with each of the age group dummies. Considering the
interactions together with the baseline estimate of δ, we see that participation among
local coworkers has a strong positive effect on the likelihood of participating among
employees who are less than 30 years of age, between 30 and 35, and between 35 and 40
that is statistically indistinguishable across groups (Column 3). From the age of 40
forward, however, the effect of local coworkers’ choices is significantly smaller in
magnitude (though still positive) and declines monotonically from group to group to near
zero among workers who are older than 60. In Column 4, the dependent variable is
instead an indicator equal to one if the employee sells shares within two weeks,
conditional on participating in the firm’s ESPP. Because we have less power in this
sample (it is roughly a third the size of the Column 3 sample), we aggregate the age
dummies into larger categories before interacting them with            . Specifically, we
consider the interactions of the rate at which local coworkers who participate in the ESPP
sell within two weeks with (1) an indicator variable that takes the value of one for
employees whose age is between 30 and 50 and (2) an indicator variable that takes the
value of one for employees older than 50. We again observe a monotonically declining
pattern in the (positive) influence of peers’ choices on trading choices as age increases.
Workers between 30 and 50 are significantly less influenced than their younger
colleagues by the average choices of their local coworkers. The attenuation of the peer
effect is even stronger for workers older than 50. In fact, the point estimate of the peer
effect even turns slightly negative for this group. Overall, we observe that younger
employees are more prone to mimic the decisions of their coworkers than their older

                                           21
colleagues. The effect could be consistent with greater expertise among older colleagues
from a longer history of financial decision-making. Alternatively, it could reflect a
stronger (false) confidence or lack of receptiveness to outside information among older
employees.
   Finally, in Columns 5 and 6, we test whether the effect of colleagues’ choices on
participation and trading decisions differs depending on the employee’s reported annual
income. We interact      with our standard four income group categories ($25K < income
≤ $50K; $50K < income ≤ $100K; $100K < income ≤ $200K; income > $200K). Unlike
age, we do not find a simple monotonic effect of income on the degree to which peers’
behavior affects individual investment decisions. In Column 5, we do not observe a
significant difference between the effects of local coworkers’ decisions on workers who
earn less than $25K or between $25K and $50K (both groups have a positive and
significant estimate of δ). The participation decisions of workers who earn between $50K
and $200K are more sensitive to the decisions of peers; however, the decisions of
workers who earn greater than $200K are significantly less sensitive to peers’ choices.
Such a pattern could arise if workers interact more with other workers in their own
income groups and, as a result, workers in low income groups less often interact with
colleagues who participate in the firm’s ESPP. On the high end of the income spectrum,
we may be more likely to observe workers in managerial positions whose decision are
less likely to be informed by how their subordinates behave. In Column 6, we report the
estimates in the context of peer trading. We do not observe significant differences in how
peers influence the decision to sell ESPP shares within the first two weeks of the firm-
wide purchase date (though the point estimates again suggest a heightened influence in
the middle income ranges). We are cautious in interpreting these results, however,
because they could simply reflect a lack of power to distinguish among the income
categories.
   Overall, we find significant differences in the degree to which word-of-mouth affects
the investment choices of employees depending on observable characteristics. The gender
differences admit a number of interpretations. For example, men may be more generally
attentive to financial decisions and, thus, more likely to learn. Alternatively, women may
seek information from sources other than peers. Consistent with peer learning, the age


                                           22
and income effects suggest that individuals who are likely to have less information about
financial decisions learn the most from their peers.

3.4. Identifying the Peer Learning Mechanism

    Our analysis thus far suggests that peer influence matters for financial choices.
Moreover, the cross-sectional evidence hints that this influence could be particularly
strong among individuals who have low information. Next, we present additional tests to
tease out the mechanism through which peers matter. Some existing work finds evidence
of peer effects driven, at least partially, by peer pressure or social norms (e.g., Mas and
Moretti, 2009). However, in the case of ESPP participation and trading, decisions are
confidential. Thus, it is unlikely that pressure to conform to group means is the primary
driver of peer effects in this context.
    Instead, our hypothesis is that information about value-maximizing investment rules
spreads from “high information” employees to “low information” employees through
direct communication between colleagues. Because participation in the ESPP is likely to
be beneficial for employees, this channel suggests a “social multiplier.” As one employee
becomes more informed about the ESPP and then communicates the information to her
colleagues, overall participation rates increase and there is a positive spillover effect.
    The general peer effects channel predicts stronger peer influence among
subpopulations of closer peers. For example, to the extent that individuals interact more
with members of the same gender or age group, then peer effects should be stronger
within those subpopulations (See, e.g., Duflo and Saez, 2000). Likewise, under our
hypothesized learning mechanism we expect to see a pattern of “like influencing like” as
information spreads among peers. However, our proposed channel also predicts that
highly informed individuals or subgroups should influence less informed subgroups,
providing the seeds of information that propagates through the network. Thus, to isolate
our proposed peer learning channel, we focus on identifying the unique role of high
information employees in transmitting information to less informed peers.
    We consider three measures of “high information” employees. First, we use
employees’ reported occupations to identify individuals who work in occupations likely
to be associated with relatively strong general knowledge of financial products
(accounting, finance, and engineering) or strong knowledge of the firm’s specific

                                              23
financial offerings (human resources). 8 For ease of exposition, we refer to these
occupations as “HO,” or high information occupations, and define an indicator that takes
the value one for employees in the “HO” set and zero for all other non-executive
employees for whom we observe non-missing occupation data. Second, we use
employees’ responses to questions about their prior investment experience to identify
employees with “excellent” or “good” prior experience. We refer to these employees as
“HE,” or high experience employees. Data on prior investment experience is missing in
most cases; in order to retain a sufficient sample size for our tests, we include employees
with missing information in the reference group. To the extent that this induces
measurement error, it should bias against finding a significant effect of high experience
employees on their less experienced peers. Third, we use employees’ reported income
bins to proxy for high information. We define an indicator variable that takes the value
one for employees in the highest reported income bin (income > $200K) and zero for all
other non-executive employees for whom we observe income data. High income
employees are likely to be influential not only because they are likely to have more
experience with financial products than their colleagues, given their relative wealth, but
also because they are likely to hold relatively senior positions inside the firm. We refer to
the set of high income employees using the abbreviation “HI.”
    Before turning to regression tests using the high information measures, we present
some summary statistics to provide preliminary validation of the measures. In Panel A of
Table 7, we report the pairwise correlations between the three measures of “high
information.” We find that both the HO and HI measures are positively and significantly
correlated with the measure of high self-reported prior investment experience (HE),
providing some validation for our interpretation of the occupation and income groups.
Interestingly, the HO and HI measures are negatively correlated with each other.
Occupations that we associate with high information about financial products are not




8
  We drop employees who identify as executives from our tests because executives may face limitations in
the information that they can directly share with employees. In our reported specifications, we also exclude
finance workers who work in firms in the finance industry from the set of “high information” employees
since it is less clear that they are more informed than their local colleagues; however, this restriction is not
crucial for the results.

                                                      24
always the highest paying occupations. 9 Nevertheless, both occupation and income
appear to capture aspects of investment experience, suggesting they have value as
complementary measures. In Panel B, we present mean worker demographics and stock
and option holdings across high and low information employee groups, using each of the
three measures. Focusing first on the measure of self-reported investment experience, we
find that men, older workers, and workers with higher holding of stock and options more
frequently report high investment experience. The latter correlations are intuitive and
suggest that individuals report realistic assessments of their experience. Across all three
measures, we consistently find that high information employees have higher holdings of
equity-linked securities, though the gender and age patterns are less consistent. It is
important to note that we control for worker demographics and stock and option holdings
in our analysis so that our information measures will not simply proxy for differences in
these characteristics.
    In Panel C of Table 7, we report mean ESPP participation, separately by occupation,
income, and investment experience categories. Because failing to participate in an ESPP
leaves money on the table (the discount between the market stock price and the purchase
price within the plan), we can interpret it as an investment mistake. Thus, to the extent
that we observe nonparticipation, it should occur among low information employees. We
find that this is generally the case under each of our three information metrics. We
observe a monotonically increasing participation rate as reported investment experience
increases. Moreover, employees for whom we do not observe reported investment
experience have the lowest participation rates, suggesting that including them in the “low
information” group is appropriate. We also find a monotonically increasing relation
between ESPP participation rates and income for the interior bins of the income
distribution (groups two through five). One possible explanation for the relatively lower
ESPP participation rate among workers in the highest income bin (group six) is that most
firms place a ceiling on the total dollar amount that can be invested in the ESPP, a
constraint most likely to be relevant for workers in this income category. In this case, the
gains from participation are relatively less compared to total compensation than for

9
 The negative correlation is sensitive to exactly which occupations we include in the high information
group. For example, if we exclude engineering or, alternatively, include employees in “research”
occupations, the correlation with HI becomes positive and there is no qualitative change in our later results.

                                                     25
workers in the other income categories. The relatively high participation rate among
workers in the lowest income bin (group 1) is surprising under the interpretation of
income as a proxy for financial information; however, we find similar results if we
exclude these workers from the analysis altogether. Finally, we observe substantial
variation in ESPP participation rates across occupation categories. For two of the four
subcategories of “high information” occupations (engineers and finance occupations), we
verify the prediction of relatively high participation rates. Participation rates are higher
than the overall sample mean (0.43) for all of the “high information” occupation groups,
except HR. Overall, the summary statistics in Table 7, though noisy, provide some basic
corroboration of our interpretation of the information measures.
   Given our measures of high information (and low information) employees, we test for
evidence of information flow not only within, but also between groups. That is, are high
information employees key “influencers” within the peer network? First, we revisit the
estimation of Equation (1), but replace        with       , where d indicates whether the
employee is a member of a high or low information partition and the vector includes
group averages for each associated subgroup. We again measure group averages in a
separate random sample of the data from the regression sample to eliminate mechanical
correlations. We also allow for differences in the estimates of the subgroup means
depending on the information of employee i by interacting             with an indicator for
whether employee i is a member of the high information group captured by d. We follow
this approach for each of the three information partitions described above. For this
analysis, the variable y is an indicator for whether the employee participates in the firm’s
ESPP at time t.
   We do not consider the timing of sales conditional on participating in the ESPP. Our
tests in this section partition the set of employees in the firm-location to measure the peer
effect in smaller subgroups (high and low information). On average, roughly 40% of
employees in a firm-location participate in an ESPP (Table 1). The average fraction of
employees who trade within the first two weeks of stock purchase (our main measure of
trading behavior) is an order of magnitude smaller. And, the high information subgroup is
relatively small, by definition. Moreover, the outcome itself is binary. Thus, measurement



                                             26
error in group averages and a lack of power in the regression samples make it challenging
to implement meaningful tests using trading measures as the choice variable.
   We present the results in Table 8. In Column 1, we use occupation groups (HO) to
identify high and low information employees. Consistent with heightened communication
among more similar peers, we observe a pattern of “like influencing like” in our data. We
find a positive and significant coefficient on the level effect of the participation rate
among local low information employees, which measures the effect of low information
peers on other low information employees. Likewise the sum of the coefficient estimates
on the participation rate of high information peers and its interaction with the high
information indicator, which measures the effect of high information peers on other high
information employees, is positive and significant. We also find evidence of significant
cross-group effects. Most relevant for our hypothesis, the level effect of the participation
rate among local high information peers, which measures the peer effect on low
information colleagues, is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. We find
broadly consistent evidence using the other two measures of high information. In Column
2, we report the results using high investment experience (HE) as the measure of
information. We confirm the pattern of “like influencing like.” The point estimates also
suggest an influence of high information employees on low information peers; however,
the frequency of high experience employees is not sufficiently high to allow us to
measure the effect with much statistical precision. Finally, in Column 3, we use high
income (HI) to proxy for high information employees. Here the results closely mimic the
results from Column 1: we find both significant evidence of “like influencing like” and of
high information employees influencing low information peers. Notably, the difference
between the effect of low information investors on high information peers and low
information peers is also negative and statistically significant in this specification.
   The results in Table 8 confirm that the choices of high information employees
influence the choices of low information peers. However, we also see not only that low
information employees respond to low information peers, but also that the magnitude of
the influence of low information peers on their low information colleagues is generally
larger than the influence of high information peers. It is important to note that these
patterns are still consistent with our learning hypothesis. For example, one high


                                              27
information influencer in an office could share information with a small set of low
information colleagues. These colleagues, in turn, could share the information with other
low information employees through the peer network (in which low information
employees are more likely to interact with other low information colleagues). In this case,
it would appear as if the low information employees respond to the decisions of low
information colleagues; however, the information that is spread would have originated
from a high information colleague. And, such information could be particularly likely to
propagate through the network.
     To test for this type of diffuse information channel, we restrict our attention to the
subsample of low information employees in the regression sample. 10 We define an
indicator variable that takes the value one if there are no high information employees in
employee i’s office location.11 We then estimate Equation (1), including this indicator,
the mean participation rate among low information employees in the firm-location, and
the interaction of the two variables in addition to the baseline fixed effects and controls.
The null hypothesis is that the coefficient estimate on the interaction term is 0; that is, the
presence of a high information employee in the office does not change the effect of the
decisions of low information employees on the decisions of their low information
colleagues. We implement the test sequentially using each of our three measures of
information. In Column 1 of Table 9, we report the results using occupations (HO) to
identify high information employees. We strongly reject the null hypothesis. The effect of
low information employees on their low information peers is significantly weaker in
offices in which there is no high information employee present to seed the flow of
information through the network. In Columns 2 and 3, we repeat the estimation using
investment experience and income, respectively, to define the set of high information
employees. The results are similar. In both cases we find negative estimates on the
coefficient of the interaction term that are statistically significant at the 1% level.
     In the remainder of Table 9, we report two robustness checks to address alternative
interpretations of the evidence. First, a potential concern is that the result is driven by

10
   We also estimate the differential effects of the participation rates of high and low information colleagues
only on the subsample of low information employees. We find results very much in line with the estimates
of the level effects of the participation rates reported in Table 8.
11
   We define this indicator variable using the full set of employees in the office and not just the random half
of the sample we use to measure average peer decisions.

                                                     28
very small offices. If the number of high information employees in an office is positively
correlated with size, then the result could be driven by measurement error in the group
average that attenuates the estimated peer effect (measurement error will be most severe
in the smallest offices). To address this concern, we repeat the specifications from
Columns 1 to 3, but exclude offices in the bottom ten percent of the size distribution. For
symmetry, we also exclude the top decile of the distribution. We report the results in
Columns 4 to 6. We continue to find that the presence of high information employees in
the office increases the activity in the peer network of low information colleagues.
Second, a potential concern is that the employees we identify as having “high information”
are concentrated at or near headquarters where there is generally more information
available to all employees. To address this concern, we repeat the specifications from
Columns 1 to 3, but exclude firm-locations that are located in the state in which the firm
has its headquarters. We report the results in Columns 7 to 9 and they are again similar to
the baseline specifications.
   Our evidence suggests that high information employees provide information on smart
investment practices within the firm’s ESPP to colleagues who then in turn spread the
information to other employees through the peer network. If this mechanism is an
important determinant of employees’ investment decisions, then ESPP participation rates
should be higher on firm-location-dates in which we observe high information employees,
given that nonparticipation is an investment mistake. In Table 10, we report mean
participation rates in firms’ ESPPs across firm-location-dates, broken out based on the
presence of a high information employee. We again consider all three of our measures of
information. In all cases, we find higher participation rates among employees from
offices in which there is a high information employee. Moreover, the minimum
difference is roughly 25%, suggesting that the peer learning channel is indeed
economically meaningful.

3.5. Differences in Peer Influence by Proxies for Intensity of Interaction

   As a final step, we consider an additional robustness test to confirm that our estimates
of peer effects are indeed likely to capture endogenous peer influence versus contextual
factors. Specifically, we identify a source of variation in the likelihood that any two
employees in a firm-location meaningfully interact. We then test whether the estimated

                                            29
peer effects are stronger among the subset of firm-locations in which we expect there to
be a higher intensity of employee interaction.
     Specifically, we consider differences in the neighborhoods in which workers are
located. Workers who live and work in areas that are more densely populated may be
more likely to have contact with each other and, therefore, to discuss or observe each
other’s decisions within the firm’s ESPP. If so, then we should observe stronger estimates
of peer influence among such employees. We retrieve data on population density at the
CBSA-level for the years 2000 and 2010 from the U.S. Census Bureau. 12 There is
substantial variation across metro areas in population density. A standard deviation of the
2000 sample is 1,709, measured in units of people per square mile. We define a set of
indicator variables for quartiles of the distribution of population density within our
sample. We then test whether the influence of peers on ESPP participation and trading
choices differs depending on the density of the location in which the workers live by
including the density indicators and their interaction with                      in Equation (1). 13 We
report the results in Table 11 using population density as measured in the 2000 Census
(the results using the 2010 Census are nearly identical). We generally find that peers
exert a stronger influence on an individual worker’s decision either to participate in the
firm’s ESPP or to sell acquired shares within two weeks of purchase conditional on
participating (our standard trading dependent variable) among workers in CBSAs that
have a greater population density. In Column 1, we find a monotonic increase in the
coefficient estimates on the interaction terms of the population density indicators with
average participation in the firm-location-month as population density increases. The
estimate on the interaction of mean participation with the indicator for the highest
quartile of CBSA population density is positive and statistically significant at the 1%
level. Economically, a ten percentage point increase in average participation would
increase an individual worker’s likelihood of participation by roughly half a percentage
point more if the worker’s CBSA is in the fourth quartile by population density compared
to the first quartile. In Column 2, we report the parallel estimates for trading decisions

12
   Data available from http://www.census.gov/population/metro/data/pop_data.html in the Chapter 3
spread-sheet. We use the population-weighted series (where the weights apply to Census tracts within each
CBSA), though our results are robust to using the unweighted series.
13
   The level effects of the density indicators cannot be identified because they are collinear with the CBSA-
month fixed effects.

                                                    30
conditional on participation in the firm’s ESPP. Here, we do not find a monotonic pattern
across the interactions of density quartiles with the fraction of participants in the firm-
location-month who sell within two weeks of share grants. Workers in CBSAs in the
second, third, and fourth quartiles all exhibit stronger sensitivity to peer trading than
workers in CBSAs in the bottom quartile. The effects in the second and fourth quartiles
are strongest statistically. Overall, our results suggest that increased contact between
peers increases the degree to which their investment decisions affect each other. Though
it is a clear prediction of the endogenous peer effects mechanism, this finding less
obviously follows from the presence of contextual peer effects.

4. Conclusion
   We use unique data from a company that administers employer-sponsored ownership
plans in several hundred public, U.S. firms to study how individuals are influenced by the
financial decisions of their peers. We focus on decisions inside ESPP plans because their
features are particularly conducive to identifying peer effects. Generally all employees
within a firm are eligible to participate in the plan and they are all simultaneously making
the decision to buy (or sell) the same security (company stock) given the same prices.
   We find evidence of significant diffusion of investment practices through employee
networks. Comparing only workers at the same firm in the same election window and
correcting for a general metro area effect, we find that average participation rates in a
firm-location positively predict the likelihood an employee participates in the ESPP.
Similarly, trading behavior is affected by the trading behavior of peers. We focus on one
specific trading behavior that is common in ESPPs through most of our analysis: the
decision to sell the shares purchased in a particular grant window within two weeks of the
firm-wide grant date. We find that the fraction of local coworkers in the firm who exhibit
this behavior also positively predicts the likelihood an employee herself chooses to make
an early sale. In addition to our baseline fixed-effects identification strategy, we confirm
the results using general demographic patterns as a source of exogenous variation. For
example, women tend to be less likely to sell ESPPs. Thus, we use lower selling rates in a
firm-location that are predicted solely by the presence of more women in the office to
identify the effects of average selling decisions on peers. We also find differences in the


                                            31
extent to which individuals are susceptible to peer influence. Men, younger employees,
and employees in the middle of the income distribution appear to be most prone to mirror
the investment decisions of peers.
   Our analysis centers on investment choices that are likely to improve employees’
welfare, particularly the decisions to participate in their firms’ ESPPs. Thus, the spread of
this behavior among peers suggests that employee networks can be a mechanism for
social learning. To test this channel more directly, we identify three sets of “high
information” employees: employees in occupations that are likely to correlate with
investment experience or expertise, employees who directly report good prior investment
experience, and employees in the highest reported income bin. We find that the choices
of such individuals exert a direct influence on their low information peers. Moreover, the
choices of “low information” employees have a significantly weaker effect on the choices
of their low information peers when there are no high information colleagues in their
offices. Thus, the importance of peer networks is mitigated when there is less likely to be
value-improving information to transmit through them.
   Overall, our results can help us to understand how financial behavior disseminates
through the population. This is particularly important given the abundance of evidence
that individuals sometimes make suboptimal financial choices. Peer networks could form
conduits through which bad behavior spreads through mimicry. However, they also hold
promise as a mechanism to spread better decision-making to low information investors at
lower cost than direct education. Providing information to key individuals within a
network has strong positive externalities on the behavior of other investors. In our context,
for example, educating a small number of influential employees on the benefits of ESPP
participation could have an outsized impact on the rate at which workers in the firm
participate in the ESPP. Since participation in ESPPs is nearly a guaranteed win for the
worker, this is likely to improve overall employee satisfaction with the plan and to
contribute to the success of the plan in improving employee morale, loyalty, and,
ultimately, productivity.




                                             32
References


Abel, Andrew B., 1990. Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the
Joneses. American Economic Review 80: 38-42.

Babenko, Ilona and Rik Sen, 2014. Money left on the table: an analysis of participation in
employee stock purchase plans. Review of Financial Studies 27: 3658-3698.

Banerjee, Abhijit V., 1992. A simple model of herd behavior. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 107: 797-817.

Barber, Brad M. and Terrance Odean, 2013. The behavior of individual investors. In
Handbook of the Economics of Finance, Volume 2B, ed. George M. Constantinides,
Milton Harris and Rene Stulz, (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Bernheim, Douglas, 1994. A theory of conformity. Journal of Political Economy 102:
841-877.

Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian and Katherine L.
Milkman, 2015. The effect of providing peer information on retirement savings decisions.
Journal of Finance 70: 1161-1201.

Bikhchandani, Sushil, David Hirshleifer and Ivo Welch, 1992. A theory of fads, fashion,
custom, and cultural change as informational cascades. Journal of Political Economy 100:
992-1026.

Brown, Jeffrey R., Zoran Ivkovic, Paul A. Smith and Scott Weisbenner, 2008. Neighbors
matter: causal community effects and stock market participation. Journal of Finance 63:
1509-1531.

Bursztyn, Leonardo, Florian Ederer, Bruno Ferman and Noam Yuchtman, 2014.
Understanding mechanisms underlying peer effects: evidence from a field experiment on
financial decisions. Econometrica 82: 1273-1301.

Case, Anne C. and Lawrence F. Katz, 1991. The company you keep: the effect of family
and neighborhood on disadvantaged youths. NBER Working Paper No. 3705.

Cohen, Lauren, Andrea Frazzini and Christopher Malloy, 2008. The small world of
investing: board connections and mutual fund returns. Journal of Political Economy 116:
951-979.

Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2002. Participation and investment decisions in a
retirement plan: the influence of colleagues’ choices. Journal of Public Economics 85:
121-148.




                                           33
Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez, 2003. The role of information and social interactions
in retirement plan decisions: evidence from a randomized experiment. Quarterly Journal
of Economics 118: 815-842.

Ellison, Glenn and Drew Fudenberg, 1995. Word-of-mouth communication and social
learning. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110: 93-125.

Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales, 2013. Time varying risk aversion.
NBER Working Paper No. 19284.

Hong, Harrison, Jeffrey D. Kubik and Jeremy C. Stein, 2004. Social interaction and stock
market participation. Journal of Finance 59: 137-163.

Lerner, Joshua and Ulrike Malmendier, 2013. With a little help from my (random) friends:
success and failure in post-business school entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies
26: 2411-2452.

Lundeberg, Mary A., Paul W. Fox, and Judith Punccohar, “Highly confident but wrong:
gender differences and similarities in confidence judgments. Journal of Educational
Psychology 86: 114-121.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, 2011. Depression babies: do macroeconomic
experiences affect risk taking? Quarterly Journal of Economics 126: 373-416.

Mas, Alexandre and Enrico Moretti, 2009. Peers at work. American Economic Review 99:
112-145.

Manski, Charles F., 1993. Identification of endogenous social effects: The reflection
problem. Review of Economic Studies 60: 531-542.

Niederle, Muriel and Lise Vesterlund, 2007. Do women shy away from competition? Do
men compete too much? Quarterly Journal of Economics 122:1067-1101.

Ouimet, Paige and Geoffrey Tate, 2016. Investor experience and attention: the effect of
financial shocks on individual trading decisions, Working Paper, University of North
Carolina.

Shue, Kelly, 2013. Executive networks and firm policies: evidence from the random
assignment of MBA peers. Review of Financial Studies 26: 1401-1442.




                                          34
Table 1. Summary Statistics

Panel A. ESPP variables
                                          N           mean         SD     min    max
Participate                            472,608         0.43       0.495    0      1
Age                                    472,608       40.45        9.428   18     108
Female                                 472,608        0.282        0.45    0      1
Option Holdings                        472,608       4.185        4.433    0    17.53
Zero Option Holdings                   472,608       0.507         0.5     0      1
Restricted Stock Holdings              472,608        1.011       2.231    0    13.51
Zero Restricted Stock Holdings         472,608        0.813        0.39    0      1
Income_25K                             472,608       0.0249                0      1
Income_25K50K                          472,608       0.0791                0      1
Income_50K100K                         472,608        0.324                0      1
Income_100K200K                        472,608        0.402                0      1
Income_200K                            472,608         0.17                0      1

Panel B. Distribution of Days to First Trade (N = 334,192)
                           Percentile                     Value
                                    5                         1
                                   10                         3
                                   15                         5
                                   20                        12
                                   25                        27
                                   30                        57
                                   35                       104
                                   40                       182
                                   45                       265
                                   50                       373
                                   55                       461
                                   60                       568
                                   65                       693
                                   70                       828
                                   75                      1004
                                   80                      1230
                                   85                      1550
                                   90                      1993
                                   95                      2678
Table 2. ESPP Participation
The full sample consists of one observation per biannual ESPP window for each eligible employee in a sample firm. The analysis
sample is a subsample constructed by randomly choosing half of the observations in each firm-location-window. The dependent
variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee participated in the firm's ESPP. The count of observations
is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the
1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                  (1)                          (2)                        (3)
                                                            Full Sample                  Full Sample              Analysis Sample
Age_3035                                                      0.0136 ***                   0.0172 ***                  0.012 ***
                                                             (0.004)                      (0.003)                    (0.004)
Age_3540                                                     -0.0034                       0.0133 ***                 0.0126 ***
                                                             (0.005)                      (0.003)                    (0.004)
Age_4045                                                     -0.0289 ***                   0.0035                     0.0024
                                                             (0.006)                      (0.003)                    (0.004)
Age_4550                                                     -0.0452 ***                  -0.0012                    -0.0008
                                                             (0.007)                      (0.003)                    (0.004)
Age_5055                                                     -0.0673 ***                  -0.0135 ***                 -0.014 ***
                                                             (0.008)                      (0.004)                    (0.005)
Age_5560                                                     -0.1037 ***                  -0.0398 ***                -0.0372 ***
                                                             (0.009)                      (0.004)                    (0.006)
Age_60                                                       -0.1573 ***                  -0.0814 ***                -0.0831 ***
                                                             (0.009)                      (0.006)                    (0.008)
Female                                                       -0.0185 ***                  -0.0238 ***                 -0.021 ***
                                                             (0.003)                      (0.002)                    (0.003)
Option Holdings                                               0.0377 ***                   0.0238 ***                 0.0246 ***
                                                             (0.003)                      (0.002)                    (0.003)
Restricted Stock Holdings                                     0.0126 ***                   0.0055 **                  0.0057 **
                                                             (0.004)                      (0.002)                    (0.003)
Zero Option Holdings                                          0.2472 ***                   0.1251 ***                 0.1334 ***
                                                             (0.025)                      (0.019)                    (0.020)
Zero Restricted Stock Holdings                               -0.1564 ***                  -0.1563 ***                -0.1582 ***
                                                             (0.022)                      (0.012)                    (0.014)
Income_25K50K                                                -0.0225 **                    0.0011                     0.0047
                                                             (0.010)                      (0.006)                    (0.008)
Income_50K100K                                                0.0347 ***                   0.0319 ***                 0.0374 ***
                                                             (0.010)                      (0.006)                    (0.008)
Income_100K200K                                               0.0287 ***                   0.0217 ***                 0.0276 ***
                                                             (0.011)                      (0.006)                    (0.008)
Income_200K                                                  -0.0666 ***                  -0.0265 ***                -0.0217 **
                                                             (0.013)                      (0.008)                    (0.010)

CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                              No                         Yes                          Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                              No                         Yes                          Yes

R-Squared                                                       0.052                       0.278                        0.309
Observations                                                  473,000                     473,000                      237,000
Table 3. ESPP Participation: IV Regressions
The sample is the Analysis Sample (See Table 2). The dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee participated in the firm's ESPP. The
reported F-statistic is the Cragg Donald F-statistic to test the joint significance of the instruments. The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                     (1)                 (2)          (3)                       (4)          (5)                      (6)          (7)
                                                   OLS              First Stage Second Stage               First Stage Second Stage              First Stage Second Stage
Age_3035 (IV)                                    0.0127     ***      0.0726 *** 0.0129 ***                  0.0654 *** 0.0132 ***                 0.0576 *** 0.0127 ***
                                                (0.004)             (0.015)      (0.004)                   (0.016)      (0.004)                  (0.016)      (0.004)
Age_3540 (IV)                                    0.0125     ***      0.0286 **    0.0125 ***                0.0277 *     0.0133 ***                0.017       0.0133 ***
                                                (0.004)             (0.014)      (0.004)                   (0.015)      (0.004)                  (0.016)      (0.004)
Age_4045 (IV)                                     0.002              0.0599 *** 0.0022                      0.0487 *** 0.0033                     0.0374 **    0.0034
                                                (0.005)             (0.015)      (0.005)                   (0.016)      (0.005)                  (0.016)      (0.005)
Age_4550 (IV)                                   -0.0023              0.0354 ** -0.0021                      0.0274      -0.0014                   0.0143      -0.0015
                                                (0.005)             (0.016)      (0.005)                   (0.017)      (0.005)                  (0.018)      (0.005)
Age_5055 (IV)                                   -0.0142     ***      0.0352 *    -0.0141 ***                0.0357 *    -0.0124 **                0.0249      -0.0123 **
                                                (0.005)             (0.018)      (0.005)                   (0.019)      (0.005)                  (0.020)      (0.005)
Age_5560 (IV)                                   -0.0371     ***     -0.0177      -0.0368 ***                -0.027      -0.0363 ***                 -0.07 *** -0.0367 ***
                                                (0.006)             (0.022)      (0.006)                   (0.023)      (0.006)                  (0.024)      (0.006)
Age_60 (IV)                                     -0.0749     ***     -0.0872 *** -0.073 ***                 -0.0898 *** -0.0721 ***               -0.1067 *** -0.0719 ***
                                                (0.009)             (0.028)      (0.009)                   (0.029)      (0.009)                  (0.031)      (0.009)
Female (IV)                                     -0.0208     ***                  -0.0209 ***                -0.207 ** -0.0212 ***                -0.0212 ** -0.0208 ***
                                                (0.003)                          (0.003)                   (0.009)      (0.003)                  (0.009)      (0.003)
Option Holdings                                  0.0255     ***                   0.0253 ***                             0.0253 ***                            0.0253 ***
                                                (0.003)                          (0.003)                                (0.003)                               (0.003)
Restricted Stock Holdings                        0.0067     **                    0.0067 **                               0.007 **                             0.0069 **
                                                (0.003)                          (0.003)                                (0.003)                               (0.003)
Zero Option Holdings                             0.1424     ***                   0.1405 ***                             0.1406 ***                            0.1403 ***
                                                (0.021)                          (0.021)                                (0.022)                               (0.022)
Zero Restricted Stock Holdings                  -0.1559     ***                  -0.1559 ***                            -0.1547 ***                           -0.1558 ***
                                                (0.014)                          (0.014)                                (0.014)                               (0.014)
Income_25K50K (IV)                               0.0077                           0.0081                                  0.008                  -0.1048 *** 0.0086
                                                (0.008)                          (0.008)                                (0.008)                  (0.009)      (0.008)
Income_50K100K (IV)                              0.0437     ***                   0.0437 ***                             0.0438 ***              -0.0314       0.0448 ***
                                                (0.008)                          (0.008)                                (0.008)                  (0.026)      (0.008)
Income_100K200K (IV)                             0.0316     ***                   0.0318 ***                             0.0321 ***              -0.0327       0.0329 ***
                                                (0.008)                          (0.008)                                (0.008)                  (0.025)      (0.008)
Income_200K (IV)                                -0.0171     *                    -0.0173 *                               -0.017 *                -0.0505 *    -0.0157
                                                (0.010)                          (0.010)                                (0.010)                  (0.027)      (0.010)
Mean_Participate                                  0.142     ***                   0.2507 **                              0.2519 **                             0.2706 ***
                                                (0.009)                          (0.112)                                (0.120)                               (0.094)

Second Stage Controls                                Yes                 Yes                                    Yes                                    Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                              Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                                  Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes

R-Squared                                         0.288              0.816              0.287                0.83              0.287               0.839              0.286
Observations                                    206,000            205,000            205,000             202,000            202,000             200,000            200,000
F-Statistic                                                                           126.083                                106.024                                124.698
Table 4. ESPP Sell Decisions
The sample consists of one observation per biannual ESPP window from the Full or Analysis Samples (see Table 2) in which an employee chose to
participate. The dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee sold the shares acquired during the window within
two weeks of purchase. The reported F-statistic is the Cragg Donald F-statistic to test the joint significance of the instruments. The count of observations is
rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%, and 10%
level, respectively.
                                                                (1)                       (2)                         (3)                      (4)
                                                         Full Sample             Analysis Sample               First Stage              Second Stage
Age_3035 (IV)                                               0.0126 ***                0.0174 ***                  0.0063                   0.0171 ***
                                                           (0.004)                   (0.005)                     (0.025)                  (0.005)
Age_3540 (IV)                                               0.0185 ***                0.0199 ***                  0.0081                   0.0201 ***
                                                           (0.005)                   (0.006)                     (0.024)                  (0.006)
Age_4045 (IV)                                             -0.0140 **                -0.0037                     -0.0045                   -0.0035
                                                           (0.006)                   (0.006)                     (0.025)                  (0.006)
Age_4550 (IV)                                             -0.0270 ***               -0.0194 ***                   0.0116                  -0.0188 ***
                                                           (0.007)                   (0.007)                     (0.025)                  (0.007)
Age_5055 (IV)                                             -0.0381 ***               -0.0262 ***                   0.0536 *                -0.0258 ***
                                                           (0.008)                   (0.008)                     (0.031)                  (0.008)
Age_5560 (IV)                                             -0.0555 ***               -0.0501 ***                 -0.0283                   -0.0500 ***
                                                           (0.008)                   (0.009)                     (0.034)                  (0.009)
Age_60 (IV)                                               -0.0812 ***               -0.0709 ***                 -0.1392 ***               -0.0698 ***
                                                           (0.009)                   (0.011)                     (0.047)                  (0.011)
Female (IV)                                               -0.0681 ***               -0.0565 ***                 -0.0371 ***               -0.0561 ***
                                                           (0.003)                   (0.003)                     (0.012)                  (0.003)
Option Holdings                                             0.0136 ***              -0.0112 ***                                           -0.0109 ***
                                                           (0.002)                   (0.002)                                              (0.002)
Restricted Stock Holdings                                   -0.015 ***              -0.0239 ***                                           -0.0239 ***
                                                           (0.003)                   (0.002)                                              (0.002)
Zero Option Holdings                                        0.1550 ***              -0.1155 ***                                           -0.1144 ***
                                                           (0.023)                   (0.017)                                              (0.017)
Zero Restricted Stock Holdings                              0.0021                    0.0518 ***                                           0.0514 ***
                                                           (0.013)                   (0.013)                                              (0.013)
Income_25K50K (IV)                                          0.0297 ***                0.0062                       0.1245 ***              0.0056
                                                           (0.010)                   (0.011)                      (0.040)                 (0.011)
Income_50K100K (IV)                                         0.0319 ***                0.0084                       0.1117 ***              0.0078
                                                           (0.010)                   (0.009)                       0.036                  (0.009)
Income_100K200K (IV)                                        0.0426 ***                0.0218 **                    0.1001 ***              0.0213 **
                                                           (0.010)                   (0.009)                      (0.036)                 (0.009)
Income_200K (IV)                                          -0.0122                     0.0198 *                     0.0464                  0.0196 *
                                                           (0.011)                   (0.010)                      (0.038)                 (0.010)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks                                                                      0.0731 ***                                           0.2562 *
                                                                                     (0.014)                                              (0.147)

Second Stage Controls                                                                                                  Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                           No                        Yes                        Yes                       Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                           No                        Yes                        Yes                       Yes

R-Squared                                                    0.024                       0.248                      0.816                     0.245
Observations                                               201,000                      85,000                     84,000                    84,000
F-statistic                                                                                                                                  53.861
Table 5. ESPP Sell Decisions: Different Horizons
The sample consists of one observation per biannual ESPP window from the Analysis Sample (see Table 2) in which an employee chose to participate. The dependent
variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee sold the shares acquired during the window within the time frame in the Column header.
The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%,
5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                   (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)                   (5)          (6)
                                                1 Week              1 Month              2 Months             3 Months               1 Year     Continuous
Age_3035 (IV)                                   0.013 ***            0.019 ***            0.028 ***            0.028 ***             0.040 *** (0.126) ***
                                               (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.005)              (0.005)               (0.006)      (0.032)
Age_3540 (IV)                                   0.014 ***            0.024 ***            0.031 ***            0.033 ***             0.049 *** (0.163) ***
                                               (0.005)              (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.007)               (0.007)      (0.037)
Age_4045 (IV)                                  (0.007)               0.001                0.006                0.008                 0.023 *** (0.004)
                                               (0.006)              (0.006)              (0.007)              (0.007)               (0.008)      (0.041)
Age_4550 (IV)                                  (0.017) ***           0.018 **            (0.013)              (0.012)                0.008        0.104
                                               (0.006)              (0.008)              (0.008)              (0.009)               (0.009)      (0.045)
Age_5055 (IV)                                  (0.022) ***          (0.027) ***          (0.029) ***          (0.032) ***           (0.029) ***   0.098 *
                                               (0.007)              (0.008)              (0.008)              (0.009)               (0.009)      (0.050)
Age_5560 (IV)                                  (0.043) ***          (0.058) ***          (0.069) ***          (0.075) ***           (0.086) ***   0.324 ***
                                               (0.008)              (0.009)              (0.009)              (0.010)               (0.011)      (0.063)
Age_60 (IV)                                     0.058 ***           (0.080) ***          (0.078) ***          (0.087) ***           (0.093) ***   0.450 ***
                                               (0.010)              (0.011)              (0.012)              (0.013)               (0.015)      (0.090)
Female (IV)                                     0.049 ***           (0.063) ***           0.069 ***           (0.074) ***           (0.083) ***   0.368 ***
                                               (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.004)              (0.004)               (0.004)      (0.021)
Option Holdings                                (0.009) ***          (0.013) ***          (0.016) ***          (0.181) ***           (0.027) ***   0.099 ***
                                               (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)               (0.003)      (0.014)
Restricted Stock Holdings                      (0.019) ***          (0.030) ***          (0.035) ***          (0.039) ***           (0.053) ***   0.156 ***
                                               (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.004)      (0.015)
Zero Option Holdings                            0.090 ***           (0.134) ***          (0.154) ***          (0.168) ***           (0.231) ***   0.930 ***
                                               (0.015)              (0.018)              (0.020)              (0.021)               (0.024)      (0.121)
Zero Restricted Stock Holding                   0.053 ***            0.039 ***            0.027 *              0.011                (0.073) *** (0.128)
                                               (0.012)              (0.015)              (0.016)              (0.017)               (0.022)      (0.081)
Income_25K50K (IV)                              0.004                0.009                0.011                0.005                 0.016       (0.024)
                                               (0.010)              (0.012)              (0.012)              (0.012)               (0.014)      (0.076)
Income_50K100K (IV)                             0.011                0.012                0.013                0.007                 0.015       (0.051)
                                               (0.009)              (0.010)              (0.010)              (0.010)               (0.012)      (0.066)
Income_100K200K (IV)                            0.022 **             0.026 ***            0.033 ***            0.029 ***             0.038 *** (0.154) **
                                               (0.009)              (0.010)              (0.011)              (0.011)               (0.012)      (0.069)
Income_200K (IV)                                0.016 *              0.026 **             0.032 ***            0.031 ***             0.055 *** (0.165) **
                                               (0.009)              (0.011)              (0.012)              (0.012)               (0.013)      (0.075)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks                                0.086 ***
                                               (0.015)
Mean_Sell_1Month                                                     0.078 ***
                                                                    (0.014)
Mean_Sell_2Months                                                                          0.075 ***
                                                                                          (0.014)
Mean_Sell_3Months                                                                                               0.063 ***
                                                                                                               (0.014)
Mean_Sell_1Year                                                                                                                      0.074 ***
                                                                                                                                    (0.013)
ln(Days to First Sale)                                                                                                                                    0.118 ***
                                                                                                                                                         (0.017)

CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                             Yes                  Yes                  Yes                   Yes                  Yes                  Yes

Observations                                   85,000               85,000               85,000               85,000               85,000                59,000
R-squared                                       0.239                0.259                0.269                0.275                0.294                 0.371
Table 6. Cross-sectional Differences in Peer Effects by Employee Characteristics
"Choice" indicates the ESPP decision that is considered in the Column. As indicated in the Column headers, Columns 1, 3, and
5 analyze the employees decision to participate in an ESPP (and so mean_choice is the participation rate in the worker's firm-
location-month in the excluded random sample) on the Analysis Sample (See Table 2). Columns 2, 4, and 6 analyze the
employee's decision to sell shares purchased within an ESPP conditional on participating (and so mean_choice is the rate at
which participators sell their shares within two weeks of purchase in the worker's firm-location-month in the excluded random
sample). Standard controls are the controls from Tables 3 and 4. The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000.
Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%, and 10% level,
respectively.
                                                           (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)
                                                      Participate Sell 2 Weeks Participate Sell 2 Weeks
Mean_choice                                            0.1515 *** 0.0979 *** 0.1861 *** 0.1436 ***
                                                      (0.009)      (0.015)     (0.013)      (0.013)
Female * Mean_choice                                  -0.0382 *** -0.1108 ***
                                                      (0.008)      (0.018)
Age_3035 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.0096
                                                                               (0.012)
Age_3540 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.0125
                                                                               (0.013)
Age_4045 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.0466 ***
                                                                               (0.014)
Age_4550 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.0696 ***
                                                                               (0.015)
Age_5055 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.0797 ***
                                                                               (0.016)
Age_5560 * Mean_choice                                                         -0.1305 ***
                                                                               (0.018)
Age_gt60 * Mean_choice                                                          -0.145 ***
                                                                               (0.027)
Age_3050 * Mean_choice                                                                      -0.0575 **
                                                                                            (0.027)
Age_50 * Mean_choice                                                                        -0.2082 ***
                                                                                            (0.034)
Income_25K50K * Mean_choice

Income_50K100K * Mean_choice

Income_100K200K * Mean_choice

Income_200K * Mean_choice


Standard Controls                                          Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes

R-Squared                                               0.288               0.249              0.273               0.249
Observations                                          206,000              85,000            206,000              85,000
Table 7.
Panel A. Correlations Across Measures of Informativeness

                 HO                      HI
HI                 -0.0065 ***
HE                  0.0364 ***                0.0043 ***

Panel B. Employee Characteristics by Measure of Informativeness

                  High Information   High Investment
                     Occupation         Experience       High Income
                 Yes       No       Yes       No     Yes       No
Female             31.36% 28.14%      11.34% 28.63%    25.04%     30.59%
Age                  42.61    47.58     48.55 47.08      50.06      44.13
RS hold              228.3    208.4     404.7 212.3      673.8        144
Opt hold            18,233 23,096      31,456 22,777    72,912     10,948

Panel C. Mean ESPP Participation Rate by Occupation, Investment Experience and Income

                  ESPP        count
Occupation
Accounting            43.9%     22,790
Engineer              51.9%     58,890
Finance               46.2%      7,438
HR                    41.9%     12,978
Administration        36.0%     14,125
Consulting            35.4%     13,173
health care           37.5%     13,095
IT                    47.3%    130,123
Marketing             43.5%     18,333
Investment Experience
Unknown               47.2%    839,135
None                  53.6%     30,428
Limited               60.0%     10,988
Good                  60.8%      9,851
Excellent             61.3%      3,569
Household Income Category
< $15,000            45.30%     17,005
$15,000-25,000       30.60%      8,812
$25,000-50,000       33.30%     61,588
$50,000-100,000      44.70%    247,690
$100,000-200,000     46.70%    262,279
> $200,000           37.60%     83,243
Table 8. Cross-sectional Differences in Peer Effects by Informativeness
The sample is the Analysis Sample (See Table 2). The dependent variable is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee participated in the
firm's ESPP. High information is defined as belonging to a high information occupation in Column 1, to reporting "good" or "excellent" investment
experience in Column 2, or to recieving income above $200,000 in Column 3. The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are
clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                                                (1)                     (2)                      (3)
Mean Participation Rate of High Information Influencers                                      0.049 ***              0.0481                   0.0241 **
                                                                                           (0.014)                  (0.036)                 (0.012)
Mean Participation Rate of Low Information Influencers                                     0.0993 ***               0.3067 ***               0.1588 ***
                                                                                           (0.023)                  (0.086)                 (0.020)
Responder is High Information                                                              0.0242 ***               0.0209                  -0.0199 **
                                                                                           (0.006)                  (0.028)                 (0.008)
Mean Participation Rate of High Information Influencers *
Responder is High Information                                                              0.0348 **                0.1884 ***               0.0484 ***
                                                                                           (0.015)                  (0.051)                  (0.016)
Mean Participation Rate of Low Information Influencers *
Responder is High Information                                                              -0.0241                  0.0759                  -0.1042 ***
                                                                                           (0.017)                  (0.072)                 (0.018)

Standard Controls                                                                               Yes                      Yes                      Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                                                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                                                         Yes                      Yes                      Yes

R-Squared                                                                                   0.296                    0.228                   0.278
Observations                                                                              105,000                   36,000                 119,000
Table 9. Cross-sectional Differences in Peer Effects by Presence of Informed Peer
The sample drops non-informed peers. Columns 4-6 also drop firm-locations where total employment is below the 10th or above the 90th percentiles. Columns 7-9 drop all firm-lcoations in the same state as the firm's headquarters. The dependent variable
is an indicator variable that takes the value of one if the employee participated in the firm's ESPP. High information is defined as belonging to a high information occupation in Columns 1, 4 and 7, to reporting "good" or "excellent" investment experience in
Columns 2, 5, and 8, or to recieving income above $200,000 in Columns 3, 6, and 9. The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***, **, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%,
and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                                       (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)         (9)
Mean Participation Rate of Low Information Influencers                             0.1238 *** 0.2423 *** 0.1511 *** 0.1305 *** 0.2616 *** 0.1546 *** 0.1076 *** 0.2497 *** 0.1241 ***
                                                                                   (0.015)    (0.021)    (0.014)    (0.016)    (0.022)    (0.014)    (0.021)    (0.034)    (0.019)
No High Information Types at Firm-Location-Month                                   0.0193 **  0.0492 *** 0.0218 **  0.0178 *   0.0447 *** 0.0152 *   0.0288 **  0.0488 **    0.024 *
                                                                                   (0.009)    (0.012)    (0.009)    (0.010)    (0.013)    (0.009)    (0.013)    (0.020)    (0.013)
Mean Participation Rate of Low Information Influencers *
No High Information Types at Firm-Location-Month          -0.0565 *** -0.1145 *** -0.0383 ** -0.0502 *** -0.1167 *** -0.0297 *                                                                          -0.0719 *** -0.1451 *** -0.028
                                                           (0.017)     (0.020)     (0.015)    (0.018)     (0.021)     (0.016)                                                                            (0.023)     (0.033)    (0.021)
Standard Controls                                        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes                                                                                Yes         Yes         Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                  Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes                                                                                Yes         Yes         Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                  Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes         Yes                                                                                Yes         Yes         Yes

R-Squared                                                                           0.316              0.296               0.305                0.317              0.296              0.307                0.367               0.343              0.359
Observations                                                                      108,000            169,000             145,000               96,000            150,000            128,000               46,000              71,000             59,000
Table 10. Mean ESPP Rate of Participation By Presence of High
Information Peer in a Firm-Location-Month
                                           mean ESPP        Count
HO at location                                46.70%      860,711
no HO at location                             36.30%      239,765

HE at location                                50.60%     453,027
no HE at location                             39.20%     760,463

HI at location                                45.40%     873,651
no HI at location                             38.80%     281,005
Table 11. Peer Effects by CBSA Population Density
The sample is the Analysis Sample (See Table 2) in Column 1 and the subsample of ESPP participants from the
Analysis Sample in Columns 2. The dependent variable is indicated in the column header. Density_Quartile`x' is an
indicator variable that takes the value of 1 if the population-weighted population density of the worker's CBSA as
measured in 2000 is in the `x'th quartile of the distribution. Standard controls are the controls from Tables 3 and 4.
The count of observations is rounded to the nearest 1,000. Standard errors are clustered at the firm-month level. ***,
**, * indicate statisticial significance as the 1%, 5%, and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                               (1)                      (2)
                                                                        Participate             Sell 2 Weeks
Mean_Participate                                                            0.128 ***
                                                                          (0.013)
Mean_Participate*Density_Quartile2                                          0.000
                                                                          (0.014)
Mean_Participate*Density_Quartile3                                          0.021
                                                                          (0.016)
Mean_Participate*Density_Quartile4                                          0.048 ***
                                                                          (0.015)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks                                                                                       0.019
                                                                                                     (0.028)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks*Density_Quartile2                                                                     0.086 **
                                                                                                     (0.035)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks*Density_Quartile3                                                                     0.035
                                                                                                     (0.040)
Mean_Sell_2Weeks*Density_Quartile4                                                                     0.061 *
                                                                                                     (0.034)

Standard Controls                                                               Yes                      Yes
CBSA-Month Fixed Effect                                                         Yes                      Yes
Firm-Month Fixed Effect                                                         Yes                      Yes

R-Squared                                                                   0.285                     0.247
Observations                                                              205,000                    85,000
