NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STUDENT LOAN NUDGES:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON BORROWING AND EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT
Benjamin M. Marx
Lesley J. Turner
Working Paper 24060
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24060

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We are grateful to the Lumina Foundation, ideas42, and the Russell Sage Foundation for financial
support and to the participating community colleges for carrying out the experiments and
providing the data used in this study. We also thank Eric Bettinger, Colleen Campbell, Judy
Scott-Clayton, Dan Connolly, Alissa Fishbane, Jee Hang Lee, Dave Marcotte, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Kansas State University, McMaster
University, National University of Singapore, Teachers College Columbia University, University
of Birmingham, University of Illinois, University of Maryland, University of North Carolina at
Charlotte, University of Nottingham, 2015 TIBER Symposium on Psychology and Economics,
2015 and 2017 APPAM annual meetings, 2016 Advances with Field Experiments meeting, 2016
AEFP annual meeting, 2016 CESifo Area Conference on the Economics of Education, 2016 IPA
Researcher Gathering on Financial Inclusion, 2016 NBER Fall Education Meeting, and 2017
Early-Career Behavioral Economics Conference for helpful comments and suggestions. Yuci
Chen and Brian Feld provided excellent research assistance. The project was registered in the
AEA RCT Registry with ID number AEARCTR-0000633 and approved by the UIUC
Institutional Review Board under protocol #15366. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Benjamin M. Marx and Lesley J. Turner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Student Loan Nudges: Experimental Evidence on Borrowing and Educational Attainment
Benjamin M. Marx and Lesley J. Turner
NBER Working Paper No. 24060
November 2017
JEL No. D12,D14,D91,I22
ABSTRACT
We estimate the impact of student loan “nudges” on community college students' borrowing and
provide the first experimental evidence of the effect of student loans on educational attainment.
Nonbinding loan offers listed in students' financial aid award letters, that do not alter students'
choice sets, significantly affect borrowing. Students randomly assigned to receive a nonzero loan
offer were 40 percent more likely to borrow than those who received a $0 loan offer. Nudgeinduced borrowing increased both GPA and credits earned by roughly 30 percent in the year of
the intervention, and in the following year, increased transfers to four-year colleges by 10
percentage points (nearly 200 percent). We predict that the average student would be better off
receiving a nonzero loan offer for any discount rate below 12.4 percent. Students' borrowing
responses to the nudge are most consistent with a model in which nonzero offers provide
information about loan eligibility, suggesting that for most students, nonzero offers are welfare
enhancing. Given that over 5 million U.S. college students receive $0 loan offers, our results
indicate the potential to achieve large gains in educational attainment through changes to the
choice architecture around borrowing.

Benjamin M. Marx
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
214 David Kinley Hall, 1407 W. Gregory
Urbana, IL 61801
benmarx@illinois.edu
Lesley J. Turner
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3115E Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
turner@econ.umd.edu

1

Introduction

U.S. undergraduate enrollment has increased by more than 30 percent since 2000, with two-year institutions
absorbing the majority of new students. The plurality of students now attend open-access community colleges
and face poor odds of success.1 At the same time, numerous studies provide evidence that community college
graduates receive substantial labor market returns.2 While financial aid has been shown to help low-income
students enter and complete college (Deming and Dynarski 2010), the design of federal student aid programs
may hinder students’ ability to take advantage of these resources. In particular, a growing literature suggests
that student decisions are influenced by debt aversion (Field 2009; Caetano et al. 2011), cognitive costs
associated with complexity (Dynarski and Scott-Clayton 2006; Bettinger et al. 2012), issues of self-control
(Cadena and Keys 2013), and framing effects (Pallais 2015; Evans et al. 2016).
Students also may be highly responsive to choice architecture – the design of the environment in which
individuals make choices (Thaler et al. 2012). Institutions choose how options for student loans are presented
to students, potentially altering the choice architecture around students’ borrowing options. Although
colleges must make federal loans available to all qualifying students, they have discretion over whether
a loan “offer” is included in students’ financial aid award letters. Thus, loan offers may serve as nudges
by altering the framing or salience of borrowing options, even though students’ choice sets are unaffected.
Offers could affect borrowing decisions if they are perceived as providing information about loan availability,
establish a reference point for students who are inattentive to alternatives, or induce anchoring around the
offered amount.3
We study the effect of student loan nudges on borrowing and educational attainment with a field experiment at a large community college. Students were randomly assigned to receive either a loan offer of zero
or a nonzero offer of $3500 (for “freshman”) or $4500 (for “sophomores”).4 Students who received a nonzero
loan offer were 40 percent more likely to borrow than those who received a $0 offer, with each additional
borrower taking-up a $4000 loan, on average.
Nonzero loan offers also generated sizable gains in educational attainment. While we find no evidence of
economically meaningful or statistically significant enrollment effects in the year of the experiment, nonzero
loan offers significantly increased credit accumulation and students’ grade point averages (GPAs). Using the
1 For example, among community college students who entered in fall 2010, only 30 percent completed a certificate or associate
degree while 9.3 percent earned a credential from a four-year institution (Shapiro et al. 2016).
2 See, for example, Jepsen et al. (2014), Bahr et al. (2015), Dadgar and Trimble (2015), Liu et al. (2015), Stevens et al.
(2015), and Turner (2016).
3 Both inattention and anchoring have been shown to influence consumers’ decisions in other financial markets. For instance,
Keys and Wang (2016) show that borrowers exhibit anchoring with respect to minimum credit card payments while Stango
and Zinman (2014) provide evidence of limited attention with respect to bank overdraft fees. However, despite the growing
importance of student loans in households’ balance sheets, less research has focused on borrowing decisions relative to consumers
decisions in other credit markets (Zinman 2015).
4 Our experimental site classifies students as freshmen if they have accumulated less than 30 credits.

2

random assignment of loan offers as an instrument, we provide the first experimental evidence of the effects
of student loans on educational attainment. On average, students earned 3.7 more credits and increased their
GPAs by 0.6 when induced to borrow by the nudge, representing increases of roughly 30 percent relative to
control group means. One year after the intervention, nudge-induced borrowing increased the probability of
transfer to a 4-year institution by 10 percentage points (200 percent).
Cost-effectiveness calculations based on the estimated first-year attainment gains indicate that nudging
students to borrow is more cost-effective than the most promising interventions at community colleges todate (e.g., Scrivener et al. 2012; Mayer et al. 2015). The average student also likely benefits from receiving
a nonzero loan offer. Using existing estimates of the labor market gains from community college credit
accumulation and from admission to a four-year institution, we estimate that the attainment gains students
experienced within two years are worth more on average than the present value of the students’ additional
debt for any discount rate below 12.4 percent.
Finally, we provide evidence of the mechanisms through which nonzero offers affect students’ borrowing
decisions. Predictions from a model with anchoring are inconsistent with the empirical distribution of loans
for treatment and control group members. Thus, we focus on a model that allows for default bias, inattention,
and costs associated with learning about loan availability. Among treated students, the distribution of loan
amounts exhibits a spike at the exact amount of the offer, providing evidence of inattention to alternative
amounts. Two additional patterns suggest nonzero loan offers provide information about loan availability,
even though all students receive an email explaining how to obtain a loan. First, treatment increases the
number of students borrowing amounts at all points in the distribution of loan amounts and not just at the
offered amount. Second, compliers – students induced to borrow by the nudge – are more likely than alwaystakers to be new students and are less likely to have borrowed in the past. We estimate that information
about loan availability provided by nonzero loan offers accounts for over 75 percent of treatment effect on
loan take-up, suggesting nonzero loan offers generate welfare gains for most compliers.
Outstanding student loan debt in the U.S. has grown steadily over the past decade, reaching $1.34
trillion in 2017 (Federal Reserve Bank of New York 2017). Despite the fact that community college students
have greater unmet financial need and are less likely to borrow than students at private and more selective
institutions, efforts to reduce borrowing have been especially pronounced within this sector.5 Such policies
range from completely opting out of federal loan programs to offering all students $0 in loan aid.6 Colleges
5 According to the 2012 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS), 70 percent of community college students
who applied for federal student aid faced a cost of attendance that exceeded their total resources (including grants, loans,
work-study, and personal resources). Among four-year public and nonprofit undergraduate aid applicants, 58 and 60 percent
had unmet need. Authors’ calculations using PowerStats.
6 Nearly one million additional students attend colleges that do not participate in the student loan program (Cochrane and
Szabo-Kubitz 2016).

3

may try to limit student loan debt out of concern over students’ ability to repay their loans and a desire
to avoid sanctions that the Department of Education can place on schools with high cohort default rates
(CDRs).7 Although sanctions can cause schools to lose access to federal student aid programs, these penalties
are rarely applied to community colleges.8
There is limited evidence on the extent to which loan aid affects outcomes in and beyond college. Two
observational studies estimate the impact of access to federal loan aid using variation in community colleges’
decisions to participate in federal loan programs (Dunlop 2013; Wiederspan 2016).9 These studies rely on
the identifying assumption that colleges’ decisions of when and whether to participate in the federal student
loan program are random, whereas we implement random assignment of non-binding loan offers within a
college. Nonetheless, these studies also suggest that institutional decisions that inhibit access to federal loans
may also reduce educational attainment.
A handful of bachelor’s degree granting institutions have also recently implemented interventions designed
to reduce borrowing. The Indiana University system rolled out a number of concurrent programs aimed at
reducing debt and increasing four-year graduation rates in 2013, and within two years, aggregate borrowing
fell by 16 percent (Kennedy 2015).10 Schmeiser et al. (2017) study a similar intervention at Montana State
University that targeted students with high levels of debt using a difference-in-differences design, and they
find that targeted students’ borrowing decreased by only 2 percent.11 Less costly interventions designed to
help inform students’ borrowing decisions have produced mixed results. Loan applicants at the Community
College of Baltimore who were randomly assigned to a text messaging campaign combined with assistance
from financial aid counselors experienced small reductions in both the amount borrowed and short-run
attainment (Barr et al. 2017).12 Experimental evidence from the U.S. and the Netherlands suggests that
7A

school’s CDR equals the share of federal borrowers who default within three years of entering repayment. Schools with
CDRs exceeding 30 percent for three consecutive years lose eligibility to provide students with federal Pell Grants and loans,
while schools with CDRs exceeding 40 percent in any single year lose access to federal loans. Schools can appeal such sanctions
for a variety of reasons, including serving a large number of low-income students or having a low number of borrowers in a given
cohort. Prior to 2012, CDRs were measured on a two year basis with lower sanction thresholds. See the Federal Student Aid
Cohort Default Rate Guide for additional details.
8 Only three community colleges received CDR-related sanctions between 2002 and 2015. All three avoided federal aid loss
through successful appeals. In September 2017, one additional community college was sanctioned and will likely appeal (see
https://www.ed.gov/news/press-releases/us-department-education-releases-national-student-loan-fy-2014-cohort-default-rate).
9 Dunlop (2013) finds that students in participating colleges are more likely to transfer to a four-year school, with some
subgroups also being more likely to obtain bachelor’s degrees. Wiederspan (2016) estimates that college-wide participation in
federal loan programs leads Pell Grant-eligible students to attempt an additional 19 credits in their first year.
10 These initiatives included the establishment of an Office of Financial Literacy and financial education program, one-on-one
financial counseling, online financial training for new students, and annual student loan debt letters to all student borrowers with
information on cumulative debt, estimated monthly repayment, and remaining federal loan eligibility. Completion initiatives
included a campaign that encouraged students to take 15 credits per semester and freezing tuition and fees for students on
track to complete their degree in four years.
11 Starting in fall 2012, Montana State University sent letters to students with high outstanding debt that included an
incentivized invitation to participate in a one-on-one counseling session with a certified financial counselor.
12 Students in the treatment group received text messages for one month. Texts included information about students’ loan
options and terms (including lifetime limits and future payments), encouragement to complete required forms, access to oneon-one counseling with financial aid staff (70 percent of students sent at least one question), reminders that it was possible to
borrow less than the offered amount, and suggested reference loan amounts less than the federal maximum.

4

information alone does not significantly alter students’ borrowing decisions, even when it increases students’
understanding of loan terms and programs (Booij et al. 2012; Darolia and Harper forthcoming). Our findings
suggest that the point in time at which students make borrowing decisions is an especially important one.
Small nudges at this point in time can have effects on borrowing that are as large as, if not larger than,
initiatives that are more expensive and broader in scope.
Furthermore, across-the-board reductions in student loan debt is not necessarily the objective that institutions and policy makers should pursue. Estimated returns to college completion suggest that the investment
in college is worth the cost of borrowing to finance it for the average young adult (Avery and Turner 2012).
Many low-income students already avoid loans, including subsidized loans that do not accrue interest in
college (Cadena and Keys 2013). Students behave as if facing a fixed cost of borrowing, particularly if they
attend colleges that make $0 loan offers (Marx and Turner forthcoming). Our experimental evidence shows
that barriers to borrowing can reduce attainment.
Nudges have been shown to affect financial choices across a variety of settings (e.g. Thaler and Benartzi
2004; Duflo et al. 2011; Allcott and Rogers 2014). Within the context of postsecondary education, attainment
effects have been found for nudges including reducing already-small costs of college applications (Pallais
2015), providing information to high-achieving, low-income students (Hoxby and Turner 2015), sending text
messages about obtaining financial aid and advancing in college (Castleman and Page 2015; Castleman and
Page 2016), and sending unemployed workers information about financial aid and the return to college (Barr
and Turner 2015). Relative to these studies, ours involves a general population of community college students
and finds especially large effects of a policy choice currently in use or being contemplated by thousands of
colleges. Finally, our study contributes to a growing literature on the importance of choice architecture.
Madrian and Shea (2001), Choi et al. (2006), Chetty et al. (2014), and Bernheim et al. (2015) show that
default options matter for decisions related to investment, saving, and 401(k) participation. The default
option for all students in our setting is a loan amount of $0, regardless of the offer received. Our study
therefore provides evidence that nudges that establish reference points can influence behavior even when the
nudge does not alter the default option.

2

Federal Student Loans in the U.S.

Low-income college students in the U.S. are eligible for federal grants and loans. In order to access federal
aid, prospective students must fill out the free application for federal student aid (FAFSA), which requires
information on family income, assets, siblings, and other family members’ college attendance. These inputs
are fed through a complicated, nonlinear formula to determine a student’s expected family contribution

5

(EFC), the federal government’s measure of ability to pay. Eligibility for federal need-based grants, subsidized
loans, and campus-based aid will generally depend on EFC, either directly (as in the case of Pell Grant aid)
or when combined with additional information (as in the case of work-study funding).
All students who are enrolled at least part-time and have completed a FAFSA are eligible to borrow
through federal loan programs. The largest source of federal loan aid for undergraduate students is the
Direct Loan Program. The terms of federal loan aid depend on a student’s course load, dependency status,
class standing, and unmet need. While students must attempt at least 6 credits to be eligible to borrow,
above this threshold, the terms of borrowing do not explicitly depend on a student’s course load. A student’s
unmet need, equal to her total cost of attendance (tuition, fees, and a cost of living allowance) minus her
expected family contribution (the federal government’s measure of need) and total grant aid from all sources,
determines her eligibility for subsidized loans, which do not accrue interest while in school. Students classified
as freshmen are eligible for subsidized loans equal to the lesser of remaining need and $3500.13 Community
college students who are classified as sophomores are eligible for an additional $1000 in subsidized loans.14
Dependent first-year students can borrow an additional $2000 in unsubsidized loans while independent
students can borrow an additional $6000.15
Students who do not qualify for subsidized loans can still borrow unsubsidized loans up to the overall maximum (e.g., $5500 for freshmen dependent students and $9500 for freshmen independent students).
Unsubsidized loans begin accruing interest immediately after disbursement, but interest rates for both subsidized and unsubsidized loans are fixed over the lifetime of repayment.16 Dependent undergraduate students
face a lifetime eligibility limit of $31,000 in federal loans, while the limit for independent undergraduate
students is $57,500.
Although the federal rules described in the previous paragraph dictate the amounts of subsidized and
unsubsidized loans for which a college student is eligible, colleges can decide how much loan aid to offer in
financial aid award letters.17 In all cases, not borrowing is the default: students who take no further action
do not receive loans, regardless of the amount offered. Students who receive nonzero loan offers must still
accept the offer and complete federal requirements (entrance counseling and a Master Promissory Note) in
order to receive their desired aid. Students who do not receive a loan offer (or receive a $0 offer) can still
13 Subsidized loan eligibility is also reduced when a student’s remaining lifetime eligibility for subsidized loans ($23,000) is
less than these amounts.
14 Students enrolled in four-year institutions are classified as upper-level students are eligible for an additional $2000 in
subsidized loans. Regardless of credit accumulation, community college students cannot be classified as upper-level.
15 An undergraduate student is classified as independent if she will be over the age of 24 by the end of the calendar year, is
married, has dependent children, was in foster care or a ward of the court since age 13, is an emancipated minor, is a homeless
unaccompanied youth, is currently serving on active duty, or is a veteran.
16 Subsidized and unsubsidized loans disbursed after July 1, 2015 had an interest rate of 4.29 percent. Both types of Direct
Loans disbursed after July 1, 2016 had an interest rate of 3.76 percent.
17 The Department of Education and college financial aid administrators call this process “packaging”.

6

request a loan, with the specific request process varying across institutions. Nearly all four-year institutions
offer students the maximum amount of loan aid for which they are eligible. In contrast, community colleges
are divided in how much loan aid they offer to students.
We collected information on loan offer policies of community colleges that participate in federal loan
programs through a combination of web searches, emails, and phone calls between March 2014 and July
2015. In Table 1 we describe each type of school using summary data from the Integrated Postsecondary
Education System’s 2012-13 Student Financial Aid and Net Price files and the Department of Education’s
official 3-year cohort default rates.18 A handful of community colleges offer students a nonzero subsidized
loan with zero unsubsidized loans, while the vast majority are split between either offering students both
subsidized and unsubsidized loans or offering them no loans. Close to 5 million students attend community
colleges offer loans, and over 5 million students attend schools that do not offer loans. All three categories
of colleges have comparable populations in terms of Pell Grant receipt, suggesting that loan offers are not
correlated with average student need. Schools that make $0 loan offers tend to have lower borrowing rates (16
versus 30 percent for schools offering subsidized and unsubsidized loans). Differences in federal loan take-up
may have important financial consequences: nationwide, low-income community college students are more
likely to use a credit card to pay for school and are more likely to work if they have unmet need and forgo
subsidized loans.19 Though the risk of federal sanctions for high student loan default rates may motivate
college policies intended to reduce student borrowing, cohort default rates among schools that package both
subsidized and unsubsidized loans are comparable to rates among schools that do not offer their students
federal loans (18.6 versus 18.9, respectively).

3

The Experiment

The experiment was implemented at “Community College A” (CCA), an anonymous community college,
during the 2015-16 academic year.20 As shown in Panel A of Table 2, CCA’s costs are comparable to the
costs faced by community college students nationwide. For instance, in-district tuition and fees for the 201415 academic year were approximately $3100 versus $3249 nationwide. We contacted colleges with sufficient
enrollment to obtain a useful sample size, and hence CCA has a significantly larger student body than the
18 An earlier version of this table appears in the online appendix to Marx and Turner (forthcoming). The current version
of the table includes the packaging practices of 796 community colleges, representing 92 percent of community colleges that
participate in federal loan programs.
19 Authors’ calculations using data from the 2012 NPSAS (via Powerstats). We limit the sample to community college students
with at least $1000 in unmet need (and thus would qualify for subsidized loans) and who are eligible for a federal Pell Grant.
Students in this sample who forgo federal loans are 9 percentage points (33 percent) more likely to use a credit card to pay for
college and are 4 percentage points (7 percent) more likely to work while in school than those who take-up federal loans.
20 We ran a similar experiment at a second community college (“Community College B” or CCB). However, the experimental
sample of students was much smaller than anticipated, and the resulting estimates were not sufficiently precise to rule out the
possibilities of either large effects or no effect. Appendix B contains details on the CCB experiment.

7

average community college, with a 12-month full-time equivalent enrollment (FTE) of approximately 18,800
compared to 4,300 across all community colleges. Financial aid receipt is similar between CCA students and
community college students nationwide. For instance, approximately 45 percent of CCA students received
Pell Grant aid and 25 percent received federal loans in 2013-14, compared to 41 and 19 percent of students
at the average community college.
Students at CCA have substantially lower completion rates and slightly worse labor market outcomes
than students at the average community college. Only 5 percent of CCA students completed a credential
within 150 percent of the expected time to degree (e.g., 3 years for an associate degree), compared to
21 percent of students at the average community college.21 Median earnings among federal aid recipients
who were no longer enrolled 10 years after entry are similar for CCA and community colleges nationwide
(approximately $28,000 versus $30,253, respectively). Other earnings outcomes follow similar patterns, with
CCA students experiencing slightly worse labor market outcomes than national averages. While borrowers
from the experimental site had lower student loan balances when entering repayment (approximately $4200
versus $6500 nationwide), CCA borrowers experienced worse repayment outcomes.
CCA had considered changing its loan packaging procedures prior to the experiment. During the 2014-15
academic year, CCA offered loans to all students with less than $25,000 in outstanding federal loan debt.
All prospective students who listed CCA on their FAFSA received information relating to their financial aid
packages electronically via a web-based system. In addition to federal requirements, CCA required students
to actively confirm that they wish to borrow and to specify the amount of loan aid they would like via an
electronic loan request form. CCA’s loan eligibility criteria and application procedures were not altered for
the experiment. CCA disburses all funds, including loans, 35 days after the start of the semester.22

3.1

Experiment design

The experiment entailed random assignment of loan offers to students. On a roughly daily basis starting in
May 2015, the CCA financial aid office provided data for each batch of students for whom an award letter
was to be generated the following day. Using these data, students were assigned to either the treatment
group or the control group using randomization stratified by Expected Family Contribution (EFC) bins and
all possible combinations of binary variables for new vs. returning, freshman vs. sophomore, dependent vs.
21 Degree completion measures are only available for students who entered the college as first-time, full-time, degree seeking
students. For community colleges, this group contains fewer than 40 percent of all students in an entry cohort on average.
Within CCA, the share of entering students for whom degree completion outcomes are reported is even smaller (roughly 25
percent).
22 If a student does not complete the federal and CCA borrowing requirements or does not enroll in at least 6 credit hours
until after the scheduled disbursement date , their loan is disbursed within two days after these criteria are met.

8

independent, and with vs. without outstanding student loan debt.23
Loan-eligible students assigned to the treatment group received a nonzero loan offer in their award letter,
while loan-eligible students assigned to the control group received a $0 offer.24 Figure 1 displays screen shots
from CCA’s web page showing the financial aid package, including examples of both treatment and control
student offers at the bottom of the page.25 These offers were pure nudges: they did not affect students’
eligibility for federal loans or the requirement that the student actively accept a nonzero loan (and complete
federal requirements) to obtain a loan. Figure 2 displays a screen shot of the online form that all CCA
students must fill out to obtain a loan.
The amount of the loan offered to treatment-group students depended on the student’s class standing;
in keeping with CCA’s loan packaging practice in the prior year, treatment group freshmen received $3500
loan offers, while sophomores received $4500 offers. Students with unmet need exceeding these amounts
were offered the full amount as subsidized loans, while those with lower unmet need received a combination
of subsidized and unsubsidized loan offers in their award letters.26 Students in the control group were
informed of their eligibility for federal loans and the process for requesting a loan via email.27 CCA clearly
displayed information on student loan eligibility on its website, and all students that complete a FAFSA
receive information on their anticipated eligibility for Pell Grants and federal loans from the U.S. Department
of Education.
23 Break points for stratification by EFC were determined within combination of the binary variables so as to roughly equate
the number of students per strata based on data from the two preceding years. A separate category was created for the
considerable number of students with a zero EFC, and the break points always included the $5198 threshold for Pell Grant
eligibility in the 2015-16 academic year.
24 Students who were not eligible for loan aid did not have loan aid mentioned in the award letter, regardless of their assignment
to treatment or control groups.
25 Among colleges that do not offer loans, some send award letters that do not mention student loans while others show “$0”
explicitly. CCA students in the control group with unmet need received award letters with an explicit $0 offer, while those
with no unmet need (who were still eligible for unsubsidized loans) received award letters that made no mention of loans. We
show in Appendix Figure A.1 that this distinction made no difference in the effect of treatment on loan take-up for either prior
borrowers (who presumably had some knowledge about federal loans) or students with no outstanding debt.
26 Unfortunately, we do not observe the specific amount of subsidized and unsubsidized loans offered to treatment group
members, as we learned during the experiment that when a student accepts a loan, CCA’s information systems change the
amount in the “offer” field to the amount the student choose to accept. However, our measure of imputed subsidized loan
eligibility is strongly predictive of actual eligibility for the subset of students that take-up both subsidized and unsubsidized
loans (i.e., students for whom we can reliably measure actual subsidized loan eligibility) and we find no evidence of heterogeneous
treatment effects for students with and without subsidized loan eligibility.
27 The email contained general information on federal student aid programs and a link to the online loan request form. The
paragraph relating to loan eligibility read as follows:

“Based on the information provided to us, you have not been offered a student loan at this time. If you plan to enroll at
least half time (minimum of 6 credits hours) and have not yet reached the aggregate loan limit for undergraduate students, you
may request loan funds by completing the Loan Request Form. If you have additional questions please contact the Student
Financial Aid & Scholarships Office at ()  − ... If you do choose to request a loan, the Student Financial Aid
& Scholarships Office encourages you to borrow wisely as loan eligibility is limited and it is possible to lose all loan eligibility
before finishing your program.”

9

3.2

Data and descriptive statistics

Our CCA experimental sample includes students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016.
Table 3 displays the characteristics of this group by treatment group assignment. We test for differences in
treatment and control group members’ class standing, past enrollment at CCA, dependency status, amount
of outstanding student loan debt, resources (EFC), Pell Grant aid, work study aid, other grant aid (i.e.,
federal non-Pell, state, and institutional grants), other resources (i.e., private and employer-provided aid),
baseline cumulative credits, and baseline cumulative GPA (for returning students). The first column displays
the control group mean and standard deviation (in parentheses) of each characteristic. The second column
displays the difference between the treatment-group mean and control-group mean and the standard error
of this difference (in parentheses). None of the differences in characteristics between treatment and control
groups are statistically significant. While this is to be expected for the variables in the first five rows,
which were used for stratification, the lack of any significant differences in the other rows provides additional
evidence that randomization was successful.
CCA students who complete a FAFSA (and thus were eligible for random assignment) are quite similar to
FAFSA-completing community college students nationwide. Sixty-five percent of CCA students are classified
as freshmen and 59 percent are independent. Furthermore, the average CCA student has outstanding
student loans worth about $4,200 and a GPA of 2.67. Using data from the publicly available 2012 National
Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS), we estimate that 60 percent of community college students
nationwide were classified as freshman, 58 percent were independent, average outstanding debt was $4,400,
and the average GPA was 2.42 in 2012.28 The mean values of $6,769 EFC and Pell Grants worth $3,438 are
both about 50 percent higher than national averages, indicating that CCA students have a relatively high
dispersion of resources, with more low-EFC students that receive Pell Grants and more high-EFC students
that bring up the college average.

3.3

Empirical Framework

To examine the impact of nonzero loan offers on borrowing and attainment, we estimate ordinary least
squares (OLS) and instrument variables (IV) models:

28 Statistics

Di = βTi + ηXi + νi

(1)

Yi = πDi + φXi + i

(2)

generated by PowerStats (https://nces.ed.gov/datalab/).

10

In equation (1), Di is a dummy variable equal to one if a nonzero loan was offered in the financial aid award
letter of student i, Ti is a dummy indicating assignment to the treatment group, and Xi includes a vector
of strata fixed effects and a linear term in student expected family contribution (EFC). To reduce residual
variation we include controls for cumulative credits earned and GPA at baseline as well as the month of
random assignment. OLS estimates of β will represent the extent to which CCA’s loan offers were correlated
with the randomly-assigned treatment status. Compliance with treatment was imperfect because students
who were assigned to the treatment group were not offered a loan if their past borrowing exceeded $20,000 or
if their financial aid package was completed after their enrollment decision and they had not enrolled in the
six credits necessary to be eligible for a loan. Given such discrepancies between treatment status and offer
status, we include among our estimates the “intent-to-treat” (ITT) effect of loan offers, i.e. the reduced-form
OLS estimates of the impact of treatment group assignment on these outcomes.
We estimate the “treatment-on-the-treated” (TOT) impact of receiving a nonzero loan offer with instrumental variables (IV) models in which we instrument for receipt of a nonzero loan offer with assignment
to the treatment group. In this case, equation (2) represents the second stage. Estimates of the coefficient
π will represent the TOT effect of a nonzero loan offer on the borrowing or attainment outcome Yi . Even
if assignment to nonzero loan offers among students in the treatment group was not random, the use of
the treatment assignment dummy Ti as an instrument isolates variation in offers that was randomized. To
test for heterogeneous treatment effects, we jointly estimate IV models for each subgroup to allow for cross
equation correlation in error terms. In all analyses, standard errors are clustered by strata.
We also use assignment to the treatment group as an instrument for loan take-up. This is because
increased borrowing, rather than the loan offer itself, is the most likely driver of changes in educational
attainment. We replace Di in equations (1) and (2) with a binary variable indicating borrowing. Estimates
produced by these models will represent ITT effects on attainment measures scaled by the impact of treatment
on loan take-up. Under the assumptions that (1) treatment only affects attainment through impacts on loan
take-up and (2) the borrowing response is monotonic, IV estimates will represent local average treatment
effects of loan take-up on attainment for students induced to borrow by the nudge (Imbens and Angrist
1994). The monotonicity assumption is satisfied by the theoretical model that best fits our data, which
we describe in Section 7. It should be noted, however, that nonzero loan offers could in theory have nonmonotonic effects on the amount borrowed. In Section 4, we provide evidence that nonzero offers increase
the probability of borrowing throughout the distribution of loan amounts, and the pattern of these effects
suggests minimal effects of the nudge on the intensive margin of borrowing. If nearly all responses occur on
the extensive margin then the IV estimates should closely approximate the local average treatment effect on
students induced to borrow. Neither assumption is required to interpret the unscaled ITT estimates.
11

3.4

Adjustments for multiple hypothesis testing

The outcomes we examine fall into two categories: borrowing and educational attainment. In the first
category, we consider two main measures - the probability of borrowing and the amount borrowed - which
are highly correlated. In the second category, we observe several measures of educational attainment in
the year of the experiment, including the number of credits attempted, credits earned, GPA, and credential
receipt. Testing for effects on multiple outcomes increases the likelihood of finding at least one estimate to
be statistically significantly different from zero when standard errors do not account for the fact that many
hypotheses are being tested.
We address concerns over the multiple hypothesis testing in two ways. First, we generate a standardized
index of treatment effects following Finkelstein et al. (2012) and the online appendix of Kling et al. (2007).
This index represents the weighted average of the estimated treatment effect for each separate outcome,
jointly estimated via seemingly unrelated regression, with weights equal to the inverse of the standard
deviation of the specific outcome in the control group. Standard errors are calculated using the delta method.
Second, for each separate attainment outcome, we calculate familywise p-values using the Westfall and Young
(1993) free stepdown procedure.29 The significance of estimated effects on the standardized treatment index
will provide evidence of whether the family of null hypotheses relating to individual attainment outcomes can
be rejected, whereas the familywise p-values will allow us to determine which, if any, attainment outcomes
contribute the most to the significance of treatment effects on the index.

4

Effects of Nonzero Loan Offers on Borrowing

Figures 3 through 6 provide a visual preview of our estimated impacts on borrowing outcomes. In Figure
3, each bar represents the probability of borrowing for students who were assigned to receive a nonzero
loan offer (“treatment group” members) and those assigned to receive a $0 offer (“control group” members).
Vertical capped lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals. Students in the treatment group were 7
percentage points more likely to borrow, a 30 percent increase relative to the control group borrowing rate of
23 percent. Figure 4 displays the probability that treatment and control group members borrowed the exact
29 This

procedure involves four steps, described below.
Step 1: For each attainment outcome k = 1, ..., 4, we calculate the p-value pk from the test of the hypothesis β k = 0 from
equation (1); we order the labeling of these outcomes such that p1 represents the smallest p-value and p4 is the largest pvalue. Step 2: We draw N = 10, 000 random samples of observations with replacement (drawing proportionately from random
assignment strata), with treatment status assigned randomly so as to impose the null. For each sample i we calculate pki ,

the p-value from the test of the null for outcome k. We then compute the adjusted sample p-value qki = min pik , ..., pi4 .
Step 3: For each outcome k, we calculate the share of random samples for which the p-value generated from the original data
exceeds the adjusted sample p-value: p̄k =

1
N

N

P

1 qki ≤ pk . Step 4: The final familywise p-value for each outcome k is

i=1



p̃k = max p̄1 , ..., p̄k .

12

amount that was included or would have been included in the award letter if the student were assigned to
the treatment group ($P = $3500 for students with “freshman” status and $4500 for those with “sophomore”
status). A significantly greater percentage of treatment group borrowers took up the exact amount offered
compared to control group members (11 versus 7 percent, respectively).
Next, we compare how the amount borrowed responded to treatment group assignment (Figure 5),
looking across all students (Panel A) and students who borrowed (Panel B). Treatment group members
borrow approximately $280 more than control group members, a 26 percent increase from the control group
mean. However, once we condition on loan take-up, control group borrowers take on higher debt than
students assigned to the treatment group (an approximately 5 percent increase from the treatment group
mean amount of $4551). The reduction in the amount borrowed by treatment group borrowers is consistent
with the mechanism described in Marx and Turner (forthcoming), whereby an offer of $0 generates a fixed
cost of borrowing. Control group students will only pay the fixed cost of borrowing if their desired amount
is sufficiently greater than their offer of $0, while treatment group students whose desired amount is only
somewhat greater than $0 may be induced to accept this small amount.
We further explore how borrowing decisions are influenced by loan offers by comparing the distributions
of loans taken up by borrowers in the treatment and control groups. We recenter the actual amount borrowed
around $P, again defined as the amount students would have been offered had they been assigned to the
treatment group ($3500 for freshmen, $4500 for sophomores). Panel A of Figure 6 displays the distributions
of amounts borrowed by students in the treatment and control groups, represented by light blue and dark
blue bars, respectively. Assignment to the treatment group increases the likelihood of borrowing at almost
every point in the distribution. However, students who received a nonzero offer are substantially more likely
to borrow exactly the amount they were offered, suggesting that the offered amount serves as a reference
point for at least some portion of students.30 This finding is confirmed in Panel B. Dark bars represent
the unconditional share of students in the control group who borrowed amounts within $500 bins centered
around $P, solid circles represent the control mean plus estimated treatment effect of nonzero loan receipt,
and the vertical capped line indicates the corresponding 95 percent confidence interval. While nonzero offers
significant increase the probability of borrowing amounts both above and below $P by 0.4 to 0.9 percentage
points, the estimated 2 percentage point increase in the probability of borrowing exactly $P is substantially
larger in magnitude, representing an increase of approximately 115 percent relative to the control group
mean.
30 We observe heaping at $500 intervals in both the treatment and control groups. Even in the control group, such heaping is
especially pronounced at $P because this amount corresponds to the maximum subsidized loan for students with unmet need
of at least $P. However, when we limit our sample to students whose subsidized loan eligibility falls below $P, we only observe
excess bunching at $P in the treatment group (Appendix Figure A.2).

13

4.1

Nonzero loan offers increase borrowing

We formally estimate the impact of treatment assignment and nonzero loan offers on borrowing outcomes
using OLS and IV models. The first column of Panel B in Table 4 displays “first-stage” estimates of the
effect of assignment to the treatment group on the probability of receiving a nonzero loan offer. Treatment
group assignment increased the probability of being offered a nonzero loan by 81 percentage points. The fact
that most students assigned to the treatment group were in fact treated with a nonzero loan offer allows for
precise estimates of impacts on borrowing outcomes.
Given the imperfect compliance with treatment assignment, we use IV models to generate TOT estimates
of the effect of loan offers on students’ borrowing decisions, as described in Section 3.3. As shown in Panel
C of Table 4, receipt of a nonzero loan offer resulted in a 9 percentage point increase in the probability of
borrowing. This response represents a 39 percent increase in borrowing relative to control students’ mean
borrowing rate of 23 percent. Furthermore, a nonzero loan offer increased the average amount borrowed
(including zeroes) by $348 (a 32 percent increase relative to the control group mean). Both estimates are
statistically significant at the 1 percent level.

4.2

Heterogeneity

We test whether receipt of a nonzero loan offer had heterogeneous impacts across different student subgroups.
Most community colleges serve a diverse student body that includes both traditional and nontraditional
students from a variety of family backgrounds. Given the one-size-fits-all approach to loan packaging taken by
most community colleges, it is important to understand whether the effects on CCA students are generalizable
to schools with different student bodies. We focus on subgroups defined by past experience of borrowing (any
outstanding debt versus no outstanding debt), student resources (Pell Grant eligible versus ineligible), prior
CCA enrollment (new versus returning), class standing (freshman versus sophomore status), and dependency
status. To do so, we jointly estimate estimate IV models for each separate subgroup. Table 5 contains these
results.
Across all subgroups, a nonzero loan offer significantly increased the probability of borrowing and the
unconditional amount borrowed. We can reject the hypothesis of equal impacts of nonzero loan offers on
borrowing and the amount borrowed across all subgroups (p < 0.001). The largest differences between
subgroups arise when splitting the sample according to whether a student had borrowed in the past. Loan
offers increased borrowing by 12 percentage points and $539 among students with outstanding loan debt
compared to only 6 percentage points and $185 among students with no outstanding debt. However, relative
to loan take-up among control group members for past borrowers (39 percent) and nonborrowers (10 percent),

14

the estimated increase in loan take-up for students without outstanding debt represents a larger increase in
percentage terms.
Loan offers also generate significantly different effects by dependency status and Pell Grant eligibility.
Pell Grant eligible students’ loan take-up is more responsive to nonzero loan offers than that of ineligible
students (p = 0.045). The nudge also led independent students to borrow significantly greater amounts than
students classified as dependents (p = 0.003), an effect that is likely driven by the higher borrowing limits
for independent students. We find no evidence of significantly different impacts of nonzero loan offers on
conditional borrowing or borrowing exactly $P (i.e., $3500 for freshmen and $4500 for sophomores) along
any of these dimensions.

5

Impacts on Attainment

We first test whether nonzero loan offers affected the likelihood that CCA applicants enrolled in fall 2015,
the semester of the intervention. As shown in Figure 7, 72 percent of students assigned to the control group
enrolled in fall courses compared to 71 percent of students in the treatment group. IV estimates of the
impact of receiving a nonzero loan offer on enrollment produce precisely estimated null effects. For instance,
the 95 percent confidence interval excludes effects larger than a 1 percent increase in enrollment and a 4
percent decrease in enrollment.31 Because we do not observe loan take-up by applicants who do not enroll,
and given that enrollment is balanced across treatment and control groups, we limit the sample of students
used to estimate attainment effects to students who enrolled in at least one course. We further limit our
sample to exclude students who received their financial aid packages after October 15, 2015 (N = 1843),
which is the approximate drop/add deadline for the fall semester. This restriction is meant to focus our
attention on students who could have adjusted their credit hours in response to the loan offer, although our
results are robust to including the dropped students.32
We observe attainment outcomes for the 2015-16 academic year including credits attempted, credits
earned, GPA, degree receipt, and the standardized treatment index constructed from all four of these variables. Control group means and standard deviations are displayed in Panel A of Table 6. We examine
the effect of treatment group assignment and being offered a loan on these outcomes (Panels B and C, respectively) and then estimate the achievement gains experienced by students who were induced to increase
borrowing by the nudge of a nonzero loan offer (Panel D).
31 We also test for heterogeneous effects of loan offers on enrollment within the 10 subgroups examined in Table 5. As shown
in Appendix Table A.1, only one of the 10 point estimates is significant (p < 0.05) and we can reject the test of joint significance
across subgroups (p = 0.482).
32 Appendix Table A.2 shows that characteristics of the treatment and control groups are balanced in this restricted sample.
In this sample the first stage coefficient is 0.835 with standard error of 0.033 and F statistic of 640.

15

As shown in Panel A, students assigned to the treatment group experienced significant increases in their
attainment. The significance of these estimates is not due to the fact that we examine multiple measures of
educational attainment; impacts on the standardized treatment index are significant at the 1 percent level.
Familywise p-values, displayed in brackets below the point estimates and cluster-robust standard errors, show
that impacts on credits earned and GPAs remain significant at the 5 and 10 percent levels, respectively, after
accounting for the familywise error rate. However, estimated impacts on credits attempted are no longer
significant at conventional levels, and effects on degree receipt remain small and insignificant.
Estimated impacts of nonzero loan offers on attainment outcomes are quite similar to ITT estimates of
the effect of treatment assignment (Panel B). Since loan offers only affected a subset of students’ borrowing
decisions, it is not surprising that nonzero offers are associated with relatively small changes in educational
attainment. The IV estimates in Panel C scale these effects by the number of students who were induced to
borrow by the nudge (compliers). On average, compliers took up a loan of approximately $4000. Borrowing
leads to a statistically significant (p < 0.05) 2.5 increase in credits attempted over the academic year.
Impacts on credits earned are even larger; nudge-induced borrowing led to gains of 3.7 credits earned over
the academic year (p < 0.05). Finally, borrowing also increased course performance. Students induced to
take-up a loan earned significantly higher GPAs in each semester, with a cumulative increase of over 0.6 GPA
points (p < 0.01). Borrowing did not increase the likelihood of degree receipt by the end of the academic
year. This finding is not surprising given that most students in our sample were more than one year of
full-time attendance away from completing their degree programs.33
As with the borrowing outcomes, we test for heterogeneous effects of borrowing on educational attainment
over the 2015-16 academic year (Table 7). Column (1) contains the average loan amount for students in the
specific subgroup who were induced to borrow by the nudge, as this amount varies across groups. When
it comes to impacts of nudge-induced borrowing on academic outcomes, there is only one case in which
the estimates for the subgroups on the two sides of each binary distinction are statistically distinguishable.
Estimated impacts on the standardized treatment index significantly exceed zero for a number of subgroups,
but as a whole, we cannot reject the hypothesis that treatment effects are jointly insignificant across all
subgroups (p = 0.273).34
We estimate impacts on on three attainment outcomes in year following the intervention (2016-17):
33 Approximately

96 percent of CCA students in the experimental sample were pursing associate degrees that required 60 to
70 credits. Most had accumulated fewer than 30 at the start of the fall 2015 semester. Only a quarter of the sample started
the fall semester with at least 40 credits.
34 We also test for heterogeneity by degree program. Specifically, we compare students pursing an academic associate degree
(e.g., Associate of Arts, Associate of Science; hereafter AA) that is designed for students who wish to transfer their first
two-years of liberal arts coursework to a four-year institution to students pursing a terminal vocational associate degree (e.g.,
Associate of Applied Science, Associate of Applied Business, Associate of Technical Studies; hereafter AAS), excluding the
small number of students in certificate programs. Treatment effects for students pursuing different associate degree programs
are not statistically distinguishable (Appendix Table A.3).

16

reenrollment in CCA, transfers to a four-year public institution, and degree receipt.35 We observe transfers
and degree receipt using data from the National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). As shown in Table 8, nudgeinduced borrowing led to a 12 percentage point (23 percent) drop in reenrollment at CCA in the 2016-17
academic. We find a similarly-sized positive impacts on transfers into bachelor’s degree programs within
four-year public institutions. Given the relatively low rate of transfers from CCA into four-year public
institutions, the statistically significant 11.4 percentage point increase in the probability of transfer represents
a 178 percent increase relative to the control group mean. Borrowing induced by the nudge did not generate
statistically significant increases in degree receipt for the average student. Although statistically insignificant,
the 2.3 percentage point increase represents a gain of 11 percent relative to the control group mean.

6

Cost-Benefit Analysis

To contextualize our findings, we compare costs and benefits of nonzero loan offers. We do so from the
perspective of the government and then from the perspective of the student. Loans appear beneficial from
both perspectives based on observed attainment effects.
We compare our estimates to impacts of other RCTs targeting community college students’ attainment,
including the City University of New York (CUNY) Accelerated Study in Associate Programs (ASAP) and the
Performance-Based Scholarship interventions. Both interventions involved student-level random assignment
and were evaluated by MDRC. CUNY community college students assigned to the ASAP program were
subject to a suite of requirements, additional supports, and financial assistance.36 The long-run effects
of the ASAP program included a doubling of the likelihood of graduation within three years of program
entry (Scrivener et al. 2015), while early impacts included a significant increase of 2.1 credits earned per
semester (Scrivener et al. 2012). These gains can be compared to an estimated annual cost of $3900 per
student per year, suggesting an annual increase of 1.1 credits earned per $1000 (Scrivener et al. 2015).
The Performance-Based Scholarship (PBS) Demonstration was implemented at several community colleges
nationwide. Students were randomly assigned to be eligible to earn up to $1500 per semester in incentive
payments if they met specific academic goals.37 At the most successful PBS site, treatment group members
earned significantly more credits than control group members, with first-year impacts of approximately 1
additional credit per $1000 of program expenditures (Barrow et al. 2014).
35 Within CCA, attainment effects remain positive, but we can no longer obtain unbiased estimates of effects on earned credits
or grades because students select out of CCA based on assignment to the treatment group.
36 Specifically, students were required to enroll in at least 12 credits per semester (the threshold for full-time attendance),
attend special seminars and engage in intensive advising. Students received a tuition waiver to cover unmet need, free use of
textbooks, and subsidies for transportation expenses. Students in the program took block scheduled classes and had support
to take winter and summer semester courses. See Scrivener et al. (2015) for additional details.
37 The specific population eligible for participation and the structure and size of incentives varied across experimental sites.
See Mayer et al. (2015) for additional details.

17

Our estimated effect of 3.7 additional credits for each $4000 of loan aid translates into approximately 0.9
credits earned per $1000 outlay, which is comparable to the magnitude of estimated effects from the ASAP
and PBS programs. However, in our setting, the additional $1000 is lent to the student rather than spent.
Long-run costs to colleges and government may be substantially lower if the additional loan aid is repaid.
If we assume that students induced to borrow by the experimental nudge will default on their loans at the
same rate as other CCA borrowers, the federal government’s expected cost per $4000 loan is $444. This
suggests a cost-benefit ratio of 8.1 additional credits per $1000, far exceeding the short-run returns of ASAP
and PBS.38
We also assess whether borrowing is financially beneficial for students by describing the financial trade-off
implied by the observed effects on borrowing and educational attainment. Making such a comparison requires
translating the attainment gains into financial terms. For the returns to credit completion within CCA, we
use estimates from Jepsen et al. (2014), who use an individual fixed-effects approach to estimate the effect of
community college credits and credentials on earnings and employment for two cohorts of students enrolling
in the Kentucky Community & Technical College System.39 For enrollment in a four-year public institution,
we use estimates from Zimmerman (2014), who uses a regression discontinuity design to estimate effects of
admission to a four-year public institution that acts as a substitute for community colleges.
Implied earnings effects are substantial. Jepsen et al. (2014) estimate that for students who do not earn
a credential, each additional credit generates a $5.60 to $14 increase in quarterly earnings (in 2008 dollars).
Applying the estimates of Jepsen et al. (2014) according to the gender mix of compliers within CCA, a
student induced to take up a $4000 unsubsidized loan by the experimental nudge would see annual earnings
increase by $169 (in 2016 dollars). Zimmerman (2014) estimates that admission to a four-year institution
that acts as a substitute for community colleges increases annual earnings by 22 percent, or $1593 (in 2005
dollars). Based on these estimates, the 10 percentage-point increase in enrollment at 4-year institutions
implies an annual earnings increase of $198 (in 2016 dollars). Thus, we project the combined earnings effects
of the nudge to be roughly $370 per year per student, on average.
If the earnings effects begin five years after loan receipt and grow at a nominal rate of 3 percent over a
30-year career, and if students repay loans at the interest rate of 4.29 percent that applied to loans made in
2015-16, then the loans are financially beneficial if future cash flows are discounted at any rate below 12.4
percent. Because roughly half of the earnings gains are due to credit accumulation, the ex-post break-even
38 CCA has a 23 percent three-year cohort default rate. We assume that all defaulters do so immediately and make no
payments on their loan and that otherwise, borrowers enter into the standard 10-year repayment plan and face a 5 percent
interest rate. The average interest earned on a $4000 unsubsidized loan over the repayment period would be $880 and thus, the
expected value of interest received given the risk of default is $678. The average cost of default is $4880, while the expected
cost of default per $4000 loan is $1122. Thus, the federal government’s expected net cost of a $4000 loan is $444. Given that a
$4000 loan buys 3.6 additional credits, we estimate that the experimental nudge produces 8.1 additional credits per $1000.
39 An earlier study finds similar effects for an older population of displaced, high tenure workers (Jacobson et al. 2005).

18

rate would be roughly half as large for students who experience average gains in credits completed but whose
four-year enrollment is unaffected. Thus, the induced borrowing is almost certainly beneficial to students on
average, and it appears likely that the majority of students benefit.

7

The Nature of the Nudge

To infer the welfare effects of the nudge, it is necessary to distinguish between potential channels through
which offered loans affect behavior and whether the response to the nudge may defy standard models of
rational choice (Bernheim and Rangel 2009; Handel 2013; Allcott and Kessler 2015; Allcott and Taubinsky
2015). We consider four potential mechanisms across models and provide evidence on their relevance using
the observed distribution of loan amounts among the treatment and control groups.40
Two models are fully consistent with rational choice. First, students may be uncertain of the existence of
or their eligibility for federal loans, and it may be costly to obtain this information. In the presence of such
information costs, a nonzero offer reduces or eliminates the expected cost by providing a signal that increases
the belief that loans are available. Second, students may consider the offered amount a recommendation,
causing a student’s belief about the optimal loan amount to update toward the offered amount, generating
anchoring of loan amounts.41
Two behavioral models of potential relevance are inattention and default bias (Madrian and Shea 2001;
Thaler and Sunstein 2003). Bernheim et al. (2015) “distinguish between the status quo, which determines
the outcome if the worker fails to attend, and the default, which determines which outcomes require effort.”
In our setting, the decision-maker is the student, and if the student doesn’t expend the effort to complete a
loan application then she receives no loan. This implies a default loan amount of $0. The offered amount
has no effect on the default loan amount, and hence both the treatment and control group might exhibit
default bias toward borrowing $0. Thus, default bias would not explain the treatment-control difference
in borrowing, and we do not attempt to estimate its role. Similarly, a status quo bias toward the amount
borrowed in the previous year would not vary across treatment and control groups. However, if the student
fails to attend to the options for borrowing then she may simply choose the offered amount. This inattention
toward options other than the offered amount could induce the observed effects on borrowing.
We examine a model that allows for information costs, inattention, and default bias. In Appendix C, we
examine anchoring as an alternative model and show that its empirical predictions are not consistent with
our findings. Evidence against anchoring is also provided by a separate experiment at a college in which all
40 The

analyses described in this section were not included in our pre-analysis plan.
anchoring could arise if the offered amount generates an endowment effect at the reference point established
by the offer.
41 Alternatively,

19

students were offered a loan (Marx and Turner 2017). In this experiment, references to amounts borrowed
by recent graduates affected loan take-up, but treated students were no more likely to borrow the suggested
amounts than students who were not given an explicit reference point.
Consider a utility function U (`|T ), where ` is the chosen loan amount and T is an indicator for treatment
with an offer of $P . When T = 0 the offered amount is $0. Let the utility function have the form
α

U (`|T ) = − (` − `∗ ) − T ca 1 [` 6= P ] 1 [` 6= 0] − (cd + (1 − T ) (ci + ca )) 1 [` 6= 0] ,
where `∗ ∈ R is the latent desired loan amount, ` ≥ 0 is the amount borrowed, ca ≥ 0 is the cost of attending
to options other than the offered amount, cd > 0 is the cost of deviating from the default of zero, ci > 0 is
the information cost of discovering availability of federal loans, and α ∈ {2, 4, 6, ...}.42 Such preferences can
be obtained as the reduced form of a model in which latent borrowing demand is determined by the chosen
amount of educational investment. Optimal loan amounts will take following form (without specifying a
choice at points of indifference):




0







∗


`


`= 0







P







`∗

α

T = 0, cd + ci + ca > (`∗ )

α

T = 0, cd + ci + ca < (`∗ )
α

α

α

α

α

α

T = 1, (`∗ ) < (`∗ − P ) + cd ∩ ca + cd > (`∗ )
T = 1, (`∗ ) > (`∗ − P ) + cd ∩ ca > (`∗ − P )
α

α

T = 1, ca < (`∗ − P ) ∩ ca + cd < (`∗ )

In this model, treatment with a loan offer of $P can increase the number of borrowers in two ways.
First, inattentive students with `∗ ≤ 0 may be induced to borrow by going along with the offered amount in
the award letter if ca is sufficiently large. Second, students with `∗ > 0 may not borrow when not treated,
either by inattentively following the $0 offer or because information costs are large enough to prevent them
from borrowing. We assess two empirical predictions that offer tests for information costs and inattention,
respectively.





Property 1: If Pr ` ∈ 0, P2 |T = 0 < Pr ` ∈ 0, P2 |T = 1 then there are students with `∗ ∈ 0, P2
with ci > 0.


Proof: Regardless of treatment, ` ∈ 0, P2 only if ` = `∗ ∈ 0, P2 . If T = 1 then students with

α
α
`∗ ∈ 0, P2 will not choose ` = P because U (P |T = 1) = − (P − `∗ ) − cd < − (0 − `∗ ) = U (0|T = 1). For
α

such students we can focus on the choice between ` = 0 and ` = `∗ . U (0|T = 0) = − (`∗ ) = U (0|T = 1),
42 The

negative quadratic form is frequently used to model single-peaked preferences, as in the example of the seminal work
of Crawford and Sobel (1982).

20

i.e. the utility obtained from ` = 0 does not depend on treatment status, but U (`∗ |T = 0) = −cd − ca − ci
and U (`∗ |T = 1) = −cd − ca . Treatment raises the utility obtained from choosing ` = `∗ and increases the
probability that it is chosen only if some of these students have ci > 0.
Property 1 shows that we can obtain evidence on the existence of information costs by examining whether

the treatment group exhibits more mass than the control group for ` ∈ 0, P2 . Experimental evidence is
provided in Figure 8, which plots the distribution of loan amounts by class level. Among both freshmen
and sophomores (for whom P differs), we find more treatment-group students than control-group students
choosing loans in amounts between 0 and

P
2

. If we estimate IV models we find that treatment increases the

likelihood of borrowing such amounts by 2.1 percentage points (p < 0.001) for all students. This evidence
implies that the treatment effects on borrowing cannot be driven entirely by inattention; information costs
must be at play.
Two additional observations about this property are noteworthy. First, it should be noted that not all
models predict a positive treatment effect on small amounts of loans. In Appendix Appendix C we show
that the anchoring model predicts a negative effect on the probability of borrowing some amounts near $P
in our setting, contrary to what we observe (Figure 6, Panel B). Second, it should be noted that it is the
symmetry around `∗ in our parametric model that makes ` =

P
2

the focal point of this prediction. More

generally, the argument will hold for the smallest loan amounts as long as the loss from borrowing less than
`∗ is not too much greater than the loss from borrowing more than `∗ , and this will be true for a wider range
of ` values if cd is large. We observe positive treatment effects throughout ` ∈ (0, P ).
Property 2: Consider δ > 0. If, for all students with `∗ ∈ (P − δ, P + δ), if ca = 0, then when T=1, if
`∗ 6= P then ` 6= P .
α

α

α

Proof: From the solution above, ` = P when (`∗ ) + ca > (`∗ − P ) + cd ∩ ca > (`∗ − P ) . If ca = 0,
α

then this requires 0 > (`∗ − P ) . The right-hand side of this expression is uniquely minimized to zero when
`∗ = P , and so for no other value of `∗ can it be that ` = P .
Property 2 shows that we can test for the existence of inattention by examining whether the treatment
group exhibits excess mass at ` = P . If students behave as if there is no cost to attending to options
other than the offered amount then we should not see a spike in the distribution of loans at the offered
amount. Figure 5 shows that we do see such a spike. Treatment leads to a 2 percentage-point increase in the
probability of borrowing $P (p < 0.001) among all students, and a 3.7 percentage point increase (p < 0.001)
among borrowers. Among treated students, the number borrowing exactly ` = P is equal to or greater than
the number borrowing any amount in a $500 bin above or below P . For this pattern to be consistent with
Property 2, there would need to be a mass of students with `∗ = P . This possibility seems unlikely except
for the fact that for some students P corresponds to the maximum subsidized loan. However, when we limit
21

the sample to students who are ineligible for the maximum subsidized loan, the excess mass of students at
P in the treatment group remains (Appendix Figure A.2). We conclude that the effect of the nudge on
amounts borrowed cannot be driven entirely by information costs and must instead involve some degree of
inattention.
Property 3: Assume ci + ca > 0. For all students, if ` > 0 when T = 0 then ` > 0 when T = 1.
Proof: From the solution above, for a treated student to not borrow when treated it is necessary that
α

α

α

cd ≥ (`∗ ) . If ci + ca > 0 then cd ≥ (`∗ ) ⇒ cd + ci + ca > (`∗ ) , which implies that the student does not
borrow when not treated.
Property 3 shows that this model implies a monotonic, positive effect of treatment on the dummy variable
1 (` > 0). Under such monotonicity, a combination of sample moments identifies the average characteristics
of always-takers (those who borrow regardless of their loan offer), compliers (those who are induced to takeup a loan when receiving a nonzero offer), and never-takers (those who do not borrow regardless of their
loan offer) (Abadie 2003).43 If the cost borrowing includes an information cost, we would expect this cost
to be decreasing in past borrowing and/or schooling experience. If this is the case then compliers for the
outcome of 1 [` > 0] will be newer students and will have less experience with student loans.
Complier characteristics are consistent with the existence of information costs. Table 9 displays estimates
of the characteristics of students according to how their decision of whether to borrow responds to the nudge.
Always-takers are significantly more likely to have borrowed in the past compared with compliers (73 versus
63 percent, respectively, with p < 0.1) and are significantly less likely to be new to CCA (19 versus 29
percent, respectively, with p < 0.1). Among returning students, compliers are the group with the lowest
baseline (consistent with either information or attention costs decreasing in ability), though the differences
between groups are not statistically significant.
Property 4: For all students with ci = 0 and `∗ > 0 ∩ `∗ 6= P , if ` = `∗ , when T = 1 then ` = `∗ when
T = 0.
Proof: From the solution above, for a treated student to choose ` = `∗ when treated it is necessary that
α

α

cd + ca < (`∗ ) . Because ci = 0, this implies cd + ci + ca < (`∗ ) , which implies that the student chooses
` = `∗ when not treated.
Property 4 allows us to bound the share of the treatment effect on the borrowing rate that is due to
43 As

shown in Abadie (2003), mean characteristics for each group can be constructed using combinations of sample moments. Let πAT , πN T , and πC represent the share of students that are always-takers, never-takers, and compliers, respectively, and B the probability of taking-up a loan. As in equation 1, T indicates assignment to the treatment group.
Then πAT = Pr (B = 1|T = 0) and πN T = Pr (B = 0|T = 1). Under the assumption that assignment to the treatment
group weakly increases the probability of borrowing for all students, πC = 1 − πAT − πN T . For any characteristic X,
E [X|C] = (1−π 1−π ) {((1 − πN T ) E[X|B = 1, T = 1]) − (πAT E[X|B = 1, T = 0])}, E [X|AT ] = E [X|B = 1, T = 0], and
AT
NT
E [X|N T ] = E [X|B = 0, T = 1] . We estimate sample analogues for each of these terms and test for significant differences in
characteristics across groups using the delta method.

22

information costs. This property notes that the information cost generates a positive treatment effect on
loan amounts other than P , whereas we would only see a reduction in the share borrowing such amounts
if students were only influenced by inattention, as some of these students would be induced to borrow P
when treated. The treatment effect is 0.02 for ` = P and 0.07 for other positive amounts. If we assume that
all students induced to choose ` = P would have chosen ` = 0 when not treated, then the information cost
explains 78 percent of the impact of the nudge on loan take-up. If we instead assume that all students induced
to choose ` = P would have chosen some other positive amount when not treated, then the information cost
explains 100 percent of the treatment effect on loan take-up.
Welfare analysis is generally difficult when people exhibit behavioral biases. Bernheim and Rangel (2009)
propose a framework for behavioral welfare analysis in which one option is deemed better for an individual
than another if, among her choices that are considered relevant, she consistently chooses the first option.
If the cost of attending to borrowing options was paramount then we might consider all choices relevant,
implying ambiguity in whether students would prefer to borrow or not because there is a set of students who
do not consistently choose the same option. However, choices are not considered relevant if the individual
does not understand her options. Given our evidence for the information-cost mechanism, students who
are not offered a loan do not appear to understand their options, and thus the compliers are students who
prefer to borrow when they understand their options. Welfare effects of a nonzero offer would therefore
appear to be positive for at least 78 percent of those induced to borrow. This conclusion could be reversed
by other behavioral biases that we have not modeled, such as if present-biased students take out loans that
are harmful to them in the long run, but our cost-benefit calculations suggest that the average student who
borrows only when offered a loan is in fact made financially better off.
We conclude that the loan offer nudge appears to affect borrowing through a combination of student
inattention and misperception about loan availability. Information costs associated with learning about loan
availability can explain at least 78 percent of the effect of the nudge on loan take-up, while bunching at the
offered amount shows that inattention also affects borrowing. These results can help guide future work on
welfare analysis and the question of why students, and individuals more generally, respond to certain nudges.

8

Conclusion

We experimentally test the effect of student loan nudges on community college students’ borrowing decisions.
Randomly assigned nonzero loan offers generated a 40 percent increase in the probability of borrowing. Students induced to borrow by the nudge earned 3.7 additional credits and improved their GPAs by 0.6 points in
the year of the intervention, on average. In the following academic year, nudge-induced borrowing generated

23

a 10 percentage point (178 percent) increase in transfers to four-year public institutions. We estimate that
nonzero loan offers increase short-run attainment of community college students by substantially more per
expected dollar of government expenditure than other interventions that have been evaluated with experiments. We cannot conclude that offering a nonzero loan is welfare-enhancing for every student, but we
project that the average responder benefits financially from borrowing, even with a discount rate as high as
12 percent. Using a simple theoretical model that allows for inattention, information costs, and default bias,
we provide evidence on the channels through which nonzero offers affect student behavior. The pattern of
responses to the nudge suggests that 78 percent of the response of loan take-up is driven by a reduction in
information costs, suggesting that nonzero offers improve most students’ welfare.
Our findings are relevant for colleges, policymakers, and future research on the effects of nudges. Over
5 million students attend U.S. colleges that do not offer loans in financial aid award letters and nearly one
million more attend colleges that do not participate in federal loan programs. Our findings suggest that
offering loans to students enrolled in these colleges could generate substantial attainment increases. We also
show that nudges can affect behavior by communicating information in a way that is more salient than other
methods used to communicate the same information. Students appear to benefit substantially from clear
communication of the opportunity to borrow at the point in time when they are making borrowing decisions,
and thus should be made aware of their choice set. At the same time, choosing well within this set also
requires knowledge of expected costs and benefits. Future research could examine how to help each student
obtain an amount of loan aid that best serves his or her needs.

References
Abadie, Alberto, “Semiparametric Instrumental Variable Estimation of Treatment Response Models,” Journal of
Econometrics, 2003, 113 (2), 231–263.
Allcott, Hunt and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Evaluating Behaviorally Motivated Policy: Experimental Evidence from
the Lightbulb Market,” American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (8), 2501–2538.
and Judd B. Kessler, “The Welfare Effects of Nudges: A Case Study of Energy Use Social Comparisons,” 2015.
NBER Working Paper No. 21671.
and Todd Rogers, “The Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Behavioral Interventions: Experimental Evidence
from Energy Conservation,” American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (10), 3003–3037.
Avery, Christopher and Sarah Turner, “Student Loans: Do College Students Borrow Too Much - Or Not
Enough?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2012, 26 (1), 165–192.
Bahr, Peter Riley, Susan Dynarski, Brian Jacob, Daniel Kreisman, Alfredo Sosa, and Mark Wiederspan, “Labor Market Returns to Community College Awards: Evidence From Michigan,” 2015. CAPSEE working
paper.
Barr, Andrew and Sarah Turner, “Out of Work and Into School: Labor Market Policies and College Enrollment
During the Great Recession,” Journal of Public Economics, 2015, 124, 63–73.

24

, Kelli Bird, and Benjamin L. Castleman, “Prompting Active Choice Among High-Risk Borrowers: Evidence
from a Student Loan Counseling Experiment,” 2017. EdPolicyWorks Working Paper.
Barrow, Lisa, Lashawn Richburg-Hayes, Cecilia Elena Rouse, and Thomas Brock, “Paying for Performance: The Education Impacts of a Community College Scholarship Program for Low-Income Adults,” Journal of
Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (3), 563–599.
Bernheim, B. Douglas and Antonio Rangel, “Beyond Revealed Preference: Choice-Theoretic Foundations for
Behavioral Welfare Economics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (1), 51–104.
, Andrey Fradkin, and Igor Popov, “The Welfare Economics of Default Options in 401(k) Plans,” American
Economic Review, 2015, 105 (9), 2798–2837.
Bettinger, Eric P., Bridget Terry Long, Philip Oreopolous, and Lisa Sanbonmastu, “The Role of Simplification and Information in College Decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1205–1242.
Booij, Adam S., Edwin Leuven, and Hessel Oosterbeek, “The Role of Information in the Take-up of Student
Loans,” Economics of Education Review, 2012, 31, 33–44.
Cadena, Brian C. and Benjamin J. Keys, “Can Self-Control Explain Avoiding Free Money? Evidence from
Interest-Free Student Loans,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2013, 95 (4), 1117–1129.
Caetano, Gregorio, Miguel Palacios, and Harry Anthony Patrinos, “Measuring Aversion to Debt: An
Experiment among Student Loan Candidates,” 2011. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5737.
Castleman, Benjamin L. and Lindsay C. Page, “Summer Nudging: Can Personalized Text Messages and
Peer Mentor Outreach Increase College Going Among Low-income High School Graduates?,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization, 2015, 115, 144–160.
and , “Freshman Year Financial Aid Budges: An Experiment to Increase FAFSA Renewal and College Persistence,” Journal of Human Resources, 2016, 31 (2), 389–415.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Søren Leth-Petersen, Torben Heien Nielsen, and Tore Olsen, “Active
vs. Passive Decisions and Crowd-Out in Retirement Savings Accounts: Evidence from Denmark,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 2014, 129 (3), 1141–1219.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick, “Optimal Defaults and Active
Decisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2006, 124 (4), 1639–1674.
Cochrane, Debbie and Laura Szabo-Kubitz, “States of Denial: Where Community College Students Lack
Access to Federal Student Loans,” 2016. The Institute for College Access and Success Report.
Crawford, Vincent P. and Joel Sobel, “Strategic Information Transmission,” Econometrica, 1982, 50 (6), 1431–
1451.
Dadgar, Mina and Madeline Joy Trimble, “Labor Market Returns to Sub-Baccalaureate Credentials: How
Much Does a Community College Degree or Certificate Pay?,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 2015,
37, 399–418.
Darolia, Rajeev and Casandra Harper, “Information Use and Attention Deferment in College Student Loan
Decisions: Evidence From a Debt Letter Experiment,” Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, forthcoming.
Deming, David and Susan Dynarski, “College Aid,” in Phillip Levine and David Zimmerman, eds., Targeting
Investments in Children: Fighting Poverty When Resources are Limited, The University of Chicago Press, 2010,
pp. 283–302.
Duflo, Esther, Michael Kramer, and Jonathan Robinson, “Nudging Farmers to Use Fertilizer: Theory and
Experimental Evidence,” American Economic Review, 2011, 101 (6), 2350–2390.
Dunlop, Erin, “What do Stafford Loans Actually Buy You? The Effect of Stafford Loan Access on Community
College Students,” 2013. CALDER Working Paper 94.
Dynarski, Susan M. and Judith E. Scott-Clayton, “The Cost Of Complexity In Federal Student Aid: Lessons
From Optimal Tax Theory And Behavioral Economics,” National Tax Journal, 2006, 59 (2), 319–356.

25

Evans, Brent J., Angela R. Boatman, and Adela Soliz, “Framing and Labeling Effects in the Decision to
Borrow for Postsecondary Education: An Experimental Analysis,” 2016. working paper.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit, February 2017,” 2017.
New York, NY: Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Field, Erica, “Educational Debt Burden and Career Choice: Evidence from a Financial Aid Experiment at NYU
Law School,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2009, 1 (1), 1–21.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P. Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker, “The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment: Evidence from the
First Year,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2012, 127 (3), 1057–1106.
Handel, Benjamin R., “Adverse Selection and Inertia in Health Insurance Markets: When Nudging Hurts,” The
American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (7), 2643–2682.
Hoxby, Caroline M. and Sarah Turner, “What High-Achieving Low-Income Students Know About College,”
American Economic Review, 2015, 105 (5), 514–517.
Imbens, Guido W. and Joshua D. Angrist, “Identification and Estimation of Local Average Treatment Effects,”
Econometrica, 1994, 62 (2), 467–475.
Jacobson, Louis, Robert LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan, “Estimating the Returns to Community College
Schooling for Displaced Workers,” Journal of Econometrics, 2005, 125 (1-2), 271–304.
Jepsen, Christopher, Kenneth Troske, and Paul Coomes, “The Labor-Market Returns to Community College
Degrees, Diplomas, and Certificates,” Journal of Labor Economics, 2014, 32 (1), 95–121.
Kennedy, James, “Indiana University Student Loan Debt Initiatives,” 2015. Testimony to the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions, Hearing on Reauthorizing the Higher Education Act.
Keys, Benjamin J. and Jialan Wang, “Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards,”
2016. NBER Working Paper No. 22742.
Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects,”
Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1), 83–119.
Liu, Vivian Y. T., Clive R. Belfield, , and Madeline J. Trimble, “The Medium-Term Labor Market Returns
to Community College Awards: Evidence From North Carolina,” Economics of Education Review, 2015, 44, 42–55.
Madrian, Brigitte C. and Dennis F. Shea, “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2001, 116 (4), 1149–1188.
Marx, Benjamin M. and Lesley J. Turner, “Borrowing Trouble? Student Loans, the Cost of Borrowing, and
Implications for the Effectiveness of Need-Based Grant Aid,” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
forthcoming.
and Lesley Turner, “Student Loan Choice Overload,” 2017. Working paper.
Mayer, Alexander K., Reshma Patel, Timothy Rudd, and Alyssa Ratledge, “Designing Scholarships to
Improve College Success: Final Report on the Performance-Based Scholarship Demonstration,” 2015. New York,
NY: MDRC.
Pallais, Amanda, “Small Differences that Matter: Mistakes in Applying to College,” Journal of Labor Economics,
2015, 33 (2), 493–520.
Schmeiser, Maximilian, Christina Stoddard, and Carly Urban, “Does Salient Student Loan Information
College Students’ Academic and Borrowing Behavior?,” Economics of Education Review, 2017, 56, 95–109.
Scrivener, Susan, Michael J. Weiss, Alyssa Ratledge, Timothy Rudd, Colleen Sommo, and Hannah
Fresques, “Doubling Graduation Rates: Three-Year Effects of CUNY’s Accelerated Study in Associate Programs
for Developmental Education Students,” 2015. New York, NY: MDRC.

26

,
, and Colleen Sommo, “What Can a Multifaceted Program Do for Community College Students? Early
Results from an Evaluation of Accelerated Study in Associate Programs for Developmental Education Students,”
2012. New York, NY: MDRC.
Shapiro, Doug, Afet Dundar, Phoebe Khasiala Wakhungu, Xin Yuan, Angel Nathan, and Youngsik
Hwang, “Completing College: A National View of Student Attainment Rates - Fall 2010 Cohort,” https://
nscresearchcenter.org/signaturereport12/ 2016. Signature Report No. 12. Herndon, VA: National Student
Clearinghouse Research Center.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman, “Limited and Varying Consumer Attention: Evidence from Shocks to
the Salience of Bank Overdraft Fees,” Review of Financial Studies, 2014, 27, 990–1030.
Stevens, Ann Huff, Michal Kurlaender, and Michel Grosz, “Career Technical Education and Labor Market
Outcomes: Evidence from California Community Colleges,” 2015. NBER Working Paper No. 21137.
Thaler, Richard H. and Cass R. Sunstein, “Libertarian Paternalism,” American Economic Review, 2003, 93
(2), 175–179.
and Shlomo Benartzi, “Save More Tomorrow: Using Behavioral Economics to Increase Employee Saving,”
Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (1), S164–S187.
, Cass R. Sunstein, and John P. Balz, “Choice Architecture,” in Eldar Shafir, ed., The Behavioral Foundations
of Public Policy, 2012, chapter 25.
Turner, Lesley J., “The Returns to Higher Education for Marginal Students: Evidence from Colorado Welfare
Recipients,” Economics of Education Review, 2016, 51, 169–184.
Westfall, Peter H. and S. Stanley Young, Resampling-Based Multiple Testing: Examples and Methods for
p-Value Adjustment, New York, NY: John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 1993.
Wiederspan, Mark, “Denying Loan Access: The Student-Level Consequences When Community Colleges Opt Out
of the Stafford Loan Program,” Economics of Education Review, 2016, 51, 79–96.
Zimmerman, Seth D., “The Returns to College Admissions for Academidally Marginal Students,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2014, 32 (4), 711–754.
Zinman, Jonathan, “Household Debt: Facts, Puzzles, Theories, and Policies,” Annual Review of Economics, 2015,
7, 251–276.

27

Figures and Tables
Figure 1: Screen Shots From CCA Financial Aid Web Pages
A. Information presented to both treatment and control group members

B. Award information presented to treatment group members

C. Award information presented to control group members

28

Figure 2: Online Loan Request Form

.35

Figure 3: Proportion Borrowing by Treatment

.15

.2

.23

0

.05

.1

Share borrowing

.25

.3

.3

No

Nonzero Loan Offer

Yes

Notes: CCA students randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. Each bar indicates the proportion of students in the treatment
and control groups that borrowed. Capped vertical lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

.12

Figure 4: Proportion Accepting $P by Treatment

.1
.08
.02

.04

.06

.07

0

Amount Borrowed = $P | Borrowing

.11

No

Nonzero Loan Offer

Yes

Notes: CCA borrowers randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. Each bar indicates the proportion of borrowers in the
treatment and control groups that borrowed exactly $P, the amount that was offered to treatment group students ($3500 for
freshmen and $4500 for sophomores). Capped vertical lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

29

Figure 5: Amount Borrowed (Conditional and Unconditional) by Treatment

200

4000
3000
0

0

4551

2000

600

800

1000

Amount Borrowed | Borrowing

1097

4764

1000

1200

1379

400

Amount Borrowed

5000

B. Conditional on Borrowing

1400

A. Unconditional

No

Yes

No

Nonzero Loan Offer

Yes

Nonzero Loan Offer

Notes: CCA students (Panel A) or CCA borrowers (Panel B) randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. Each bar indicates
the average amount borrowed by students in the treatment and control groups. Capped vertical lines represent 95 percent
confidence intervals.

Figure 6: Distribution of (Recentered) Amount Borrowed
B. Effect of Nonzero Offers on the Probability
of Borrowing Specific Amounts

Treatment

]
20

P+
0,
50

0,
+1
(P

00

00

]

0]
P+

15

00

]

+1
(P

(P

+5

00

(P

,P

,P

+1

+5

00

00

P

)
,P
00
-5

[P

50
P-

[P

-1

00

0,

P0,
50

-1

0)

)

)

00
10

00

)
[P

00

0,

P-

15

00
-2
[P

50

0,

P-

20

00
25
P-

6000

0,

5000

00

4000

-2

3000

[P

2000

-3

1000

[P

0

0,

-1000

(Recentered) Amount Borrowed

50

-2000

-3

-3000

(P

-4000

P-

30

0

00

)

)

0

.01

.02

.03

.04

Share borrowing within specified range

300
200
100

Number of students

.05

400

A. Treatment and Control Group Borrowers

(Recentered) Amount Borrowed

Control

Control mean

Control mean + treatment effect

95% CI

Notes: CCA borrowers randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. In both panels, the amount borrowed is recentered around
the amount a student would have received had they been assigned to the treatment group ($3500 for freshmen and $4500 for
sophomores). Panel A displays the number of students taking-up loans within the specified $500 bin. Panel B displays the
control group mean unconditional probability of borrowing within the specified $500 bin, the estimated effect of nonzero offer
receipt on the unconditional probability of borrowing within the specified bin, and the corresponding 95 percent confidence
interval. Treatment effects are estimated via 2SLS where assignment to treatment group serves as an instrument for receipt of
a nonzero loan offer.

30

.8

Figure 7: Proportion Enrolled in Fall 2015
.72

.5
.4
.3
0

.1

.2

Share enrolled

.6

.7

.71

No

Yes

Nonzero Loan Offer

Notes: CCA students randomly assigned before October 15, 2015. Each bar indicates the proportion of students in the treatment
and control groups that enrolled. Capped vertical lines represent 95 percent confidence intervals.

Figure 8: Distribution of Amount Borrowed by Level
B. Sophomores

P

P/2

P

0

0

Number of students
50
100
150

Number of students
50
100
150

P/2

200

200

A. Freshmen

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

Amount Borrowed

7000

8000

9000

10000

0

Nonzero loan offer?
Yes

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

6000

Amount Borrowed

7000

8000

9000

10000

Nonzero loan offer
No

Yes

No

Notes: CCA borrowers randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. Vertical lines indicate $P ($3500 for freshmen, $4500 for
sophomores) and P2 ($1750 for freshmen, $2250 for sophomores). Light blue bars represent treatment group borrowers and
dark blue bars represent control group borrowers.

31

Table 1: Characteristics of Community Colleges by Loan Packaging Procedures
(1) Both

(2) Subsidized

(3) Neither

323

19

454

14,037

18,483

11,642

Enrollment weighted percent of institutions

0.45

0.03

0.52

Offers BA degree(s)

0.12

0.05

0.07

Pell Grant aid
Percent
Average | receipt

0.40
$3,663

0.36
$3,784

0.37
$3,670

Federal loan aid
Percent
Average | receipt

0.30
$5,338

0.26
$4,231

0.16
$5,097

Cohort default rate

18.6

20.5

18.9

Number of institutions
Average undergraduate enrollment

Notes: Community colleges participating in federal student loan programs, excluding the 69 community colleges
for which we were unable to obtain loan packaging practice information (participation status and enrollment from
http://projectonstudentdebt.org/files/pub/CC_participation_status_2013-14.pdf). Federal loan and Pell Grant recipient data
from the Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System’s 2012-13 Student Financial Aid and Net Price file. Information on
whether a given community college offers bachelor’s degree programs from the IPEDS 2012-13 Institutional Characteristics file.
Cohort default rates from Department of Education, Office of Federal Student, official 3-year cohort default rates for borrowers
entering repayment in 2012 (available at: http://www2.ed.gov/offices/OSFAP/defaultmanagement/cdr.html). All statistics are
enrollment weighted except for average enrollment, the count of institutions in each category, and cohort default rates. Cohort
default rates are weighted by cohort size. The number of schools with nonmissing cohort default rate information is in each
category is 296 (both), 19 (subsidized), and 429 (neither).

32

Table 2: Community College A Characteristics and National Averages
CCA

All community
colleges

A. Prices
Published tuition and fees
In‐district
In‐state
Out‐of‐state
Cost of attendance (if living off campus)

$3,100
$4,000
$7,500
$12,600

$3,249
$3,375
$7,547
$16,434

B. Student body
12‐month FTE
Percent receiving Pell Grants
Percent with federal loans
Percent first generation

18,800
45
25
50

4,335
41
19
48

C. Attainment and Earnings Outcomes
Percent grad w/in 150% time to degree
Percent with earnings, 10 years after entry
Percent earn > $25K, 10 years after entry
Median salary, 10 years after entry

5
75
55
$28,000

21
81
59
$30,253

D. Borrowing and Repayment Outcomes
Percent defaulting in 3 years
Median debt at repayment entry
Percent paying down balance, 7 years later

20
$4,200
60

19
$6,563
67

Notes: Two-year public schools participating in Title IV federal student aid programs. Panel A measures from 2014-15 IPEDS
institutional characteristics file. Dollar amounts for experimental sites rounded to nearest $100 to preserve confidentiality. Cost
of attendance is equal to the sum of in-district tuition and fees and the estimated cost of books and supplies, off campus housing,
and other living expenses. Panel B measures from 2013-14 IPEDS for all students except the last measure (percent of students
that are first generation college students), which comes from the College Scorecard data and pools 2013-14 and 2014-15 cohorts.
FTE = full-time equivalent enrollment. Enrollment for experimental sites is rounded to nearest 100 and percent measures are
rounded to the nearest 5 to preserve confidentiality. Panel C measures from the College Scorecard data. The percent of students
graduating within 150% of the expected time to degree is measured using first-time, full-time, degree-seeking undergraduates
who entered college in fall 2010 and fall 2011. The percent of students with earnings and the percent of students earning more
than $25,000 10 years after entry are measured for federal aid recipients who were not enrolled 10 years after college entry,
belonging to the 2001-02 and 2002-03 entry cohorts. Earnings measured in 2012 and 2013, adjusted for inflation and reported
in constant 2015$. Median salary is reported for students with earnings who received federal student aid in college and were not
enrolled 10 years after college entry, belonging to the 2001-02 and 2002-03 entry cohorts. Percent measures for experimental
sites rounded to nearest 5 and median salary for experimental sites rounded to nearest $1000 to preserve confidentiality. Panel D
cohort default rate comes from the official three-year federal cohort default rate for students who entered repayment in FY2013.
Borrowers are considered to have defaulted if they have not made payments on their federal loans for 270 days. Median debt
from College Scorecard data and pools students entering repayment in 2014 and 2015. The percentage paying down their loan
balance is from College Scorecard data and represents the share of students who entered repayment in FY2007 and FY 2008
who were not in default and had reduced their loan balance 7 years after entering repayment. Experimental site measures
rounded to nearest 5 (percent measures) or nearest $100 to preserve confidentiality.

33

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics
Control
mean

Treatment
effect

<30 credits earned

0.65

‐0.0002
(0.007)

New

0.28

0.0002
(0.006)

Independent

0.59

‐0.0001
(0.007)

Outstanding loan debt

4173
(6480)

‐5.2
(93)

Expected family contribution (EFC)

6769
(8273)

115
(686)

Pell Grant aid

3438
(2305)

16
(23)

Work study aid

45
(508)

0.1
(4)

All other grant aid

122
(453)

0.4
(5)

Total other resources

36
(272)

‐0.5
(3)

Cumulative credits1

32.1
(24.8)

0.05
(0.27)

Cumulative GPA2

2.67
(0.92)

‐0.01
(0.02)

Characteristic

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)
excluding cumulative credits, GPA
including cumulative credits, GPA
Observations

0.995
0.997
9,860

19,724

Notes: Sample includes students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. 1. Continuous variable standard
deviations in parentheses below means. 1. Cumulative credits only measured for students with prior attendance at experimental
site (N = 13,566). 2. GPA only measured for students with prior attendance at experimental site and nonmissing GPA (N
= 13,219). All other grant aid includes non-Pell federal grants, state grants, and institutional grants. Total other resources
includes private and employer provided aid.

34

Table 4: The Impact of Nonzero Loan Offers on Borrowing
(1) Offered
loan
A. Control group mean

Conditional Outcomes
(4) Amount (5) Amt. = $P

(2) Any
borrowing

(3) Amount
borrowed

0.23

$1,097

$4,764

0.074

0.073
(0.009)**

282
(52)**

‐146
(83)+

0.037
(0.010)**

0.090
(0.009)**

348
(58)**

‐146
(81)+

0.037
(0.009)**

19,724

19,724

5,254

5,254

B. OLS estimates
Assigned to treatment group

0.812
(0.030)**

C. IV estimates
Offered loan
Observations

19,724

Notes: CCA students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. Panel A contains OLS estimates of the impact of
assignment to the treatment group on receiving a nonzero loan offer. Panels B contains IV estimates of the impact of being
offered a nonzero loan on the specified outcome; assignment to the treatment group serves as the excluded instrument. Robust
standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. All regressions include controls for strata,
randomization month, and baseline cumulative credits and cumulative GPA.

35

Table 5: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Loan Offers on Borrowing
(1) Any
borrowing

(2) Amount
borrowed

Conditional Outcomes
(3) Amount (4) Amt. = $P

0.060
(0.007)**
0.124
(0.009)**
[<0.001]

185
(52)**
539
(66)**
[<0.001]

‐460
(170)**
‐80
(101)
[0.054]

0.057
(0.020)**
0.040
(0.013)**
[0.474]

0.096
(0.011)**
0.064
(0.011)**
[0.045]

358
(72)**
301
(74)**
[0.579]

‐256
(145)
‐60
(94)
[0.329]

0.038
(0.012)**
0.055
(0.021)*
[0.518]

0.097
(0.013)**
0.087
(0.012)**
[0.571]

313
(69)**
362
(76)**
[0.629]

‐379
(152)*
‐131
(118)
[0.199]

0.034
(0.013)**
0.049
(0.014)**
[0.425]

0.092
(0.010)**
0.085
(0.018)**
[0.730]

318
(60)**
399
(114)**
[0.527]

‐292
(101)**
‐39
(158)
[0.178]

0.037
(0.011)**
0.055
(0.022)*
[0.458]

0.076
(0.012)**
0.097
(0.012)**
[0.213]

179
(34)**
451
(83)**
[0.003]

‐216
(81)**
‐156
(136)
[0.703]

0.055
(0.019)**
0.041
(0.013)**
[0.548]

<0.001

<0.001

0.103

0.388

Subgroup
No outstanding debt (N = 11,301)
Has outstanding debt (N = 8,424)

Pell eligible (N = 16,204)
Pell ineligible (N = 3,521)

New student (N = 5,607)
Returning student (N = 14,117)

<30 credits earned (N = 12,763)
30 or more credits earned (N = 6,961)

Dependent student (N = 8,125)
Independent student (N = 11,599)

All subgroups
Test of equality (p ‐value)

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)
<0.001
<0.001
0.113
0.011
Robust
standard
errors
in
parentheses
Notes: CCA students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. IV estimates of the impact of being offered a
nonzero loan on the borrowing
outcome
specified
in column, estimated separately for each specified subgroup. Assignment to
** p<0.01,
* p<0.05,
+ p<0.1
treatment serves as an instrument for receipt of a nonzero loan offer. Brackets contain p-values from a test of the equality of
prior two subgroup estimates. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. All
regressions include controls for strata, randomization month, and baseline cumulative credits and cumulative GPA.

36

Table 6: OLS and IV Estimates of the Impact of Nonzero Loan Offers on Attainment
(1) Credits
attempted

(2) Credits
earned

(3) GPA

(4) Degree
receipt

17.28

12.93

2.26

0.09

(7.65)

(8.75)

(1.27)

(0.29)

(5) Standardized
treatment effect

A. Control mean

B. OLS Estimates
Assigned to treatment group

0.213

0.310

0.053

0.003

0.029

(0.117)+

(0.132)*

(0.018)**

(0.005)

(0.011)**

{0.158}

{0.067}

{0.021}

{0.637}

C. IV Estimates
Offered loan

37

0.255

0.371

0.063

0.003

0.034

(0.134)+

(0.154)*

(0.021)**

(0.006)

(0.013)**

2.528

3.671

0.627

0.033

0.339

(1.276)*

(1.585)*

(0.218)**

(0.065)

(0.130)**

11,774

11,774

11,774

11,774

11,774

D. IV Estimates
1[borrowed]

Observations

Notes: Enrolled CCA students who were randomly assigned before October 15, 2015. Control group means and standard deviations (in parentheses) in Panel A. Panel B
contains OLS estimates of the impact of assignment to the treatment group on the specified outcome; family-wise p-values (adjusted to account for multiple hypothesis testing)
in brackets. Panels C and D contain IV estimates of the impact of being offered a nonzero loan (C) or loan take-up (D) on the specified outcome; assignment to the treatment
group serves as the excluded instrument. See Section 3.4 for description of standardized treatment effects. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; **
p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. All regressions include controls for strata, randomization month, and baseline cumulative credits and cumulative GPA.

Table 7: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Borrowing on Attainment: 2015-16 Academic Year
(1) Amount
borrowed

(2) Credits
attempted

(3) Credits
earned

(4) GPA

(5) Degree
receipt

(6) Std. TE

No outstanding debt

3135
(614)**

0.988
(2.718)

5.019
(3.581)

0.800
(0.408)+

0.116
(0.122)

0.440
(0.280)

Has outstanding debt

4602
(599)**

3.458
(1.114)**

2.739
(1.364)*

0.497
(0.249)*

‐0.022
(0.076)

0.284
(0.119)*

[0.087]

[0.401]

[0.552]

[0.527]

[0.335]

[0.609]

Pell eligible

3924
(551)**

2.822
(1.341)*

4.325
(1.699)*

0.788
(0.258)**

‐0.002
(0.059)

0.369
(0.130)**

Pell ineligible

4585
(962)**

1.154
(3.348)

0.483
(4.277)

‐0.131
(0.369)

0.192
(0.236)

0.183
(0.406)

[0.550]

[0.640]

[0.401]

[0.043]

[0.427]

[0.661]

New student

3201
(581)**

0.745
(2.253)

0.561
(2.549)

0.266
(0.318)

0.021
(0.021)

0.143
(0.181)

Returning student

4423
(612)**

3.153
(1.475)*

4.764
(1.983)*

0.733
(0.293)*

0.039
(0.096)

0.426
(0.168)*

[0.148]

[0.371]

[0.193]

[0.280]

[0.857]

[0.251]

<30 credits earned

3629
(445)**

2.494
(1.469)+

2.882
(1.743)+

0.440
(0.259)+

‐0.060
(0.037)

0.136
(0.132)

30 or more credits earned

4961
(947)**

3.333
(2.175)

5.600
(3.175)+

0.911
(0.321)**

0.183
(0.206)

0.607
(0.277)*

[0.203]

[0.749]

[0.453]

[0.253]

[0.245]

[0.125]

Dependent student

2418
(288)**

0.094
(2.527)

1.722
(2.980)

0.506
(0.425)

0.032
(0.101)

0.184
(0.243)

Independent student

4892
(566)**

3.960
(1.234)**

4.927
(1.816)**

0.689
(0.255)**

0.031
(0.084)

0.445
(0.151)**

[<0.001]

[0.170]

[0.314]

[0.713]

[0.884]

[0.362]

Test of equality (p ‐value)

0.001

0.727

0.581

0.323

0.307

0.712

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)

<0.001

0.024

0.202

0.186

0.393

0.113

Subgroup

All subgroups

Notes: Enrolled CCA students who were randomly assigned before October 15, 2015. IV estimates of the impact of loan
take-up on the outcome specified in column, estimated separately for each specified subgroup. Assignment to treatment, serves
as an instrument for the amount borrowed. See Section 3.4 for description of standardized treatment effects. Brackets contain
p-values from a test of the equality of prior two subgroup estimates. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses;
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Regressions also include controls for strata, randomization month, and baseline cumulative
credits earned and cumulative GPA.

38

Table 8: The Impact of Borrowing on Attainment: 2016-17 Academic Year

A. Control group mean

(1) Reenrolled at
CCA

(2) Transfer to 4‐
year public

(3) Received any
degree

0.54

0.06

0.21

‐0.123

0.114

0.023

(0.105)

(0.051)*

(0.055)

11,774

11,774

11,774

B. IV estimates
1[borrowed]

Observations

Notes: Enrolled CCA students who were randomly assigned before October 15, 2015. IV estimates of the impact of loan takeup on the outcome specified in column. Assignment to treatment, serves as an instrument for the amount borrowed. Robust
standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Regressions also include controls for strata,
randomization month, and baseline cumulative credits earned and cumulative GPA.

39

Table 9: Characteristics of CCA Students by Response to Treatment
Characteristic
Female
White
College educated parent
Age
EFC
Cost of attendance
Pell Grant eligible
Independent
Has outstanding debt
New student
Freshman
Baseline credits (N = 13,576)
Baseline GPA (N = 13,576)
Baseline credits*GPA (N = 13,576)

E[X|AT]

E[X|C]

E[X|NT]

0.659
0.439
0.411
30.2
$4,143
$11,698
0.702
0.682
0.727
0.210
0.559
35.2
2.64
100.9

0.652
0.460
0.370
28.7
$4,005
$11,675
0.842
0.670
0.635
0.297
0.645
31.8
2.67
95.1

0.620
0.429
0.390
26.6
$2,854
$9,464
0.859
0.548
0.306
0.308
0.676
31.0
2.58
91.0

Tests of equality (p ‐value):
E[X|C]=E[X|AT]

E[X|C]=E[X|NT]

E[X|C]=E[X|AT U NT]

E[X|AT]=E[X|NT]

0.902
0.722
0.466
0.239
0.874
0.959
0.009
0.818
0.083
0.074
0.139
0.298
0.760
0.571

0.510
0.544
0.689
0.058
0.143
<0.001
0.710
0.011
<0.001
0.800
0.539
0.797
0.410
0.657

0.655
0.589
0.623
0.291
0.301
<0.001
0.653
0.071
<0.001
0.763
0.966
0.891
0.503
0.891

<0.001
0.396
0.070
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
<0.001
0.049
<0.001

40

Notes: CCA students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016 (N = 19,724 except where noted). AT = always-takers (students who borrow regardless of treatment
group assignment); C = complier (students induced to borrow by a non-zero offer), NT = never-takers (students who do not borrow regardless of treatment group assignment).
Baseline credits and GPA sample limited to returning students.

Appendix A: Additional Tables and Figures
Figure A.1: Explicit $0 Does Not Reduce Take-up Among Past Borrowers
Has outstanding debt

.5
0

Share Borrowing

1

No outstanding debt

C = blank
T = unsub only
-5000

C = $0
T = sub+unsub or sub only

0

5000

10000-5000

0

5000

10000

Imputed Unmet Need
Treatment

Control

Notes: Enrolled CCA students randomly assigned before October 15, 2015. Each line represents a local linear regression of the
probability of borrowing on (imputed) unmet need (= gross need less EFC, grant aid, and work-study) by treatment assignment.

40

40
00

30
00

20
00

10
00

0

0
-1
00

0
-2
00

0
-3
00

-4
00

0

0

20

Frequency

60

80

Figure A.2: Distribution of (Recentered) Amount Borrowed, Students with no Unmet Need

(Recentered) Amount Borrowed
Treatment

Control

Notes: CCA borrowers randomly assigned before February 2, 2016 who were ineligible for subsidized loans based on imputed
unmet need. Amount borrowed recentered around the amount a student would have received had they been assigned to the
treatment group ($3500 for freshmen and $4500 for sophomores). Light blue bars represent treatment group borrowers and
dark blue bars represent control group borrowers.

41

Table A.1: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Loan Offers on Fall 2015 Enrollment
(1) Enrolled

(2) Control
group mean

Subgroup
No outstanding debt

‐0.015
(0.010)

0.729

Has outstanding debt

‐0.003
(0.134)

0.713

[0.482]
Pell eligible

‐0.011
(0.010)

0.723

Pell ineligible

‐0.003
(0.016)

0.716

[0.694]
New student

‐0.021
(0.018)

0.684

Returning student

‐0.004
(0.010)

0.736

[0.428]
<30 credits earned

‐0.020
(0.010)*

0.705

30 or more credits earned

0.009
(0.012)

0.751

[0.061]
Dependent student

‐0.008
(0.013)

0.763

Independent student

‐0.011
(0.012)

0.693

[0.874]
All subgroups
Test of equality (p ‐value)

0.416

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)

0.482

Notes: CCA students who were randomly assigned before February 2, 2016. IV estimates of the impact of being offered a
nonzero loan on Fall 2015 enrollment, estimated separately for each specified subgroup. Assignment to treatment serves as
an instrument for receipt of a nonzero loan offer. Brackets contain p-values from a test of the equality of prior two subgroup
estimates. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. All regressions include
controls for strata, randomization month, and baseline cumulative credits and cumulative GPA.

42

Table A.2: Descriptive Statistics, Attainment Sample
Control
mean

Treatment
effect

<30 credits earned

0.61
(0.49)

‐0.008
(0.009)

New

0.26
(0.44)

‐0.004
(0.008)

Independent

0.56
(0.50)

‐0.001
(0.009)

Outstanding loan debt

4171
(6435)

‐22
(118)

Expected family contribution (EFC)

3026
(7769)

208
(165)

Pell Grant aid

3358
(2181)

12
(40)

Work study aid

77
(651)

1
(12)

All other grant aid

192
(558)

2
(10)

Total other resources

50
(323)

‐3
(6)

Cumulative credits1

34.6
(24.2)

0.31
(0.52)

Cumulative GPA2

2.76
(0.86)

‐0.01
(0.02)

Characteristic

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)
excluding cumulative credits, GPA
including cumulative credits, GPA
Number of observations

0.990
0.991
5,920

5,854

Notes: Enrolled CCA students who were randomly assigned before October 16, 2015. GPA only measured for students with
prior attendance at CCA. All other grant aid includes non-Pell federal grants, state grants, and institutional grants. Total other
resources includes private and employer provided aid.

43

Table A.3: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Loan Aid on 2015-16 Attainment Outcomes by Baseline Degree Program
(1) Offered
loan
A. OLS (assigned to treatment group)
AA/AS (N = 3,156)
0.817
(0.036)**
AAS (N = 8,109)
0.843
(0.032)**
[0.036]
B. IV (offered loan)
AA/AS (N = 3,156)
AAS (N = 8,109)

C. IV (borrowed)
AA/AS (N = 3,156)

44
AAS (N = 8,109)

Test of joint sig (p‐ value):

(2) Any
borrowing

(3) Amount
borrowed

(4) Credits
attempted

(5) Credits
earned

(6) GPA

(7) Degree
receipt

(8) Std. TE

0.104
(0.017)**
0.108
(0.011)**
[0.834]

453
(92)**
408
(78)**
[0.579]
4373
(489)**
3790
(524)**
[0.258]

5.700
(3.031)+
1.047
(1.811)
[0.265]

9.385
(3.357)**
1.734
(1.971)
[0.079]

0.601
(0.405)
0.628
(0.259)*
[0.957]

‐0.003
(0.136)
0.032
(0.069)
[0.825]

0.554
(0.273)*
0.237
(0.152)
[0.345]

<0.001

0.047

0.004

0.012

0.900

0.020

Notes: Enrolled associate degree-seeking CCA students who were randomly assigned before October 16, 2015. Each column within a panel contains estimates from a separate
regression. Panel A contains OLS estimates of the impact of assignment to treatment on receiving a nonzero loan offer. Panel B contains IV estimates of the impact of a nonzero
loan offer on borrowing outcomes, where assignment to treatment serves as an instrument for receipt of a nonzero loan offer. Panel C contains IV estimates of the effect of an
additional $1000 of loan aid on 2015-16 academic year attainment, represented by standardized index of treatment effects (see Section 3.4 for details). The p-value from the
test of equality of subgroup coefficients in brackets below estimates. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Regressions
also include controls for strata, cumulative credits earned and cumulative GPA before the beginning of the fall 2015 semester.

Appendix B: Community College B Experiment
In this appendix, we describe the setting and design of the experiment that took place at Community College
B (CCB). We then present preliminary estimates of the impact of loan offers on borrowing and attainment
(fall semester enrollment and credits attempted).

B.1 CCB Experiment Design
In the year prior to the intervention (2014-15), CCB students were not offered loan aid. CCB only provides
financial aid packages to students after they have registered for courses and sends students hard-copies of their
financial aid package via mail. In addition to federal requirements (i.e., entrance counseling and completion
of a master promissory note), CCB students who wish to borrow must complete several additional steps.
These include filling out a budget, determining their expected future salary upon graduation and calculating
estimated loan payments, and attending a one-on-one meeting with a college counselor.44
For the intervention, CCB’s financial aid office offered students assigned to the treatment group their
maximum subsidized loan and no unsubsidized loans. CCB students without subsidized loan eligibility were
not included in the experimental sample. Offers continued to be made via paper award letters that were
mailed to students (Figure B.1). Students in the control group did not receive an additional communications
from CCB on their loan eligibility, although the school’s financial aid website contained general information
on federal loan programs.
CCB underperformed in terms of expected sample size. Based on past enrollment of degree-seeking
students, we projected a sample size of roughly 8,000 students. However, the surprisingly small number
of CCB students who completed a FAFSA and were eligible for subsidized loans reduced the number of
students eligible to be included in random assignment to 2,221. At present time, we only observe borrowing
outcomes for 2,102 of these students. As shown in Table B.1, predetermined characteristics are balanced
between CCB treatment and control groups.

B.2 Results
As shown in Table B.2, only 74 percent of treatment group members received a loan offer. The estimated
effect of a nonzero loan offer on the likelihood of borrowing is small and statistically insignificant. However,
the corresponding 95 percent confidence interval - [−0.12, 0.14] - includes the estimated effect of the nudge
44 The budgeting worksheet requires students to estimate their fall and spring semester education-related expenses, financial
resources, and unmet need.

45

within CCA. In contrast to CCA, we find large, negative impacts on conditional borrowing, suggesting that
among borrowers, receipt of a nonzero offer led to a $1093 reduction in loans (p < 0.01). This reduction
is driven by a reduction in unsubsidized borrowing (available upon request), which is consistent with the
fact that CCB treatment group members only received subsidized loan offers. We find evidence of patterns
of heterogeneous treatment effects in the impact of nonzero offers on borrowing that are similar to those
produced in CCA (Table B.3), but we are underpowered to distinguish between effects across groups.
Given that we do not find any first-stage effects of loan offers on borrowing, we are only able to estimate
reduced form impacts of loan offers on attainment. As shown in Table B.4, estimated impacts on fall
semester enrollment, credits attempted, and the likelihood of part-time or full-time enrollment are negative,
insignificant, and sufficiently imprecise that we cannot rule out impacts of a similar magnitude to those
found in CCA.

46

B.3 Figures and Tables
Figure B.1: CCB Financial Aid Award Letters

A. Award information presented to treatment group members

B. Award information presented to control group members

47

Table B.1: Descriptive Statistics
Control mean
(sd)

Treatment
effect (se)

<30 credits earned

0.63
(0.10)

0.002
(0.003)

New

0.22
(0.07)

‐0.004
(0.003)

Independent

0.43
(0.10)

0.005
(0.003)

Outstanding loan debt

1904
(74)

97
(147)

Expected family contribution (EFC)

2390
(18)

34
(35)

Pell Grant aid

4397
(6)

‐5
(12)

All other grant aid

906
(25)

‐9
(49)

Characteristic

Test of joint significance (p ‐value)

0.543

Number of observations

1,047

1,055

Notes: CCB students randomly assigned before November 6, 2015. All other grant aid includes non-Pell federal grants, state
grants, and institutional grants.

Table B.2: The Impact of Nonzero Loan Offers on Borrowing
(1) Offered
loan
A. OLS estimates
Assigned to treatment group

Amount borrowed
(3) Uncond.
(4) Cond.

0.741
(0.019)**

B. IV estimates
Offered loan

Observations
Mean control

(2) Any
borrowing

2,102
0

0.010
(0.013)

‐41
(70)

‐1,093
(391)**

2,102
0.066

2,102
$348

146
$5,287

Notes: CCB students randomly assigned before November 6, 2015. OLS estimates of the impact of assignment to treatment
on being offered a loan (Panel A) and IV estimates of the impact of being offered a loan on borrowing outcomes (Panel B),
where assignment to the treatment group serves as an instrument for being offered a loan. Robust standard errors, clustered
by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. All regressions also include controls for strata fixed effects.

48

Table B.3: Heterogeneity in the Impact of Loan Offers on Borrowing
(1) Any
borrowing
A. Outstanding debt
Offered loan
ˣ No student loan debt

Amount borrowed
(2) Uncond.
(3) Cond.

‐0.001
(0.012)
0.054
(0.049)

‐31
(61)
‐78
(244)

‐651
(626)
‐1,274
(506)*

0.265

0.853

0.464

0.009
(0.014)
0.010
(0.033)

‐49
(71)
‐14
(178)

‐1,294
(547)*
‐887
(575)

0.978

0.854

0.627

0.009
(0.032)
0.010
(0.014)

18
(159)
‐57
(77)

‐889
(878)
‐1,121
(424)**

0.989

0.672

0.812

‐0.004
(0.016)
0.033
(0.026)

‐67
(70)
3
(149)

‐899
(498)+
‐1,293
(541)*

0.221

0.674

0.592

‐0.011
(0.014)
0.041
(0.028)

‐37
(63)
‐46
(149)

171
(394)
‐1,652
(410)**

Test of equality (p ‐value)

0.094

0.957

0.001

Observations

2,102

2,102

146

ˣ Outstanding student loan debt
Test of equality (p ‐value)
B. Pell Grant eligibility
Offered loan
ˣ Pell eligible
ˣ Pell ineligible
Test of equality (p ‐value)
C. Past enrollment
Offered loan
ˣ New student
ˣ Returning student
Test of equality (p ‐value)
D. Class standing
Offered loan
ˣ <30 credits earned
ˣ 30 or more credits earned
Test of equality (p ‐value)
E. Dependency status
Offered loan
ˣ Dependent student
ˣ Independent student

Notes: CCB students randomly assigned before November 6, 2015. IV estimates of the impact of being offered a nonzero
loan on the borrowing outcome specified in column. Each panel contains estimates from a separate regression. Assignment
to treatment, interacted with the specified characteristics, serves as an instrument for the interaction between the receiving a
nonzero loan offer and the specified characteristic. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, *
p<0.05, + p<0.1. Regressions also include controls for strata fixed effects.

49

Table B.4: The Impact of Nonzero Loan Offers on Attainment
(3) ≥ 6 credits (4) ≥ 12 credits
attempted
attempted

(1) Enrolled

(2) Credits
attempted

‐0.019
(0.016)

‐0.266
(0.175)

‐0.010
(0.019)

‐0.024
(0.020)

‐0.025
(0.021)

‐0.359
(0.229)

‐0.013
(0.024)

‐0.032
(0.026)

Observations

2,102

2,102

2,102

2,102

Control mean

0.77

7.3

0.65

0.30

A. OLS estimates
Assigned to treatment group
B. IV estimates
Offered loan

Notes: CCB students randomly assigned before November 6, 2015. Panel A contains OLS estimates of the impact of assignment to the treatment group on the specified outcome.
Panel B contains IV estimates of the impact of being offered a nonzero loan on the specified outcome; assignment to the treatment group serves as an instrument for receipt of
a nonzero loan offer. Robust standard errors, clustered by strata, in parentheses; ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1. Regressions also include controls for strata fixed effects.

percentage increase

‐0.03

‐0.049

‐0.02

‐0.11

50

Appendix C: Anchoring Model
We first consider a model with anchoring, which offers predictions that differ considerably from the other
possible explanations discussed in Section 7. Let the utility function have the form
α

α

α

U (`|T ) = − (` − `∗ ) − T c (` − P ) − (1 − T ) c (` − 0) ,

where `∗ ∈ R is the latent desired loan amount, ` ≥ 0 is the amount borrowed, c > 0 is a parameter affecting
the cost of deviating from the offered amount, and α ∈ {2, 4, 6, ...}. We consider two testable properties of
this model.
Property 1: When T=1, only if `∗ = P does ` = P .
Proof:

d
d` P

U (`|T = 1) = −α (` − `∗ )

α−1

− αT (` − P )

α−1

α−1

= −α (P − `∗ )

. If ` = P and `∗ > P then

the derivative is positive, and increasing ` would increase utility. If ` = P and `∗ < P then the derivative is
negative, and decreasing ` would increase utility. Thus ` = P is only optimal if `∗ = P .
As Figure 5 shows, many students in the treatment group borrow exactly ` = P , and this is not due to
a shift in the distribution of loan amounts, suggesting that anchoring cannot be the only reason that the
loan offer affects borrowing. Among treated students, the number borrowing exactly ` = P is similar to or
greater than the number borrowing any amount in a $500 bin above or below P . This increased mass at
exactly ` = P could arise because for some students P corresponds to the maximum subsidized loan, but
this is also true for the control group, for which we do not see a spike at exactly ` = P . Figure 5 shows
that a nonzero offer of P significantly increases the probability of borrowing exactly ` = P by a magnitude
substantially larger than estimated impacts on the probability of borrowing other amounts.
Property 2: Suppose α = 2 and  ∈ R+ . If the density of `∗ is increasing (decreasing) over [P, (1 + c) (P + )]
then the probability Pr (` ∈ (P, P + )) will be greater (lesser) when T=1 than when T=0.
Proof: For α = 2, the first-order condition and be rearranged to show that the utility function is maxi ∗

∗
cP
`
mized by ` = ` +T
1+c . The relevant probabilities are therefore Pr (` ∈ (P, P + ) |T = 0) = Pr 1+c ∈ (P, P + )
 ∗

+cP
= Pr (`∗ ∈ ((1 + c) P, (1 + c) (P + ))) and Pr (` ∈ (P, P + ) |T = 1) = Pr ` 1+c
∈ (P, P + ) = Pr(`∗ ∈
(P, P + (1 + c) )). Both the upper and lower bounds for the range of possible values of `∗ are decreased by
cP when T=1 relative to when T=0. If the density of `∗ is increasing (decreasing) over the entire range then
the higher values implied by T=1 occur with greater (lesser) probability.
Empirical evidence on Property 2 indicates that anchoring is limited. Though we cannot directly observe
the density of `∗ , when the offer is $P , the distribution of ` near $P is not greatly distorted from that of
`∗ (as noted in Property 1). Hence we can get a sense of the slope of the latent distribution around $P

51

from the observed distribution among students treated with an offer of $P . Panel A of Figure 6 shows
that the loan amount density of treated students is increasing in the range up to $2000 above $P , at least
among freshmen. By property 2, this would imply that in the bin just above $P we should observe more
control-group students than treatment-group students. We observe the opposite, suggesting that anchoring
is limited.
Property 3: Suppose α = 2. There exists  ∈ R+ such that if the density of `∗ is increasing (decreasing)

over (0, P ) then the probability Pr ` ∈ P2 − , P2 +  will be greater (lesser) when T=0 than when T=1.
∗

cP
Proof: For α = 2, the utility function is maximized by ` = ` +T
1+c . The relevant probabilities are there




`∗
fore Pr ` ∈ P2 − , P2 +  |T = 0 = Pr 1+c
∈ P2 − , P2 +  = Pr(`∗ ∈ ((1 + c) P2 − (1 + c) , (1 + c) P2 +
 ∗



+cP
(1 + c) )) and Pr ` ∈ P2 − , P2 +  |T = 1 = Pr ` 1+c
∈ P2 − , P2 +  = Pr(`∗ ∈ ((1 − c) P2 −(1 + c) ,

(1 − c) P2 + (1 + c) )). Both the upper and lower bounds for the range of possible values of `∗ are decreased by cP when T=0 relative to when T=1. If the density of `∗ is increasing (decreasing) over the
entire range then the higher values implied by T=1 occur with greater (lesser) probability. The entire
range is ((1 − c) P2 − (1 + c) , (1 + c) P2 + (1 + c) ), and for this to be contained in (0, P ), it must be that
P
2

+≤

P
1+c

⇔≤

P
2

. Choose  small enough that this holds.

Figures 6 and 8 show that the density is generally increasing over amounts less than P . Property 3
therefore implies that the control group should exhibit more mass around

P
2

than does the treatment group.

We observe the opposite. In both figures we see that the treatment group has at least as many students as
the control group who borrow at each level below P . This pattern provides another piece of evidence against
the anchoring model.
The distributions of loan amounts among treatment and control groups does not support an anchoring
explanation. Failure of Property 1 implies that anchoring cannot fully explain the borrowing effects, and
failure of Properties 2 and 3 suggests that anchoring is limited. While there may be a small amount of
anchoring that is obscured by offsetting factors, for the purpose of distinguishing between remaining possible
mechanisms, we assume there is no anchoring.

52

