                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    LEAVING MONEY ON THE TABLE? SUBOPTIMAL ENROLLMENT IN THE NEW
                  SOCIAL PENSION PROGRAM IN CHINA

                                            Xi Chen
                                           Lipeng Hu
                                         Jody L. Sindelar

                                       Working Paper 24065
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24065


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We are grateful to have access to the data from the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS), which is
funded by 985 Program of Peking University and carried out by the Institute of Social Science
Survey of Peking University. Financial support from the James Tobin Research Fund at Yale
Economics Department, the U.S. PEPPER Center Career Development Award (P30AG021342),
and an NIH/NIA grant (R03 AG048920) are acknowledged. We acknowledge comments from
participants at the following conferences and seminars: Center for Retirement Research at Boston
College, AEA annual meetings, India Statistical Institute (ISI), IZA Labor Economics
Conference, UPenn, University of Minnesota, New York Academy of Medicine, Gerontological
Association of America (GSA), National University of Singapore, and Yale University. The
views expressed herein and any remaining errors are those of the authors and do not represent any
official agency. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect
the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Xi Chen, Lipeng Hu, and Jody L. Sindelar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Leaving Money on the Table? Suboptimal Enrollment in the New Social Pension Program
in China
Xi Chen, Lipeng Hu, and Jody L. Sindelar
NBER Working Paper No. 24065
November 2017
JEL No. D13,D14,D15,H55,I3

                                          ABSTRACT

China’s recently implemented New Rural Pension Scheme (NRPS), the largest social pension
program in the world, was designed to provide financial protection for its rural population and
reduce economic inequities. Yet the impact of this program is mitigated if those eligible fail to
enroll. This paper examines the extent to which pension-eligible individuals, and their families,
make optimal pension decisions. Families are involved in the NRPS decisions because, in most
cases, adult children need to enroll as a prerequisite of their parents’ receipt of benefits. We
examine the decisions of both those eligible for pension benefits (i.e. over 60 years old) and their
adult children. We use the rural sample of the 2012 China Family Panel Study to study
determinants of the decision to enroll in NRPS, premiums paid, and time taken to enroll. We find
evidence of low and suboptimal pension enrollment by eligible individuals and their families.
Suboptimal enrollment takes various forms including failure to switch from the dominated default
pension program to NRPS and little evidence that families make mutually beneficial intra-family
decisions. For the older cohort, few individual and family characteristics are significant in
enrollment decisions, but village characteristics play an important role. For the younger cohort,
we find that more individual-level characteristics are significant, including own and children’s
education. Village characteristics are important but not as much as for the older cohort.

Xi Chen                                                  Jody L. Sindelar
Yale University, School of Public Health                 Yale School of Public Health
Department of Health Policy & Management                 Yale University School of Medicine
Department of Economics                                  60 College Street, P.O. Box 208034
60 College Street, P.O. Box 208034                       New Haven, CT 06520-8034
New Haven, CT 06520-8034                                 and NBER
xi.chen@yale.edu                                         jody.sindelar@yale.edu

Lipeng Hu
National School of Development
Peking University
Beijing 100871
China
lipenghu@gmail.com
1. Introduction
      In 2009, China introduced to its rural population the world’s largest social pension,
the New Rural Pension Scheme (NRPS). This covered population tends to be of lower
education and to have lower income and worse health than its urban counterpart. The
NRPS was designed to provide the rural elderly, especially those with low income, with
basic protection against poverty in old age. The NRPS was also introduced in part due
to erosion of the traditional system of intergenerational cohabitation, in which children
would provide in-person care for elderly family members and share incomes. The lower
rates of cohabitation with children are due to both the large outmigration of younger
generations and the persistent decline in the fertility rate. Consequently, the elderly
currently need more market-based services to substitute for the lack of in-person family
care. The increased life expectancy in China leaves the elderly living alone for more
years.2 Thus, many rural elderly are increasingly likely to suffer from too little support
without the rural pension system. However, without a high uptake of NRPS, protection
will remain low.
      The NRPS was also launched to replace the failed, unsubsidized rural pension
program initiated in the 1990s, i.e. the Old Rural Pension Scheme (ORPS). In contrast
to ORPS, both the central and local governments generously subsidize the NRPS. The
subsidy is particularly robust for those in the special phase-in period at program
initiation, allowing elderly persons at the time of local rollout to receive benefits despite
never having paid into the system. This special phase-in period provides an important
opportunity to study enrollment decisions.
      We use the 2012 China Family Panel Study (CFPS) to explore determinants of the
decision to enroll in NRPS, premiums paid, and time to enrollment. This paper
empirically investigates the extent to which people are responding to the new pension
program with optimal financial decisions. To the extent that they do not respond
optimally, we also examine who fails to enroll, and why. Specifically, we examine the
economic incentives to enroll and factors that could directly and indirectly affect
enrollment decisions. The rollout of the program to all counties in China prior to the
2012 survey provides us with the opportunity to observe our three outcome variables
the: decision to enroll, timing of enrollment, and size of individual premium
contribution. We examine these decisions both for those eligible for a pension and their
adult children. We focus on the latter due to the requirement that children need to enroll
to make their elderly parents eligible for NRPS, and because they may also have their
own motivations to enroll for their futures.
      The Family Binding Policy in China requires at least one child (aged 16 years or
above, not enrolled in school, and holding rural registration) to enroll in the NRPS to
make their elderly parents eligible for pension benefits. Note that a large proportion of
elderly parents have multiple children due to the loosely implemented One Child Policy
in rural China. The enrolling adult child must pay premiums each year for his or her
parents to receive pension payments. We examine separately the incentives and
decisions of those over and under the age of 60, due to this important policy and other

2
  By 2050, 32.8 percent of China’s population will be above age 60, which will be the largest in size in
the world (United Nations 2013).
                                                   2
differences in coverage and contribution requirements by age. Specifically, we
separately examine individuals over age 60 who have children, and also those between
the ages of 45 and 60. We ignore those under 45 as they have little incentive to enroll
until later in life, even with the binding policy. People older than age 60 have
straightforward incentives to enroll in NPRS as it is noncontributory for this initial
cohort of the elderly. The decisions of people aged 45–60 are more complicated, for
several reasons. Importantly, their decision to enroll may be affected by the desire to
ensure benefits for their parents. If they choose to enroll, they also must decide when
to enroll, and at what level of premiums.
      We find that only half of the small percentage of childless seniors who could
benefit immediately without being subject to the Family Binding Policy enroll. Children
and their elderly parents could make simple arrangements to enroll, and have immediate
pension benefits to both generations, but many fail to do so, thus leaving money ‘on the
table’. Moreover, a sizable portion of respondents could obtain higher benefits simply
by switching from the unsubsidized ORPS (the default program) to the highly
subsidized NRPS, but again fail to do so. Surprisingly, although the poorest households
(in the bottom quintile) are more likely to enroll as compared to their richer counterparts,
those in the next lowest quintiles are not more likely to enroll. And none of the lowest
quintiles enroll more rapidly despite presumably having more to gain in terms of
improvement in their well-being.
      Our empirical investigation has several notable strengths. First, we contribute to
the literature by making the first attempt to examine suboptimal pension enrollment and
exploring plausible explanations to the puzzle of low pension enrollment and, more
generally, inadequate planning for old age3. Second, we contribute to the literature by
examining intra-family and intergenerational arrangements as they are key to optimal
pension decisions. Our ability to link older parents and children (even those who have
migrated) enables us to observe intra-family dynamics. Third, because the 2012 CFPS
survey was fielded on average two years after the implementation of NRPS, we are able
to compare the actual enrollment to some clear-cut gains to enrollment that occurred in
the initial rollout. In this post-enrollment period, respondents would have had ample
time to make decisions. Further, we collect and match county administrative data on
pension roll-out with individual’s pension choices to obtain precisely measured pension
enrollment decisions.
      Another contribution of this paper is that while most of the literature on pension
decisions relates to the developed world, this paper examines pension decisions in a
middle-income country. As the country with the world’s largest population and pension
system, China’s experience demands analysis. In addition, the program is growing

3
  For example, people often fail to plan adequately for retirement. A sizable fraction of those close to
retirement age do not plan for retirement (Lusardi 1999) or make adjustments to consumption and saving
(Hubbard et al. 2005); this holds even among respondents with high educational attainment (Ameriks et
al. 2003). Employees fail to enroll in a timely manner and fail to obtain the maximum payouts (Campbell
2006; Chalmers et al. 2014). Also, people are uninformed about the characteristics of their pension plans
(Mitchell 1988; Gustman and Steinmeier 2001), respond to the complexity inherent in retirement plan
choices by simply choosing the default option (Madrian and Shea 2001; Clark et al. 2015), and leave
“$100 bills on the sidewalk” by declining matching retirement contributions that can be immediately
withdrawn (Choi et al. 2011).
                                                   3
dramatically as China is currently integrating rural and urban social pensions. Once
completed, this unified pension system may serve more than 800 million residents,
doubling the current size of the NRPS (Chen 2016). Thus, lessons learned from analysis
of the NPRS have an immediate application.
     The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides institutional
background on the New Rural Pension Scheme. Section 3 discusses the conceptual
framework, provides predictions about optimal enrollment decisions, and explains the
empirical methods. Section 4 introduces the dataset and the analytical sample. Section
5 discusses the empirical results. Section 6 concludes and discusses potential
explanations and policy implications.

2. Institutional Background: The New Rural Pension Scheme in China
     Despite rapid overall economic growth in China, income growth in rural areas has
not matched that of urban areas. NRPS was launched to help address this geographical
inequity and to protect rural populations against poverty in old age. Officially launched
in September 2009, after a few years of piloting in selected areas of the country, the
NRPS was to replace ORPS, an older and unsuccessful rural pension program
implemented in the 1990s. Since 2009, ORPS has remained in operation but not
accepted new enrollees. The two programs are mutually exclusive in enrollment but
existing ORPS clients can simply transfer their contributed premiums to the NRPS. In
contrast to ORPS, NRPS is subsidized at both provincial and national levels. By 2012,
the NRPS had been introduced into all counties of China, thus making more than 400
million eligible for enrollment and providing the potential for nationwide, subsidized
old-age support to rural China’s elderly population (see Appendix Figure 1). Yet, about
17 percent of those over age 45 (i.e. 12 percent of those aged 45–60 and 24 percent of
those over 60) have not switched from ORPS to NRPS, though NRPS clearly dominates
ORPS (Table 1 and Appendix Figure 2).4
     All residents with rural registration (Hukou), aged 16 or above and not in school,
can voluntarily enroll in NRPS. No cumulative work histories are required5. Individuals
aged 16–60 at the time of the rollout can establish and contribute to private accounts at
varying levels. Such private accounts are funded by and eventually paid to the
individual and can be inherited at death. However, those of 60 or over at the time of the
local rollout did not have the opportunity to establish private accounts.
     Those over age 60 at the time of the rollout were not required to have contributed
to the pension system to be eligible for basic pension benefits. However, the Family
Binding Policy stipulates that they are eligible for basic pension benefits only if at least
one of their adult children eligible for the NRPS also enrolls. If there is no such adult
child, the parent is eligible for benefits by default. People aged between 45 and 60 can
contribute for any time period before age 60 to be eligible for pension benefits.6 For

4
  Note that even if all were to switch to NRPS, 30 percent of the younger cohort and 20 percent of the
older cohort would not have enrolled in NRPS.
5 The lack of a contribution requirement perhaps occurs in part because most rural residents work in

the informal sector, with no formal documentation of work contribution.
6
  In order to support the financial stability of NPRS, the government recommends that those aged 45–
60 contribute as much as possible to NRPS, although there is no financial incentive for them to do so.
                                                  4
individuals aged 16–44 at rollout, contributions must have been made into the system
for at least 15 years before benefits can be received at age 60.
      The lowest level of pension premium paid by an individual is 100 CNY per year
per person, but wealthier provinces often set higher premium levels, and consequently
the premiums paid vary greatly by province. Funding comes in part from the required
local government subsidies of 30 CNY per person per year for the first 100 CNY of
premiums contributed to the individual account; there is a lower than proportional
subsidy for additional premiums contributed. In addition, to compensate for the lower
fiscal capacity of local governments in central and western China, the national
government finances all basic pension benefits in these regions, compared with only 50
percent of the basic pension benefits in eastern China.
      Upon reaching age 60, eligible individuals can receive payments from their
government provided account. This basic pension benefit ranges from 55 to 380 CNY
per month per person in 2012 (Cai et al. 2012; Cheng et al. 2017); the variation is due
to adjustments for the cost of living at the province level (Chen, Eggleston, Sun 2016).
They can also receive payments from their private account if they established one.
Benefits are paid regardless of working status. Because pension benefits are distributed
directly to an individual’s bank accounts without a need to claim benefits in person,
migration may not discourage enrollment. In rural China, almost all older persons have
at least one bank account.

3 Conceptual Framework and Empirical Approach
3.1 Conceptual Framework
     NRPS enrollment decisions depend on the expected benefits and costs of the
NRPS, which in turn depend on a variety of factors. A key aspect is how generations
within each family are linked in enrollment decisions. The generations are naturally
linked since in Chinese culture, intergenerational ties are strong, ranging from
cohabitation, to older parents providing childcare to their grandchildren, to the role of
sons in taking responsibility for their elderly parents. In addition, the rules of NRPS, as
discussed above, require that at least one child enrolls to make the older parents eligible
for NRPS, unless the parents are childless. These considerations link the enrollment
decisions of both generations not only to their own characteristics but also to those of
the other generation. Given the out-migration of children, village characteristics may
also affect the decisions of the older parents left behind, because their children are no
longer around to give help.
     Below we discuss these and other factors and their potential impact on enrollment
decisions. Because both the set of factors relevant to the decisions and their
hypothesized impacts will differ somewhat across the two generations, we discuss them
separately below but also focus on the commonalities and particularly on the
intergenerational linkages.

     Individuals over age 60 are the most likely to enroll in NRPS as the program is
designed to benefit them. Their benefits to enrollment are greater if they are younger
(but at least 60 years old) or if their spouses are also eligible. A pension-eligible spouse
                                             5
may promote enrollment via mutual assistance and income and information sharing
between the couple. There may also be gender differences that need to be determined
empirically. The childless over the age of 60 at the time of roll-out have the most clear-
cut incentive to enroll: they are immediately eligible for pension payouts but are not
required to contribute and are not subject to the Family Binding Policy.
     For those with children, at least one child must enroll and contribute financially to
NRPS. When altruism alone is not enough to encourage enrollment by the adult
children, then intra-family or intergenerational agreements might facilitate enrollment.
Such agreements could be implicit or explicit, and payments might be non-financial
(older parents providing childcare or housing) or financial (giving money to pay for the
child’s NRPS contribution). The costs and benefits of these arrangements for both
generations would depend on the ages, number, and gender of both the older parents
and their children.
     Adult children can play a central, but mixed, role in parents’ enrollment decisions
for multiple reasons. First, the greater the number of children, the greater the likelihood
of at least one child enrolling or more children collectively paying pension premiums
for their parents’ benefits. However, a larger number of children may also reflect
stronger informal old-age support that may offset motives for pension enrollment
(Packard et al. 2002; Li and Olivera 2005; Auerbach et al. 2007; Ebenstein and Leung
2010). Second, the older the adult children are, the greater the expected, discounted
benefit to them of enrolling, and again, the more willing they might be to enroll7. Third,
children’s out-migration likely weakens emotional and geographical ties to their parents
and the ability to make intra-family commitments to enroll parents with the Family
Binding Policy. Fourth, the better the decision-making abilities of elders and their
children (e.g. higher educational attainment), the greater the probability of a parent
understanding the benefits of enrolling. Children may play a large role, as their
education is on average higher than that of their parents.
     Financial protection available to older parents could have offsetting impacts on
enrollment decisions. Stronger financial protection, such as from their children, spouses,
other pension and non-pension income, and health insurance coverage, 8 may
financially enable older persons to enroll, and enroll more rapidly. However, such
protection may also reduce the need to enroll. Clearly, poor health could increase the
demand for both pension income and personal care services, but poor health might also
reduce the number of years over which to expect to reap the returns from NPRS. These
are potentially offsetting impacts that must be determined empirically.
      For the elderly, there is only the potential for financial gain, and no risk of losing
money, so trust in government should play little role in enrollment decisions; although

7 Yet adult children might resist contributing due to: distrust of the government continuing the

program, and of payout levels; skepticism that the parent would redistribute the payouts; lack of
financial resources; lack of altruism; and other factors.
8
  Health insurance coverage could serve either as a substitute for or complement to NRPS. It would be
a substitute as it could help with both the financial risk and provision of care. It would be a
complement for at least three reasons: 1) both serve as a risk reduction approach; 2) health insurance
coverage may raise one’s life expectancy and expectancy of accruing greater pension benefits (Lei and
Lin 2009; Wagstaff et al. 2009; Kimberly et al. 2010; Hu et al. 2012); and 3) both may be due to greater
trust in government (Li and Olivera 2005).
                                                   6
there might be some residual impact. For example, parents might altruistically be
concerned about the long-term viability of a system that might put their children’s funds
at risk (Crabbe 2005; Lei et al. 2013), and thus low trust might reduce the enrollment
rate. The net effect is likely to be a small and/or insignificant impact on enrollment
decisions.
      Village characteristics may influence individuals’ pension enrollment decisions,
for example, through peer learning and sharing of a village infrastructure to aid the
enrollment process. The village may be particularly influential towards childless elders,
those whose children have migrated, or who do not have close relations with their
children.

       Individuals aged 45–59 have incentives to enroll in NRPS, both for their own
direct benefit and to help their older parents. While their own incentives are largely
similar to the older cohort and interact with the enrollment decisions of their parents,
there are additional considerations. Below we consider pension decisions from the
perspective of the younger generation. We do not repeat the discussion about
intergenerational links in the enrollment decision.
       Just like the older generation, the younger generation should be more likely to
enroll, the more years they can reap pension benefits relative to the number of years in
which they will have to make payments. Thus, it is the individuals who are older but
still under 60 who are more likely to enroll. They will have to contribute for fewer years
before receiving benefits. They also bear a lower risk of losing benefits if the pension
system falters. As explained before, having a pension-eligible spouse, having stronger
trust in government or better decision-making abilities are all expected to promote
pension enrollment, but financial protection may play a mixed role. A higher number
of senior parents still alive, or not all children migrating out, are likely associated with
greater enrollment. To the extent that the younger generation, especially migrants, has
relatively weak ties to their home communities, the characteristics of the village might
not significantly affect their enrollment decisions. Unlike the older parents who are
required to have at least one child enroll in order to be eligible to enroll, the Family
Binding Policy does not apply to the younger parents and their children. Therefore, the
number of children in one’s family only indicates the extent of informal old-age support
that the younger parents receive; thus, more children in the family may dampen pension
enrollment.

3.2 Empirical Approach
     In our empirical analysis, we determine if the factors discussed above explain
enrollment decisions as predicted from the above section. We analyze three enrollment
outcomes, including the extensive margin (i.e. the decision to enroll) as well as
intensive margins (i.e. the time to enrollment and premium paid). Specifically, we
estimate the following:
            Pensionifv   +X i +X f  +X v  c   ifv           (1)
where Pensionijv is separately each one of the three outcome variables, and Xs are a

                                             7
rich set of covariates at the individual level ( X i ; i for individual), the family level ( X f ;
f for family), and the village level ( X v ; v for village). Information at all three levels is
key to understanding enrollment decisions. The list of X variables is summarized in
section 4.2 and in Table 1. Also, because the NRPS was rolled out at the county level,
all regressions account for county-specific heterogeneities by controlling for county
fixed effects ( c ). Standard errors are clustered at the county level. All estimations are
weighted to obtain nationally representative results. We present empirical findings
separately for the older and younger cohorts, as explained above. In our sensitivity
analysis, we test our results across three specifications. Then, using what we determine
to be our preferred specification, we separately estimate female and male subsamples
to capture gender differences.

4. Data, Analytic Sample, and Variables
4.1 Data and Analytical Sample
      We use the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS) 2012 national sample to study
determinants of the decision to enroll in NRPS, time to enrollment, and for individuals
below age 60, premiums paid. The survey covers 44,693 individuals from 13,459
households across 25 provinces of China 9 , geographically representing 95% of the
Chinese population (Xie and Lu 2015). Because the survey was fielded about two years
after the rollout of NRPS, we can observe if, when, and to what extent an individual
enrolled in NPRS10. The two-year gap allows substantial time for individuals to respond
to the program.
      Characteristics at the individual, family, and village levels hypothesized to affect
enrollment decisions are available in the data set. For individuals, standard socio-
economic and demographic characteristics were collected, including education, family
structure, age, income and wealth. Data were also obtained on health status, migration,
county of residence, and a number of relatively rare variables pertinent to our study.
The latter include the individual’s trust in government and the functioning of the social
security system. In addition, there is information on whether the individual is enrolled
in any other public programs. The family level data have rich information on family
composition, including adult children living away from home. For the older cohort, we
match parents to their children even if they were not co-residing. For the younger cohort,
we include both those with and without living parents. Phone surveys were used to
contact migrant children. Such data are critical to our analysis of the intergenerational
dynamics of pension enrollment. Data characterizing villages were also collected as
part of the survey. Home villages can be important for enrollment decisions among the
rural elderly.
      Our analytical sample is restricted to individuals who are over age 45 and eligible
for NRPS enrollment (i.e. holding rural registration). We analyze the sample by two age
categories, i.e., individuals over age 60 who have children (4,635 observations) and


9
  Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan, Xinjiang, Qinghai, Inner Mongolia, Ningxia, and Hainan are excluded.
10
   Because the NRPS rolled-out in most counties between 2010 and 2012, very few counties had initiated
the program when the CFPS 2010 baseline sample was collected. Therefore, this current study uses only
the CFPS 2012 sample.
                                                  8
those aged 45–60 (6,811 observations, of whom 38.5 percent have no senior parents
alive), to capture differing incentives to enroll and to contribute to the system. Except
reporting the percentage that enrolls, we do not analyze the 142 childless older persons
in our sample as the size is too small. We also ignore those under 45 as they have little
incentive to enroll until later in life. Table 1 reports summary statistics for the two age
cohorts.

4.2 Variables
      Outcome measures. As indicated above, we examine three decisions related to
enrollment in the NRPS: the decision to enroll, an individual’s premium paid, and the
decision time to enrollment. See Table 1 for summary statistics and Figure 1 for
distributions by age. The decision to enroll is a binary variable, equal to 1 if an
individual has enrolled and zero otherwise. The NRPS enrollment rate is, on average,
54.2 percent among the younger cohort and 59.5 percent among the older cohort. An
individual’s premium paid represents the level of individual contribution, ranging from
zero to 7,200 CNY per year per person. The average pension premium, including those
who do not enroll, is 89 CNY per year per person among all people age 45–60, whether
or not enrolled in the NRPS. The average pension premium among enrollees is 162
CNY per year per person. Decision time measures the years taken for an individual to
enroll after the program became available at the county level.11 We calculated this from
the date on which the program was initiated in their county until the date of their
enrollment. We use the rollout dates for all counties listed in county-level official
documents provided by China’s Ministry of Human Resources and Social Security
(Appendix Figure 3). Table 1 suggests that the younger cohort (aged 45–60) wait only
slightly longer to make pension enrollment decisions compared to their older
counterparts, which is consistent with the Family Binding Policy that requires older
parents and their eligible children to enroll at the same time.
      Control variables. Factors at the individual, family, and village level that may
influence pension enrollment decisions are included in regressions. See Tables 2A and
2B for the list of covariates for the older cohort and Tables 3A–3C for that of the
younger cohort. We control for somewhat different sets of variables due to the design
of NRPS as discussed above.
      Individual level variables. In both groups, we control for: age, gender, whether the
individual is a household head, marital status, own and children’s years of education,
party membership, presence of chronic disease and impairment in activities of daily
living (ADL), migration status (if outside the local county in the past year), enrollment
in the New Cooperative Medical Scheme (NCMS)12, and enrollment in ORPS. For both
groups, trust in government and concern over poor functioning of the social security
system are respectively measured by three binary indicators, from low (responses of 0–
3), medium (4–6), to strong (7–10). The lowest category of each of these subjective
11
   For those who did not enroll, their decision time is defined as the difference between the county
level rollout date and the date of the interview. The results for premium paid and decision timing are
not sensitive to exclusion of those who did not enroll by the survey date.
12
   Since its rollout in 2003, NCMS has rapidly expanded its coverage, service use, cost control and
quality. NCMS is now a cornerstone of China’s rural health system (Meng and Xu 2014).
                                                    9
assessments is omitted as the comparison group. For those aged 45–60, we also control
for age groups 45–50 (omitted comparison group), 50–55 and 55–60 using binary
indicators.
      Family characteristics. For the older cohort, we control for household size,
whether their spouses are age-eligible for pension benefits (no spouse as the comparison
group), years of schooling of their most educated child, and the relationship with their
children. For the younger cohort, we control for the existence of elderly parents, and
then for those with at least one living elderly parent, parents’ characteristics (e.g. age
categories interacted with gender). We do not control for their relationship with parents
as 38.5 percent of them have no parents alive. For both groups, we also control for:
house value, land size, number of sons and daughters, whether all the children are out-
migrants or not, and family income (excluding pension) in quintiles. See Appendix
Table 1 for information on income quintiles; note that the bottom three quintiles were
below the international poverty line at the time of the survey.13
      Village characteristics. We also control for village factors, including income per
capita, proportion of villagers enrolled, number of enrollees above the age of 60 who
fail to claim benefits, and the elapsed time since the first villager received a pension
payment. We also control for geographic access to health care and population size at
the village level.

5. Empirical Results
     In the regression tables for the older individuals, we examine their decision to
enroll (Table 2A) and time to enrollment (Table 2B) in NRPS. However, because those
over 60 are not required to contribute pension premiums, we cannot examine premiums
paid. The full sample results across three specifications are displayed in columns (1) to
(3). Specifically, we present column (1) with no measure of the relationship between
parents and children, column (2) with such measures, and column (3) with an additional
mechanistic factor – if any eligible child enrolls in the NRPS – as stipulated in the
Family Binding Policy. Following our main specification in column (2), columns (4)
and (5) separately estimate female and male subsamples because children’s willingness
to contribute financially and through in-person care might differ by gender of the parent.
     In the regression tables for the younger individuals, we display the results for
decision to enroll (Tables 3A), time to enrollment (Table 3B), and premiums paid (Table
3C). We present column (1) with number of living parents and their age profiles, column
(2) adds if all children have migrated away from their parents, column (3) adds gender
composition of living parents, and columns (4) and (5) separately estimating female
and male subsamples using the same set of variables as column (2) for the full sample.
We examine gender differences, as culturally sons play a larger role in ensuring the
well-being of elders.

Individuals 60 and above

13
   Note also that pension benefits are not counted as income when assessing eligibility for social welfare
programs, which rules out the potential concern that people in the lowest income quintile fail to enroll as
they may become ineligible for other benefits due to their pension benefits.
                                                    10
      Our primary focus is on older persons who have children. However, as noted above,
there are too few childless elders over 60 to analyze them, they are eliminated from our
sample. We analyze only those with children. In general, relatively few personal
characteristics affect both outcomes across the samples and specifications. Those who
are younger among this set of those over 60 years old likely reap greater benefits to
enrolling but are no more likely to enroll. Rather surprisingly, neither own education
nor that of one’s own children significantly promotes either enrollment decision among
older persons. This lack of significance may occur as both the parents and children have
very low levels of education; 2.17 and 4.92 respectively for the older and young cohort.
Gender is never significant, but when estimates are conducted separately by gender
there are a few differences in coefficients, particularly in time to enrollment.
Specifically, coefficients on number of children in different age categories and the
number of sons are significant for males but not for females in the time to enrollment.
Contrary to expectations, the set of variables indicating the age categories of one’s
children are insignificant in both decisions. For example, elderly parents with children
in their fifties are no more likely to enroll than others.
      However, prior enrollment in other programs, i.e. health insurance (NCMS) and
pension program (ORPS), are all significant. The results show that ORPS is a substitute
(negative coefficients) for NRPS both in terms of enrollment and time to enrollment
(positive coefficients). NCMS is a complement to NRPS in both decisions. These
findings are consistent with the function of each of the programs. Compared to low
trust, stronger trust in government increases enrollment and reduces time to enrollment.
Having migrated out also significantly increases enrollment, but does not reduce time
to enrollment. Note that only 1.1 percent of this older group have migrated.
      We find scant evidence of within-couple coordination to maximize the gains for
the family (only one time is one of the variables significant). For example, other things
being equal, and compared to unmarried elderly persons, having a spouse above age 60
is not associated with a higher pension enrollment rate, as would be expected.
      Out-migration of all children from the home county significantly reduces parental
enrollment but only when controlling for if an eligible child has enrolled in the NRPS
(column (3), Table 2A) and in the separate estimates for males (column (5) Table 2A).
However, out-migration of all children is insignificant in all estimates of the time to
enrollment. Parents who help their children to manage financial assets tend to enroll
sooner in some specifications (column 2 Table 2A) and for women when estimated
separately (column 4 Table 2A). This evidence weakly suggests that reduced
intergenerational connectedness may discourage enrollment for some.
      However, having a child enroll in NRPS is positively and significantly associated
both with NRPS enrollment (column (3), Table 2A) and with a shorter time to
enrollment (column 3, Table 2B). This is an expected mechanistic relationship, given
the requirement for older persons to have at least one eligible child enrolled in the
program if they are to receive benefits.
      Only those in the lowest quintile of income are more likely to enroll and enroll
more rapidly, while there are no significant impacts for the second and third quintiles
of income. This means that a majority of poor older individuals are no more likely to

                                           11
take advantage of NRPS than their richer counterparts.
     Village characteristics strongly influence individual pension enrollment decisions
in ways that are consistent with the predicted signs. Specifically, individuals’
enrollment rates are higher and enrollment is quicker if there are: 1) a larger share of
villagers who enrolled in the NRPS; 2) a smaller number of enrollees above 60 in the
village who failed to claim pension benefits; and 3) a villager who started to receive
pension benefits at an earlier date. These village level findings are all consistent with
peer learning, and perhaps with other factors, such as a strong village leader.

Individuals aged 45-60
    Perhaps a more interesting and more complicated decision is that of children of
elderly parents. Consistent with expectations, individuals are more likely to enroll when
they are closer to the pension eligibility cut-off age. Specifically, age groups 50–55 and
55–60 are more likely to enroll, enroll with less delay, and pay higher premiums
compared to the younger age group 45–50.
    In this age group as compared to the older group, own education and that of the
most educated child play a role in decisions. Specifically, own education increases
premiums paid in all specifications but not for females. Children’s education increases
enrollment in all specifications but not for males, while children’s education weakly
promotes contributions to premiums in all specifications but not for females. There are
other differences across the estimates by gender as well. For example, being a
household head increases enrollment only in separate estimates for males.
     Other individual level variables that are significantly and positively associated
with at least one outcome measure are: male, years of schooling, household head,
chronic diseases, ADL, and strong concern over the social security system. However,
these are not consistently significant across the outcomes and specifications.
    As we observe for the older cohort, enrolling in NCMS increases pension
enrollment rates and reduces the time taken to enroll; however, it is insignificant in
premiums paid. In addition, enrolling in ORPS reduces enrollment and premium
contribution, and increases decision time. These results suggest that for this age group,
ORPS is a substitute for NRPS and health insurance is a complement as is true for the
older cohort. Strong trust in government has a similar, positive impact for this age group
on enrollment and premiums paid and a negative impact on time to enrollment as
similar to what was observed with the older cohort.14
    As was found in the older cohort, there is little evidence of within-couple
arrangements for the three NRPS enrollment outcomes. Only for the premium decision
and only for when regressions are estimated separately by gender are any of the spouse
variables significant. For women, having a spouse over age 60 has a negative impact
on the premium, but for men having a spouse of any age increases premium
contributions. In other words, wives promote husbands’ enrollment, but not vice versa.
    There is mixed evidence on the impact of intergenerational arrangements on

14Our placebo tests replace trust in government by trust in parents, Americans, strangers or neighbors;
but none of these is associated with pension enrollment decisions, suggesting that unobserved factors
might not drive both trust and individual enrollment decisions. These results are available upon request.
                                                   12
enrollment decisions among children aged 45–59 with parents age-eligible for NRPS.
Some of the age categories measuring having two parents over age 60 are significant in
the expected directions for the three enrollment decisions; with the omitted reference
group of no senior parent. Specifically, having older parents (e.g. two parents 60–65
years old) increases both enrollment and premiums and reduces the time to enrollment.
This is consistent with the idea that an increase in the number of eligible parents
heightens the potential gains of NRPS participation for adult children. Having two
parents over the age of 70 also increases enrollment and reduces time to enroll, but does
not affect premiums. However, there is little such evidence when comparing only one
parent over age 60. Further, parents with more sons significantly reduce pension
premiums, but not in separate estimates for males.
     The only significant impacts of income are for females in the second and the third
lowest quintiles, indicating that females in two out of three low income groups are more
likely to enroll. All of the other income variables have insignificant coefficients in the
decision to enroll, the time to enrollment, and premiums paid.
     It is interesting to note that village effects for this younger cohort are weaker than
those for the older cohort. One plausible explanation is that peers may exert stronger
influence on older persons compared to the younger generation, who are more educated
and are more likely to migrate out; they may adjust their reference groups to those more
relevant to their lives.

6. Conclusions and Discussion
     We find evidence of low and suboptimal pension enrollment in NRPS by eligible
individuals and their families. For the older cohort, few individual and family
characteristics are significant in enrollment decisions, but village characteristics play
an important role. For the younger cohort, we find that more individual-level
characteristics are significant, including own and children’s education. Village
characteristics are important but not as much as for the older cohort. For both cohorts,
we find little evidence that families make simple and mutually beneficial intra-family
enrollment decisions. Our finding of suboptimal enrollment highlights the need for
research to determine how best to improve enrollment.
      The suboptimal enrollment takes several forms across different populations.
Specifically, individuals enrolled in the unsubsidized ORPS could benefit by simply
switching to the highly subsidized NRPS program, yet not all do. All childless elderly
could enroll in NRPS without any financial risk, yet not all do. There are also benefits
to be shared across generations through intra-family transfers, yet these financial gains
for the elderly have also been left untapped. Relatively younger senior parents or senior
parents with children approaching pension-eligible age have more to gain than others,
but such benefits are not often realized.
      Thus, many of China’s rural elderly lack the financial support they need in old age
and this problem is likely to remain incompletely addressed due to suboptimal
enrollment. The problems may worsen as factors driving financial insecurity likely
exacerbate the problem over time. The number of adult children migrating to cities is
increasing as is the life expectancy, leaving older parents without in-person support

                                            13
possibly for many years. To address these challenges, China implemented NRPS in
every county in the country. Despite the broad eligibility of the program and the
financial gains possible, we find evidence of low and suboptimal participation. And
thus, the full gains will not accrue due to the low take-up rates. Many of those who
could most benefit from NRPS do not enroll.
     Why do people leave money on the table? Low monetary returns to pension
enrollment is unlikely to be a viable explanation. This would be particularly unlikely
for those without children, for whom it would be costless to receive benefits. It is also
unlikely among people who are over 60 years old, because their pension payments
would be several times higher than the premiums that would have to be paid by their
children. The family unit would be better off with enrollment, and side payments could
be redistributed. Also, the operational cost of claiming pension benefits is low in China
due to the direct transfers of pension payments to individuals’ banking accounts. This
might help to explain why we find that migrants do not enroll at a lower rate.
      Enrollment could remain low due to a lack of understanding about the program
and inability to understand the potential gains to intra-family enrollment decisions and
redistribution in reaction to the Family Binding Policy and then to respond. Both may
occur due to low education or low financial literacy. Distrust in government could also
discourage pension enrollment, and our evidence supports this to some extent. However,
as discussed, older cohorts are guaranteed a financial gain, or at least no downside
financial risk, so this should mitigate their concern about trust. Our evidence suggests
aspects of the village may promote optimal decisions, at least for the older cohort. One
could postulate that, gains in education might mitigate this problem, but only for the
children of the younger cohort, did we find a significant, beneficial effect of education
on enrollment decisions.
     This study has notable strengths including being the first analysis to examine
suboptimal pension enrollment in NRPS; and also, to explore plausible explanations
including intra-family and intergenerational arrangements. Our ability to link data on
the generations enables us to observe these family dynamics. Also by collecting and
matching county administrative data on pension roll-out with individual’s pension
choices, we can measure the actual to the optimal pension enrollment decisions.
     Despite the strengths, this study has some limitations as well. One limitation is that
this is largely a descriptive study. Another limitation is that despite the richness of these
data there are some unmeasured factors such as a direct measure of financial literacy.
Also, although we have education of the children for both generations, we do not have
information on education and some other personal characteristics for the parents of the
children age 45-59. This is due to the fact that 38 percent of them do not have a living
parent (See Table 1).
      The insights from this paper may be applied to other developing countries. As in
China, the percentage of the elderly population in many other developing countries is
growing more rapidly than younger cohorts, many of the elderly are poor and
undereducated, and children are migrating to cities. Family ties are often strong, but
social protection systems are weak. Emerging evidence demonstrates the benefits of
enrolling in social pension programs in developing countries, but enrollment rates are

                                             14
low (Pension Watch 2017). The low enrollment can limit the economic, health and
social benefits of such social pension programs.




                                      15
References
Auerbach, P., Genoni, ME., and Pages, C. 2007. Social Security Coverage and the Labor Market
in Developing Countries. IZA Discussion Paper No. 2979.

Barr, A., & Packard, T. 2003. Preferences, constraints, and substitutes for coverage under Peru’s
pension system. Background Paper for Regional Study on Social Security Reform, Office of
the Chief Economist, Latin America and Caribbean Regional Office, World Bank.

Beshears J, Choi, J., Laibson, D., Madrian, BC., Milkman, KL. 2015. The Effect of Providing
Peer Information on Retirement Savings Decisions. Journal of Finance 70(3): 1161-1201.

Cai, F., Giles, J., O'Keefe, P., Wang, D. 2012. The elderly and old age support in rural China.
World Bank Publications.

Chen, X. 2016. Social pensions could reshape informal old-age care and improve health.
National Institutes of Health. https://obssr.od.nih.gov/social-pensions-could-reshape-informal-
old-age-care-and-improve-health/

Chen, X., K. Eggleston. A. Sun. 2016. The Impact of Social Pensions on Intergenerational
Relationship: Comparative Evidence from China. Forthcoming in Journal of the Economics
of Aging.

Cheng, LG., Liu, H., Zhang, Y., Z. Zhao. 2016. The Health Implications of Social Pensions:
Evidence from China's New Rural Pension Scheme. In press. Journal of Comparative
Economics.

Choi, J., D. Laibson, and B. Madrian. 2011. “$100 Bills on the Sidewalk: Violations of No-
Arbitrage in 401(k) Accounts,” The Review of Economics and Statistics 93(3): 748-763.

Clark, RL., Maki, JA., and MS. Morrill. 2014. “Can Simple Informational Nudges Increase
Employee Participation in a 401(k) Plan?” Southern Economic Journal 80(3): 677–701.

Crabbe, C. A. (Ed.). 2005. A quarter century of pension reform in Latin America and the
Caribbean: lessons learned and next steps. IDB. https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/314

Ebenstein, A., and Leung, S. 2010. Son preference and access to social insurance: evidence
from China's rural pension program. Population and Development Review, 36(1), 47-70.

Ho, K., J. Hogan, and FS. Morton. 2017. The impact of consumer inattention on insurer Pricing
in the Medicare Part D Program. NBER Working Paper No. 21028.

Holzmann, R., Packard, T., and Cuesta, J. 2000. Extending coverage in multi-pillar pension
systems: Constraints and hypotheses, preliminary evidence and future research agenda. World
Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper, 2.

Hu, H. and Q. Qi, et al. 2012. "Analysis of hospital technical efficiency in China: Effect of
                                               16
health insurance reform." China Economic Review 23(4): 865-877.

Kimberly, S. B. and M. Grant, et al. 2010. "New evidence on the impact of China’s New Rural
Cooperative Medical Scheme and its implications for rural primary healthcare: multivariate
difference-in-difference analysis." BMJ 341.

Lei, X. and W. Lin 2009. "The New Cooperative Medical Scheme in rural China: does more
coverage mean more service and better health?" Health Economics 18(S2): S25-S46.

Lei, X., C. Zhang and Y. Zhao 2013. "Incentive problems in China’s new rural pension
program." Research in Labor Economics 37: 181-201.

Li, C. A., & Olivera, J. 2005. Participation in the Peruvian reformed pension system. Economics
Discussion Papers, 592.

Madrian, B. and D. Shea, 2001. “The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
Savings Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116: 1149-1187.

Meng, Q. and K. Xu, 2014. Progress and challenges of the rural cooperative medical scheme in
China. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 92: 447-451.

Packard, T., Shinkai, N., and Fuentes, R. 2002. The reach of social security in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Background Paper for Regional Study on Social Security Reform, 30491.
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 2013. World
Population Ageing 2013. ST/ESA/SER.A/348.

Pension Watch. 2017. Social pensions database: Notes. Retrieved from HelpAge International.
http://www.pension-watch.net/pensions/contact-us/social-pensions-database-notes/

Thaler, R. and CR. Sunstein. 2009. Nudge: Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth, and
Happiness. Publisher: Penguin Books; Revised & Expanded edition.

Thaler, R. 2016. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. Publisher: W. W. Norton
& Company.

United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division 2013. World
Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision, DVD Edition.

Wagstaff, A. and M. Lindelow, et al. 2009. "Extending health insurance to the rural population:
An impact evaluation of China's new cooperative medical scheme." Journal of Health
Economics 28(1): 1-19.

Wang, XM, JB. Williamson, and M. Cansoy. 2016. “Developing Countries and Systemic
Pension Reforms: Reflections on Some Emerging Problems.” International Social Security

                                              17
Review 69(2): 85-106.

Williamson, JB, Esteban C., and LQ. Fang. 2017. “Rural Pension Reform in China: A Critical
Analysis.” Journal of Aging Studies 41: 67-74.

Xie, Y. and Lu, P. 2015. “The Sampling Design of the China Family Panel Studies (CFPS).”
Chinese Journal of Sociology. 1(4): 471-484.




                                           18
                          Figure 1 NRPS Enrollment Decisions




Note: All individuals with zero premium contributions are counted in when generating the average
premium by age.
                                              19
                                                                   Table 1 Summary Statistics
                                                                         age>=45 & age<60                                             age>=60
                                                             N        mean         sd     min     max           N            mean            sd    min   max
Whether enroll in NRPS (yes=1,no=0)                        6,811     0.542       0.498     0        1         4,635          0.595         0.491    0     1
Level of NRPS (CNY)                                        6,467     89.110    259.932     0     7,200
Waiting time of NRPS (years)                               6,148     2.493       1.381     0        5         4,067          2.330         1.393    0     5
                                                                                                Individual Characteristics
Age is [45,50) (yes=1,no=0)                                6,811     0.412      0.492      0        1         4,635             0            0      0     0
Age is [50,55) (yes=1,no=0)                                6,811     0.255      0.436      0        1         4,635             0            0      0     0
Age is [55,60) (yes=1,no=0)                                6,811     0.333      0.471      0        1         4,635             0            0      0     0
Age is [60,) (yes=1,no=0)                                  6,811       0          0        0        0         4,635             1            0      1     1
Age (year)                                                 6,811     51.598     4.527     45       59         4,635          67.993        6.739   60    99
Male (male=1,female=0)                                     6,811     0.478      0.500      0        1         4,635           0.479        0.500    0     1
Years of schooling in 2012                                 6,811     4.924      4.469      0       16         4,631           2.168        3.394    0    16
Household head (yes=1,no=0)                                6,811     0.484      0.500      0        1         4,635           0.408        0.492    0     1
Marital status (married=1,single=0)                        6,811     0.944      0.229      0        1         4,634           0.773        0.419    0     1
Chronic disease (yes=1,no=0)                               6,811     0.136      0.343      0        1         4,630           0.195        0.396    0     1
Activities of Daily Living (ADL) impairment (yes=1,no=0)   6,808     0.063      0.242      0        1         4,624           0.200        0.400    0     1
Party membership (yes=1,no=0)                              6,810     0.045      0.208      0        1         4,634           0.074        0.262    0     1
Low trust in government (yes=1,no=0)                       6,757     0.253      0.435      0        1         4,489           0.191        0.393    0     1
Medium trust in government (yes=1,no=0)                    6,757     0.484      0.500      0        1         4,489           0.472        0.499    0     1
Strong trust in government (yes=1,no=0)                    6,757     0.263      0.440      0        1         4,489           0.337        0.473    0     1
Low concern re social security system (yes=1,no=0)         6,811     0.287      0.453      0        1         4,635           0.324        0.468    0     1
Medium concern re social security system (yes=1,no=0)      6,811     0.391      0.488      0        1         4,635           0.356        0.479    0     1
Strong concern re social security system (yes=1,no=0)      6,811     0.270      0.444      0        1         4,635           0.213        0.410    0     1
Migrant (yes=1,no=0)                                       6,791     0.054      0.226      0        1         4,629           0.011        0.103    0     1
NCMS health insurance enrollment (yes=1,no=0)              6,811     0.901      0.299      0        1         4,635           0.897        0.304    0     1
ORPS pension enrollment (yes=1,no=0)                       6,811     0.125      0.330      0        1         4,635           0.247        0.431    0     1
                                                                                                  Family Characteristics
No spouse (yes=1; no=0)                                    6,811      0.056     0.229     0         1         4,635          0.227         0.419    0     1
Spouse is below 60 (yes=1,no or single or widow=0)         6,781      0.861     0.346     0         1         4,617          0.123         0.328    0     1
Spouse is above 60 (yes=1,no or single or widow=0)         6,781      0.083     0.277     0         1         4,617          0.650         0.477    0     1
0 senior parent (yes=1,no=0)                               6,315      0.385     0.487     0         1            .             .             .      .     .
1 senior parent, ages [60, 65) (yes=1,no=0)                6,315      0.003     0.058     0         1            .             .             .      .     .
1 senior parent, ages [65, 70) (yes=1,no=0)                6,315      0.022     0.147     0         1            .             .             .      .     .

                                                                               20
1 senior parent, ages [70+) (yes=1,no=0)                    6,315   0.323     0.468   0        1            .             .        .     .      .
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [60, 65) (yes=1,no=0)        6,315   0.002     0.044   0        1            .             .        .     .      .
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [65, 70) (yes=1,no=0)        6,315   0.018     0.131   0        1            .             .        .     .      .
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [70+) (yes=1,no=0)           6,315   0.247     0.431   0        1            .             .        .     .      .
Whether children enroll in NRPS (yes=1,no=0)                   .       .        .     .        .          3,461         0.638    0.481   0      1
Number of children age below 45                                .       .        .     .        .          4,635         2.164    1.226   0      7
Number of children age [45,50)                                 .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.511    0.783   0      5
Number of children age [50,55)                                 .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.190    0.492   0      3
Number of children age [55,60)                                 .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.111    0.390   0      3
Number of children age above 60                                .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.044    0.273   0      4
All child migrate? (yes=1,no=0)                             6,811   0.034     0.182   0        1          4,635         0.015    0.121   0      1
Highest years of education of their children                6,800   10.840    3.805   0       22          4,633         9.457    3.684   0     22
Household size                                              6,811   4.415     1.858   1       17          4,635         4.290    2.158   1     14
Number of sons                                              6,811   1.143     0.731   0        5          4,635         1.671    1.002   0      6
Number of daughters                                         6,811   0.966     0.883   0        8          4,635         1.346    1.178   0      6
House value (10,000 CNY)                                    6,792   14.156   33.343   0     2,000         4,604        14.183   51.359   0    2,000
Land size (1,000 mu)                                        6,742    0.011    0.035   0        1          4,575         0.009    0.031   0      1
Lowest quantile of income per capita (yes=1,no=0)           6,811   0.200     0.400   0        1          4,635         0.201    0.401   0      1
2nd quantile of income per capita (yes=1,no=0)              6,811   0.200     0.400   0        1          4,635         0.199    0.399   0      1
3rd quantile of income per capita (yes=1,no=0)              6,811   0.200     0.400   0        1          4,635         0.200    0.400   0      1
4th quantile of income per capita (yes=1,no=0)              6,811   0.200     0.400   0        1          4,635         0.196    0.397   0      1
Highest quantile of income per capita (yes=1,no=0)          6,811   0.200     0.400   0        1          4,635         0.205    0.403   0      1
Economic help for children (yes=1,no=0)                        .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.071    0.256   0      1
Housework for children (yes=1,no=0)                            .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.265    0.441   0      1
Take care of grandchildren (yes=1,no=0)                        .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.310    0.462   0      1
Financial management (yes=1,no=0)                              .       .        .     .        .          4,635         0.017    0.128   0      1
                                                                                             Village Characteristics
Village income per capita (1,000 CNY)                       6,810   10.196    5.373    0      68          4,632        9.942    5.419    -0     68
% villagers enroll in NRPS                                  6,809   0.471     0.280    0       1          4,634        0.470    0.281     0      1
# enrollees above age 60 fail to receive pension benefits   6,811   5.331     5.040    0      28          4,635        6.458    5.906     0     28
Population of the village                                   6,811   2,192     1,850   31   23,000         4,635        2,215    1,784    16   23,300
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension (year)        6,769   1.362     1.142    0       5          4,600        1.427    1.164     0      5
Time to nearest hospital (hour)                             6,784   0.198     0.271    0       5          4,598        0.233    0.304     0      5



                                                                             21
                                                    Table 2A Whether Enrolled (yes/no, for age>=60)
                                                    (1)                           (2)                      (3)               (4)                 (5)
Dependent Variable: NRPS (yes/no)
                                                All Sample                   All Sample               All Sample        Female Sample        Male Sample
                                                                      Individual Characteristics
Age in 2012                                     -0.002    0.002            -0.002     0.002         -0.002     0.002    -0.001     0.002    -0.002     0.003
Male                                             0.019    0.017             0.022     0.017          0.020     0.016
Years of schooling in 2012                      -0.002    0.002            -0.002     0.002         -0.001     0.002      -0.002   0.004     -0.001    0.003
Household head                                   0.004    0.015             0.002     0.015        0.024*      0.014       0.007   0.029      0.012    0.024
Chronic disease                                 -0.003    0.015            -0.003     0.015         -0.002     0.017      -0.022   0.023      0.020    0.023
ADL impairments                                 -0.027    0.020            -0.026     0.020         -0.023     0.016      -0.032   0.028     -0.023    0.031
Party membership                                -0.007    0.026            -0.006     0.026         -0.041     0.025       0.036   0.078     -0.004    0.030
Medium trust in government                       0.003    0.019             0.005     0.018          0.011     0.018      -0.010   0.024      0.011    0.022
Strong trust in government                     0.047**    0.023           0.048**     0.024        0.041**     0.021       0.047   0.030      0.042    0.027
Medium severity of social security problem    -0.039**    0.015          -0.038**     0.015         -0.020     0.016     -0.043*   0.022     -0.035    0.023
Strong severity of social security problem      -0.012    0.022            -0.012     0.022         -0.007     0.020      -0.032   0.031      0.016    0.035
Migrant                                        0.111**    0.051           0.110**     0.052          0.108     0.068    0.202**    0.085   0.153***    0.051
NCMS health insurance enrollment              0.176***    0.031          0.177***     0.031       0.140***     0.035    0.183***   0.036   0.182***    0.038
ORPS pension enrollment                      -0.326***    0.050         -0.331*** 0.050          -0.279*** 0.048       -0.291***   0.068   -0.372***   0.052
                                                                        Family Characteristics
Within-couple arrangements/relationship (reference group=no spouse)
Whether spouse is below 60                       0.032    0.026           0.035        0.027     0.064***     0.025     -0.017     0.051     0.016     0.035
Whether spouse is above 60                      -0.006    0.020          -0.005        0.020       0.012      0.018      0.013     0.025    -0.030     0.029
Intergenerational arrangements/relationship
Number of children age below 45                  0.151    0.150           0.150        0.151       0.110      0.112     -0.014     0.083      0.165    0.199
Number of children age [45,50)                   0.152    0.151           0.152        0.152       0.114      0.113     -0.021     0.084      0.175    0.200
Number of children age [50,55)                   0.138    0.154           0.139        0.155       0.117      0.114     -0.026     0.091      0.169    0.202
Number of children age [55,60)                   0.149    0.151           0.151        0.152       0.130      0.116      0.000     0.076      0.152    0.203
Number of children age above 60                  0.135    0.154           0.137        0.156       0.080      0.115     -0.034     0.101      0.169    0.205
Number of sons                                  -0.141    0.149          -0.144        0.150      -0.111      0.111      0.030     0.082     -0.171    0.198
Whether all children are migrants?                                       -0.124        0.092     -0.160**     0.081     -0.032     0.100    -0.207*    0.107
Economic help for children                                               -0.011        0.029       0.023      0.036     -0.033     0.055     -0.014    0.037
Housework for children                                                    0.021        0.015       0.007      0.014      0.008     0.024      0.027    0.021
Take care of grandchildren                                                0.014        0.014       0.005      0.014      0.017     0.021      0.014    0.023

                                                                                  22
Financial management                                                           0.012         0.065        0.019       0.063          -0.062      0.099          0.065       0.072
Whether children enroll in NRPS                                                                         0.357***      0.038
Other Family Characteristics
Highest years of education of their children         0.001      0.002         0.001     0.002             0.003       0.002          0.002       0.003         -0.001       0.003
Household size                                      -0.001      0.004        -0.002     0.004            -0.004       0.004         -0.003       0.005          0.000       0.005
House value                                         -0.000      0.000        -0.000     0.000             0.000       0.000          0.000       0.000         -0.000       0.000
Land size                                           -0.025      0.177        -0.038     0.172             0.036       0.260         -0.031       0.158          0.125       0.426
Lowest quintile of income per capita               0.135***     0.025       0.135***    0.025           0.075***      0.027        0.141***      0.036        0.137***      0.034
2nd quintile of income per capita                   -0.026      0.029        -0.028     0.029            -0.028       0.029         -0.044       0.039         -0.019       0.032
3rd quintile of income per capita                   -0.013      0.026        -0.012     0.026            -0.012       0.028         -0.016       0.044         -0.011       0.029
4th quintile of income per capita                    0.011      0.030         0.012     0.030            -0.010       0.027          0.033       0.040         -0.003       0.033
                                                                            Village Characteristics
Fellow Villagers’ Influences
% villagers enroll in NRPS                         0.617***     0.100       0.613***         0.099       0.254***     0.079         0.499***     0.116        0.764***      0.103
# enrollees >60 fail to receive pension benefits   -0.011***    0.003       -0.011***        0.003      -0.009***     0.002        -0.012***     0.004        -0.009***     0.003
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension      0.047***     0.012       0.045***         0.012       0.043***     0.013         0.052***     0.015        0.038***      0.013
Other Village Characteristics
Village income per capita                            0.003*     0.002          0.003*     0.002            0.001     0.001            0.001     0.002           0.004     0.003
Population of the village                            -0.000     0.000          -0.000     0.000            0.000     0.000           -0.000     0.000         -0.000**    0.000
Time to nearest hospital                            -0.049*     0.026         -0.048*     0.027           -0.023     0.022          -0.038*     0.022          -0.065     0.042
Number of observations                                    4,331                     4,331                      3,243                      2,205                     2,126
Adjusted R2                                               0.545                     0.546                      0.636                      0.551                     0.559
   Notes: Standard errors are clustered at the county level. NRPS = 1 if one enrolls in. All sample means combining the male and female samples. All income measures exclude
   pension benefits. Migration status is defined as being outside the local county in the past year. *10% significance level. **5% significance level. ***1% significance level




                                                                                        23
                                                         Table 2B Decision Time (year, for age>=60)
                                                     (1)                         (2)                      (3)                (4)                 (5)
Dependent Variable: Decision time (year)
                                                 All Sample                  All Sample               All Sample        Female Sample        Male Sample
                                                                      Individual Characteristics
Age in 2012                                     -0.001     0.004           -0.002    0.004          -0.001    0.004     -0.008     0.006     0.002     0.004
Male                                            -0.033     0.035           -0.039    0.035          -0.050    0.040
Years of schooling in 2012                       0.003     0.005            0.004    0.005           0.003    0.006        0.004   0.008       0.005   0.006
Household head                                  -0.035     0.033           -0.029    0.032          -0.042    0.034       -0.007   0.057      -0.069   0.046
Chronic disease                                 -0.007     0.037           -0.003    0.037          -0.012    0.036       -0.014   0.050      -0.007   0.057
ADL impairments                                  0.042     0.042            0.038    0.042         0.079*     0.041        0.069   0.060      -0.006   0.084
Party membership                                 0.016     0.060            0.017    0.059           0.067    0.068       -0.188   0.137       0.063   0.064
Medium trust in government                      -0.035     0.046           -0.034    0.047          -0.015    0.061       -0.020   0.055      -0.027   0.062
Strong trust in government                    -0.133**     0.055         -0.133**    0.056         -0.110*    0.064      -0.121*   0.066     -0.124*   0.068
Medium severity of social security problem     0.084**     0.040          0.085**    0.040           0.047    0.044        0.067   0.057      0.093*   0.051
Strong severity of social security problem      -0.018     0.053           -0.020    0.053          -0.041    0.047       -0.059   0.074      -0.019   0.076
Migrant                                         -0.027     0.141           -0.022    0.148          -0.151    0.124       -0.382   0.261      -0.169   0.129
NCMS health insurance enrollment             -0.284***     0.058        -0.286*** 0.058          -0.243*** 0.064       -0.186***   0.069   -0.402***   0.082
ORPS pension enrollment                       0.777***     0.109         0.795***    0.107        0.562***     0.111    0.760***   0.162    0.834***   0.100
                                                                       Family Characteristics
Within-couple arrangements/relationship (reference group=no spouse)
Whether spouse is below 60                      -0.080    0.069           -0.088        0.069      -0.045     0.077     -0.088     0.138    -0.042     0.075
Whether spouse is above 60                       0.059    0.046            0.060        0.046       0.052     0.044      0.038     0.068     0.076     0.051
Intergenerational arrangements/relationship
Number of children age below 45                 -0.223    0.291           -0.234        0.286      -0.033     0.360     -0.126     0.278    -0.446*    0.233
Number of children age [45,50)                  -0.241    0.292           -0.257        0.287      -0.048     0.357     -0.093     0.280   -0.519**    0.238
Number of children age [50,55)                  -0.180    0.288           -0.190        0.283      -0.033     0.359     -0.063     0.287   -0.454**    0.222
Number of children age [55,60)                  -0.200    0.292           -0.210        0.287      -0.066     0.361     -0.093     0.273    -0.446*    0.240
Number of children age above 60                 -0.216    0.298           -0.235        0.294       0.017     0.364     -0.086     0.297   -0.503**    0.250
Number of sons                                   0.217    0.291            0.232        0.286       0.035     0.360      0.087     0.275    0.488**    0.231
Whether all children are migrants?                                         0.142        0.159       0.145     0.180     -0.026     0.155      0.285    0.190
Economic help for children                                                 0.025        0.062      -0.043     0.070     -0.008     0.086      0.005    0.082
Housework for children                                                    -0.012        0.046       0.021     0.053      0.016     0.063     -0.048    0.061
Take care of grandchildren                                               -0.070*        0.038      -0.067     0.044     -0.073     0.047     -0.076    0.054
Financial management                                                    -0.275**        0.114      -0.134     0.122    -0.465**    0.214     -0.201    0.174
Whether children enroll in NRPS                                                                  -0.496***    0.067
Other Family Characteristics
                                                                                   24
Highest years of education of their children         -0.005       0.005          -0.006    0.005            -0.009       0.007          -0.009      0.006          -0.003       0.007
Household size                                       -0.001       0.008           0.004    0.009            -0.001       0.010           0.005      0.011          -0.002       0.012
House value                                          -0.000       0.000          -0.000    0.000           -0.001*       0.000          -0.000      0.000          -0.000       0.000
Land size                                            -0.007       0.191          -0.034    0.194             0.018       0.425           0.193      0.206          -0.556       0.555
Lowest quintile of income per capita               -0.262***      0.058       -0.264*** 0.059             -0.148***      0.053        -0.282***     0.087        -0.247***      0.068
2nd quintile of income per capita                     0.045       0.048           0.047    0.049             0.015       0.056           0.040      0.063           0.066       0.062
3rd quintile of income per capita                    -0.006       0.051          -0.012    0.050            -0.021       0.053          -0.008      0.080          -0.003       0.058
4th quintile of income per capita                   -0.101*       0.057         -0.103*    0.055           -0.113*       0.066         -0.164**     0.066          -0.055       0.084
                                                                              Village Characteristics
Fellow Villagers’ Influences
% villagers enroll in NRPS                         -0.839***      0.282        -0.835***      0.282         -0.215       0.287         -0.753**     0.301        -1.047***      0.329
# enrollees >60 fail to receive pension benefits    0.021***      0.008         0.021***      0.008        0.017**       0.007          0.021*      0.011         0.020***      0.007
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension      -0.214***      0.041        -0.212***      0.042       -0.261***      0.047        -0.240***     0.053        -0.157***      0.046
Other Village Characteristics
Village income per capita                            -0.008*     0.005          -0.008*     0.005           -0.006     0.004            -0.006     0.006           -0.010     0.007
Population of the village                             -0.000     0.000           -0.000     0.000           -0.000     0.000            -0.000     0.000            0.000     0.000
Time to nearest hospital                             -0.081*     0.046           -0.075     0.047          -0.125**    0.052            -0.058     0.067           -0.022     0.069
Number of observations                                     3,941                      3,941                      2,997                       1,966                      1,975
Adjusted R2                                                0.745                      0.746                      0.775                       0.754                      0.750
   Notes: NRPS decision time is defined as the time gap between enrollment date (or date of interview for non-participants) and county level rollout date. Other notes follow Table
   2A.




                                                                                         25
                                                Table 3A Whether Enrolled (yes/no, for age>=45 & age<60)
                                                        (1)                        (2)                    (3)                (4)                 (5)
Dependent Variable: NRPS (yes/no)
                                                    All Sample                 All Sample             All Sample        Female Sample        Male Sample
                                                                      Individual Characteristics
Age is [50,55)                                    0.068***    0.018        0.069*** 0.018           0.069***   0.018    0.052*     0.027   0.090***    0.022
Age is [55,60)                                    0.097***    0.021        0.098*** 0.021           0.099***   0.021   0.081***    0.025   0.122***    0.027
Male                                                -0.018    0.017          -0.018    0.017          -0.018   0.017
Years of schooling in 2012                          0.003     0.002           0.003    0.002           0.003   0.002       0.002   0.003      0.003    0.002
Household head                                      0.016     0.015           0.015    0.015           0.015   0.015      -0.024   0.024    0.067***   0.025
Chronic disease                                    0.046**    0.021         0.046**    0.021         0.045**   0.020      0.058*   0.034     0.038*    0.022
ADL impairments                                     -0.044    0.033          -0.045    0.033          -0.045   0.033     -0.084*   0.047     -0.003    0.035
Party membership                                    0.052     0.033           0.052    0.033           0.052   0.033       0.050   0.039      0.098    0.072
Medium trust in government                          0.021     0.020           0.021    0.020           0.021   0.020       0.042   0.028      0.009    0.026
Strong trust in government                         0.051**    0.023         0.052**    0.023         0.051**   0.023     0.070**   0.031      0.036    0.027
Medium severity of social security problem          -0.006    0.016          -0.006    0.016          -0.005   0.016      -0.002   0.023     -0.014    0.025
Strong severity of social security problem          -0.031    0.019          -0.031    0.019          -0.030   0.019      -0.014   0.023     -0.043    0.030
Migrant                                             0.020     0.026           0.019    0.026           0.020   0.026       0.021   0.030     -0.006    0.062
NCMS health insurance enrollment                  0.245***    0.039        0.246*** 0.039           0.246***   0.039    0.223***   0.046    0.268***   0.049
ORPS pension enrollment                          -0.386***    0.040       -0.387*** 0.040          -0.386***   0.040   -0.364***   0.050   -0.404***   0.052
                                                                        Family Characteristics
Within-couple arrangements/relationship (reference group=no spouse)
Whether spouse is below 60                          0.003     0.027          0.002     0.026         0.002     0.026    -0.019     0.033     0.041     0.042
Whether spouse is above 60                          0.027     0.038          0.026     0.038         0.026     0.038     0.041     0.072     0.052     0.048
Intergenerational arrangements/relationship (reference group=no senior parent)
1 senior parent, ages [60, 65)                      0.032     0.097          0.028     0.095                            0.134      0.106     0.033     0.141
1 senior parent, ages [65, 70)                      -0.033    0.046         -0.034     0.046                            0.022      0.087    -0.063     0.067
1 senior parent, ages [70+)                         0.022     0.014          0.021     0.014                           0.039**     0.019     0.004     0.024
1 senior parent, Male, ages [60, 65)                                                               0.328**     0.147
1 senior parent, Female, ages [60, 65)                                                              -0.061     0.095
1 senior parent, Male, ages [65, 70)                                                                -0.076     0.105
1 senior parent, Female, ages [65, 70)                                                              -0.027     0.051
1 senior parent, Male, ages [70+)                                                                  0.047*      0.025
1 senior parent, Female, ages [70+)                                                                  0.013     0.015


                                                                                 26
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [60, 65)             0.170*     0.087      0.172**     0.086       0.171**    0.086     0.101    0.073    0.318***   0.091
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [65, 70)              0.041     0.047        0.042     0.047         0.043    0.047     0.017    0.073      0.080    0.053
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [70+)               0.045***    0.015     0.045***     0.015      0.045***    0.015   0.074***   0.025      0.020    0.025
Number of sons                                      -0.010     0.014       -0.009     0.014        -0.010    0.014    -0.005    0.017     -0.010    0.019
Number of daughters                                 -0.012     0.009       -0.011     0.009        -0.011    0.010    -0.013    0.014     -0.010    0.012
Whether all children are migrants?                                          0.041     0.046         0.043    0.046     0.019    0.048      0.082    0.057
Other Family Characteristics
Highest years of education of their children       0.005**     0.002       0.005**    0.002      0.005**     0.002   0.007**    0.003      0.004    0.003
Household size                                      -0.003     0.004        -0.003    0.004       -0.003     0.004    -0.003    0.005     -0.003    0.005
House value                                         0.000      0.000         0.000    0.000        0.000     0.000     0.000    0.000      0.001    0.000
Land size                                            0.112     0.296         0.116    0.298        0.118     0.299    -0.026    0.280      0.568    0.384
Lowest quintile of income per capita                0.013      0.024         0.013    0.024        0.012     0.024     0.020    0.035     -0.007    0.032
2nd quintile of income per capita                  0.043*      0.024       0.043*     0.024      0.042*      0.024   0.064*     0.034      0.009    0.034
3rd quintile of income per capita                  0.062**     0.025       0.062**    0.025      0.061**     0.025   0.085**    0.034      0.037    0.039
4th quintile of income per capita                   0.019      0.026         0.019    0.026        0.019     0.026     0.033    0.030     -0.012    0.038
                                                                       Village Characteristics
Fellow Villagers’ Influences
% villagers enroll in NRPS                          0.987***   0.080      0.987***    0.079       0.985***   0.079   0.996***   0.087    0.988***   0.104
# enrollees >60 fail to receive pension benefits   -0.007***   0.003     -0.007***    0.002      -0.007***   0.003   -0.006**   0.003    -0.008**   0.004
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension         0.007    0.012        0.007     0.012         0.007    0.012     0.010    0.011      0.006    0.015
Other Village Characteristics
Village income per capita                           -0.000     0.001       -0.000     0.001       -0.000     0.001    -0.002     0.002     0.001     0.002
Population of the village                           -0.000     0.000       -0.000     0.000       -0.000     0.000    -0.000     0.000    -0.000     0.000
Time to nearest hospital                            0.001      0.036        0.001     0.036        0.003     0.036     0.054     0.037    -0.039     0.047
Number of observations                                   6,083                  6,083                  6,083               2,976               3,107
Adjusted R2                                              0.433                  0.433                  0.434               0.433               0.430
    Notes: Follow Table 2.




                                                                                 27
                                                   Table 3B Decision Time (year, for age>=45 & age<60)
                                                       (1)                       (2)                     (3)                (4)                 (5)
Dependent Variable: Decision time (year)
                                                   All Sample                All Sample              All Sample        Female Sample        Male Sample
                                                                     Individual Characteristics
Age is [50,55)                                    -0.075*    0.044        -0.075*    0.044          -0.076*   0.044    -0.017     0.045    -0.123*    0.066
Age is [55,60)                                  -0.178***    0.044      -0.179*** 0.044           -0.180***   0.044    -0.088     0.055   -0.270***   0.065
Male                                                0.035    0.036          0.035    0.036           0.035    0.036
Years of schooling in 2012                         -0.007    0.004         -0.007    0.004           -0.007   0.004      -0.005   0.005     -0.008    0.006
Household head                                     -0.025    0.029         -0.025    0.029           -0.024   0.029       0.045   0.052     -0.084    0.055
Chronic disease                                    -0.056    0.045         -0.056    0.045           -0.057   0.045     -0.115*   0.066     -0.041    0.056
ADL impairments                                     0.065    0.053          0.065    0.053           0.067    0.053       0.145   0.089     -0.015    0.059
Party membership                                   -0.028    0.058         -0.028    0.059           -0.028   0.059      -0.006   0.071     -0.162    0.172
Medium trust in government                        -0.069*    0.038        -0.068*    0.038          -0.069*   0.038    -0.112**   0.050     -0.045    0.050
Strong trust in government                        -0.088*    0.048        -0.088*    0.048          -0.087*   0.048    -0.155**   0.061     -0.031    0.060
Medium severity of social security problem         -0.036    0.036         -0.037    0.036           -0.038   0.036      -0.033   0.052     -0.031    0.051
Strong severity of social security problem          0.046    0.035          0.046    0.035           0.045    0.035       0.053   0.047      0.039    0.062
Migrant                                             0.012    0.052          0.012    0.052            0.011   0.052       0.051   0.067     -0.019    0.133
NCMS health insurance enrollment                -0.466***    0.081      -0.467*** 0.081           -0.466***   0.081   -0.352***   0.089   -0.571***   0.121
ORPS pension enrollment                          0.676***    0.115       0.676***    0.115         0.675***   0.115    0.541***   0.147    0.772***   0.132
                                                                       Family Characteristics
Within-couple arrangements/relationship (reference group=no spouse)
Whether spouse is below 60                          0.055    0.053          0.056        0.053     0.057      0.053     0.112     0.076    -0.008     0.083
Whether spouse is above 60                         -0.037    0.083         -0.037        0.083     -0.036     0.083    -0.022     0.150    -0.064     0.105
Intergenerational arrangements/relationship (reference group=no senior parent)
1 senior parent, ages [60, 65)                      0.212    0.144          0.218        0.147                          0.165     0.213     0.125     0.259
1 senior parent, ages [65, 70)                      0.036    0.108          0.036        0.108                          0.008     0.143     0.057     0.186
1 senior parent, ages [70+)                        -0.046    0.029         -0.046        0.029                        -0.088**    0.043    -0.003     0.047
1 senior parent, Male, ages [60, 65)                                                              -0.338***   0.086
1 senior parent, Female, ages [60, 65)                                                              0.280*    0.151
1 senior parent, Male, ages [65, 70)                                                                 0.036    0.226
1 senior parent, Female, ages [65, 70)                                                               0.036    0.120
1 senior parent, Male, ages [70+)                                                                  -0.083*    0.050
1 senior parent, Female, ages [70+)                                                                 -0.033    0.030


                                                                                    28
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [60, 65)             -0.463*    0.258      -0.465*     0.258       -0.465*    0.258    -0.225     0.139    -0.744     0.624
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [65, 70)             -0.189*    0.113      -0.191*     0.113       -0.191*    0.113    -0.020     0.108   -0.359**    0.183
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [70+)                -0.062*    0.037      -0.062*     0.037       -0.062*    0.037    -0.079     0.056    -0.049     0.056
Number of sons                                       -0.008    0.025       -0.009     0.025        -0.008    0.025   -0.062**    0.030     0.024     0.038
Number of daughters                                  -0.008    0.018       -0.010     0.019        -0.010    0.019    -0.038     0.028     0.013     0.023
Whether all children are migrants?                                         -0.046     0.071        -0.047    0.072     0.002     0.084    -0.105     0.107
Other Family Characteristics
Highest years of education of their children        -0.004     0.005       -0.004    0.005        -0.004     0.005    -0.005     0.007    -0.003     0.005
Household size                                       0.002     0.009        0.003    0.009        0.002      0.009     0.009     0.011    -0.004     0.011
House value                                         -0.000     0.000       -0.000    0.000        -0.000     0.000     0.000     0.001    -0.001     0.001
Land size                                           -0.274     0.541       -0.279    0.543        -0.284     0.546     0.046     0.496   -1.252**    0.596
Lowest quintile of inc per capita                    0.068     0.054        0.069    0.054        0.069      0.054     0.039     0.075    0.119*     0.067
2nd quintile of income per capita                    0.042     0.044        0.042    0.044        0.043      0.044     0.053     0.066     0.075     0.059
3rd quintile of income per capita                   -0.039     0.061       -0.039    0.060        -0.038     0.060    -0.120     0.078     0.038     0.076
4th quintile of income per capita                    0.026     0.047        0.026    0.047        0.026      0.047    -0.004     0.065     0.094     0.070
                                                                       Village Characteristics
Fellow Villagers’ Influences
% villagers enroll in NRPS                         -1.354***   0.369    -1.354***     0.369      -1.353***   0.369   -1.199***   0.333   -1.503***   0.416
# enrollees >60 fail to receive pension benefits      0.006    0.007       0.006      0.007        0.006     0.007      0.005    0.008     0.007     0.010
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension        -0.005    0.059      -0.005      0.059        -0.005    0.059     -0.015    0.059     0.002     0.060
Other Village Characteristics
Village income per capita                            0.001     0.005       0.001     0.005        0.001      0.005     0.008     0.006    -0.002     0.007
Population of the village                            0.000     0.000       0.000     0.000        0.000      0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000     0.000
Time to nearest hospital                            -0.080     0.076      -0.080     0.078        -0.082     0.077    -0.132     0.113    -0.048     0.068
Number of observations                                   5,522                 5,522                   5,522               2,724               2,798
Adjusted R2                                              0.687                 0.687                   0.687               0.688               0.686
   Notes: Follow Table 2.




                                                                                 29
                                                      Table 3C Premium Paid (CNY, for age>=45 & age<60)
                                                      (1)                        (2)                        (3)                 (4)                   (5)
Dependent Variable: Premium (CNY)
                                                  All Sample                 All Sample                 All Sample         Female Sample          Male Sample
                                                                         Individual Characteristics
Age is [50,55)                                34.718***   11.740       34.329*** 11.690           34.469*** 11.728       37.959***    14.536    35.933*    19.288
Age is [55,60)                                48.171***   10.151       47.655*** 10.043           48.115*** 10.110       46.302***    11.530   45.170***   17.269
Male                                           -18.294*   10.974        -18.265*     10.981        -18.337*     10.994
Years of schooling in 2012                      2.179**   1.069          2.171**      1.072         2.200**     1.073       1.646      1.843      2.575*    1.556
Household head                                    1.918   12.697           2.048     12.621           1.705     12.665     -25.317    16.760     26.336*   15.283
Chronic disease                                  -4.273   8.525           -4.451      8.619          -4.731     8.671       6.478     20.263    -20.532*   11.976
ADL impairments                               -25.810**   11.952       -25.240** 11.782           -25.449** 11.686       -42.665***   13.969      -8.711   15.838
Party membership                                -22.955   18.709         -23.102     18.684         -23.001     18.695     -10.837    19.063     -52.124   34.995
Medium trust in government                        8.845   12.890           8.847     12.849           8.957     12.855    24.988**    12.034       0.245   26.766
Strong trust in government                     43.567**   18.700        43.497** 18.686            43.372** 18.650        72.049**    35.715     23.025*   12.645
Medium severity of social security problem      -12.485   11.438         -12.574     11.450         -12.378     11.454     -17.282    11.369     -13.237   19.668
Strong severity of social security problem    -24.169**   11.037       -24.228** 11.033           -23.915** 11.001         -28.457    23.344     -20.988   20.398
Migrant                                         -11.641   13.698         -11.254     13.532         -11.039     13.505     -24.158    15.168      -0.188   17.192
NCMS health insurance enrollment                 36.770   31.690         36.252      31.159          36.127     31.096     -14.961    33.296      85.530   57.262
ORPS pension enrollment                       -72.662**   33.255       -72.470** 33.420           -71.957** 33.538         -47.347    54.781   -109.347*   59.010
                                                                            Family Characteristics
Within-couple arrangements/relationship (reference group=no spouse)
Whether spouse is below 60                       12.383    15.992        13.127     16.311         12.907      16.345      -5.643     25.519    39.105*    19.989
Whether spouse is above 60                        8.950    22.903          9.350    22.923          9.204      22.910     -57.190*    29.878    47.401*    26.672
Intergenerational arrangements/relationship (reference group=no senior parent)
1 senior parent, ages [60, 65)                    2.330    35.523          5.431    35.362                                 7.987      32.058     33.018    51.973
1 senior parent, ages [65, 70)                  -24.207    18.385        -23.493    17.365                                -15.768     43.626   -33.150**   15.266
1 senior parent, ages [70+)                      -9.115    13.817         -8.968    13.739                                -11.340     21.642     -4.197    14.886
1 senior parent, Male, ages [60, 65)                                                              114.661*     62.156
1 senior parent, Female, ages [60, 65)                                                             -21.837     32.576
1 senior parent, Male, ages [65, 70)                                                               -36.598     28.533
1 senior parent, Female, ages [65, 70)                                                             -21.025     17.774
1 senior parent, Male, ages [70+)                                                                   3.788      15.005
1 senior parent, Female, ages [70+)                                                                -13.163     14.163


                                                                                     30
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [60, 65)             45.021*    25.286       43.883*       25.888      43.749*      25.868       9.964    34.316     51.458    56.136
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [65, 70)               2.126    17.995         1.012       18.261        1.136      18.283      -8.537    15.260     8.591     24.834
2+ senior parents, oldest ages [70+)                 10.405    8.019         10.505        8.023       10.447      8.016       12.268    11.854     9.500     15.363
Number of sons                                     -22.197**   9.985       -22.677**      10.257     -22.926**     10.319    -19.336**    9.264    -23.959    15.136
Number of daughters                                   4.297    3.949          3.176        3.804        3.110      3.777       -2.772     4.296     10.287     7.112
Whether all children are migrants?                                          -27.985       25.702      -27.359      25.828     -24.599    30.266    -27.489    26.886
Other Family Characteristics
Highest years of education of their children        2.351*     1.395        2.382*       1.371           2.359*    1.365        2.073     1.526     3.327*     1.972
Household size                                       -1.379    1.950         -1.191      1.971            -1.082   1.970       -1.855     2.931      0.526     2.570
House value                                          -0.170    0.217         -0.177      0.220            -0.178   0.221       -0.621     0.404      0.022     0.309
Land size                                           31.128     47.590       28.493      46.794           30.070    47.302      68.606    70.331    -61.776    141.605
Lowest quintile of inc per capita                    -4.369    29.091        -4.143     28.995            -4.343   29.023       0.547    37.764     -3.593    30.568
2nd quintile of income per capita                    -8.108    24.702        -7.873     24.599            -8.150   24.639     -11.559    25.736     -6.366    32.378
3rd quintile of income per capita                    -5.094    23.481        -5.314     23.657            -5.963   23.706     -13.730    26.128      3.245    31.980
4th quintile of income per capita                   -11.590    24.780       -11.630     24.854           -11.914   24.874     -17.849    23.853     -7.074    40.060
                                                                               Village Characteristics
Fellow Villagers’ Influences
% villagers enroll in NRPS                         191.029**   83.268      191.387**      83.874     191.021**     83.950    268.879**   108.080    119.267   76.904
# enrollees >60 fail to receive pension benefits     -0.888    1.974         -0.867        1.981       -0.847      1.983       -0.116     1.725      -1.992    3.050
Time since the 1st villagers receives pension       26.721*    15.364       26.600*       15.218      26.613*      15.211     12.287     15.627    40.348**   20.322
Other Village Characteristics
Village income per capita                            4.830     3.751          4.847      3.754            4.861     3.745      3.698       3.193    6.538       4.577
Population of the village                           -0.003     0.004         -0.003      0.004           -0.003     0.004      0.002       0.008   -0.009*      0.005
Time to nearest hospital                            27.743     17.784        27.655     17.401           28.142     17.383    17.873      18.535    36.577     24.364
Number of observations                                   5,790                    5,790                       5,790                 2,836                2,954
Adjusted R2                                              0.105                    0.105                       0.105                 0.109                0.089
       Notes: NRPS premium=0 is coded for non-participants. Other notes follow Table 2.




                                                                                          31
                                                                               Appendix
                                   Appendix Figure 1 – Statistics on the Rural Pension System in China (2002-2014)
          Number of Contributors and Beneficiaries (10,000 persons)                      Fund Expenses and Fund Balance (100 million yuan)
                  New Rural Pension Scheme in China, 2002-2014                               New Rural Pension Scheme in China, 2002-2014
 50000                                                                         3000

                                                                               2500
 40000

                                                                               2000
 30000
                                                                               1500
 20000
                                                                               1000

 10000                                                                         500

     0                                                                            0
      2001       2003       2005        2007      2009        2011      2013          2001    2003     2005      2007     2009      2011      2013

                              Contributors         Beneficiaries                                      Fund balance         Fund expenses

Source: China Labor Statistical Yearbooks (2004-2014), Statistical Bulletin on the Social Development of Human Resources and Social Security (2002-2014).
Notes: The NRPS initiated at the end of 2009. The non-zero figures before 2009 represent the unsubsidized ORPS that covered a tiny proportion of rural residents, mainly in
developed regions in China.




                                                                                       32
                      Appendix Figure 2 – Pension Enrollment Rate by Age and Type of Pension
                                                Enrollment Rate by Age and Types of Pension
                               105%
                                                                No pension

                                90%                             ORPS
 Ratio of pension enrollment




                                                                Other pension
                                75%


                                60%


                                45%


                                30%


                                15%


                                  0%
                                       16               26               36                46             56     66   76
                                                                                            Age
                               Notes: Proportion of 80+ age cohort is 1.2%. So they are dropped in the figure.

Notes: Only 1.2 percent of respondents are above age 80, and they are excluded from this figure. Other
pensions mainly include commercial pension and pension subsidy to the oldest of old, and a tiny
proportion of enterprise employee pension or government and public institution employee pension.
Having commercial pensions or pension subsidy to the oldest of old does not preclude people from
enrolling in NRPS. Note that there is no policy regarding potential reduced benefits if one enrolled in
more than one of these programs. While the unsubsidized ORPS is still in operation (but not accepting
new enrollment) and people are not allowed to enroll in NRPS and ORPS at the same time, rational
agents should simply switch from this program to the highly subsidized NRPS with higher return and
lower risk.




                                                                                      33
     Appendix Figure 3 – The Rollout of New Rural Pension Scheme in China




Notes: The NRPS was rolled out at the county level between 2009-2012.




                                                34
   Appendix Table 1 - Summary Statistics of Income per capita by quintile (for
                               those age >45)
                                              N          mean          Sd          min          max
Income per capita (1000 CNY)
Lowest quintile                             1,360        0.082       0.706         -12.2         0.5
2nd quintile                                1,361        1.004       0.314          0.5          1.6
3rd quintile                                1,364        2.713       0.769          1.6          4.2
4th quintile                                1,361        7.343       2.246          4.2         12.0
Highest quintile                            1,357        29.552      30.507        12.0        500.0
Data: CFPS (2012)
Notes: The 1.90 USD international poverty line corresponds to 4,577 CNY per person per year (1 USD
= 6.60 CNY).
Therefore, all individuals in the lowest three income quintiles were below the international poverty line
at the time of survey.




                                                    35
