                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              ENVIRONMENTAL, SOCIAL, AND GOVERNANCE CRITERIA:
                    WHY INVESTORS ARE PAYING ATTENTION

                                         Ravi Jagannathan
                                        Ashwin Ravikumar
                                         Marco Sammon

                                       Working Paper 24063
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24063


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2017




We thank the AQR Research Group, Craig Furfine, Kose John, David Matsa, Lukasz Pomorski,
Todd Pulvino, Prateek Raj for helpful comments. We alone are responsible for any errors and
omissions. The views expressed in the article are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the institutions that the authors belong to. The article has been accepted for
publication in the Journal of Investment Management. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ravi Jagannathan, Ashwin Ravikumar, and Marco Sammon. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Environmental, Social, and Governance Criteria: Why Investors are Paying Attention
Ravi Jagannathan, Ashwin Ravikumar, and Marco Sammon
NBER Working Paper No. 24063
November 2017
JEL No. G0,G12,H23,Q4,Q5

                                         ABSTRACT

We find that money managers could reduce portfolio risk by incorporating Environmental,
Social, and Governance (ESG) criteria into their investment process. ESG-related issues can
cause sudden regulatory changes and shifts in consumer tastes, resulting in large asset price
swings which leave investors limited time to react. By incorporating ESG criteria in their
investment strategy, money managers can tilt their holdings towards firms which are well
prepared to deal with these changes, thereby managing exposure to these rare but potentially large
risks.

Ravi Jagannathan                                Marco Sammon
Kellogg Graduate School of Management           Department of Financce
Northwestern University                         Kellog School
2001 Sheridan Road                              Northwestern University
Leverone/Anderson Complex                       2001 Sheridan Rd, Evanston, IL 60208
Evanston, IL 60208-2001                         mcsammon@gmail.com
and NBER
rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Ashwin Ravikumar
Amherst College
220 South Pleasant Street
Amherst, MA 01002
ashwinra@gmail.com
1 Introduction

In this paper, we examine the consequences of adding Environmental, Social and Gover-
nance (ESG) criteria to money managers’ investment process, focusing on the ”E” part
of ESG to illustrate the issues and mechanisms involved. The rapid growth of the global
economy during the post-World War II era, especially over the past three decades, has
strained the environment.1 Much of this growth can be attributed to the rise of China,
which went from being the seventh-largest economy in 1997 to the second-largest econ-
omy today2 . To put the potential environmental impact into perspective, China now
produces as much steel in a year as the entire world did in 1980.3
       Cumulative environmental stress has not only made environmental crises more severe
and more likely to occur, but has also changed how governments and consumers respond.
Now, when a crisis occurs, it is more likely to incite sudden changes in regulation and
consumer behavior, causing large swings in asset prices over a short period of time.
Assessing such risks, and their impact on long-term returns, requires understanding
how environmental crises, from global climate change to regional pollution, may lead to
political disruptions and subsequent regulatory changes. Further, the concerns that lead
to regulatory changes can contribute to the emergence of alternative technologies that
pose a competitive threat to firms generating negative externalities.
       If changes in regulation, technology and consumer tastes arrive quickly, investors will
have limited time to react. Firms, however, are heterogeneously exposed to these risks.
Even investors who only care about maximizing returns subject to risk budgets can use
   1
       According to Olivier, Janssens-Maenhout, Muntean, and Peters (2016) global emissions of carbon
dioxide increased by nearly 60% from 22.7 billion tonnes in 1990 to 36.2 billion tonnes in 2016. U.S.
emissions increased marginally from 5.0 billion tonnes to 5.2 billion tonnes. In contrast, Chinese emissions
increased from 2.4 billion tonnes to 10.7 billion tonnes. As Daniel, Litterman, and Wagner (2016) point
out, the world has only one atmosphere with limited capacity for absorbing carbon dioxide - and it may
become full.
   2
     We chose 1997, as this was the year Hong Kong was returned to China by the United Kingdom.
Chinese growth expanded rapidly post 2001, when it joined the World Trade Organization.
  3
    Data from Statistical Yearbooks of the World Steel Association




                                                     3
ESG criteria to identify firms which are well prepared to deal with changes in regulations
and consumer preferences, as well as potential threats from new technologies.
       To put our analysis into context, we start with the history of ESG criteria in invest-
ment decisions.4 Next, we provide a brief background on current environmental issues,
focusing on carbon emissions, which may shape regulatory policy through emerging po-
litical movements and coalitions. We then discuss two commodities which have a large
impact on the environment through their consumption and production: coal and palm
oil. For coal, producers and industrial/utility users are subject to stringent environmen-
tal regulations. The unexpected election of Donald Trump led stock market investors to
expect significant deregulation of the coal industry, and coal firms’ shares rose sharply.
For palm oil, which is primarily used to produce consumer goods, we find that voluntary
commitments, presumably due to fear of consumer action, have altered the industry and
regulatory changes may be on the horizon.
       The coal and palm oil examples underscore the importance of considering regulatory
risks that arise from ESG issues, particularly environmental concerns. The specific
indicators that investors use to make decisions about environmental risks are, however,
beyond the scope of this paper.5 While there are ongoing debates about these measures’
limitations, our evidence from the coal sector suggests that environmental regulations
can lead to sudden large changes in stock prices within a short period of time. Further,
the palm oil example illustrates the mechanism through which social preferences for
public goods/bads may influence firms and investors’ behavior. Investors may reduce
portfolio risks by considering how these regulatory risks are reflected in their investment
decisions - whether through new or existing ESG indicators.
   4
       As Garvey, Kazdin, LaFond, Nash, and Safa (2017) observe, firms may disclose more ESG policies
when they are more exposed to controversies. An implication is that a tilting portfolio weights towards
firms that disclose more may not necessarily lead to lower exposure to ESG related risks.
   5
     For example, see Responsible Investment 2016, Government Pension Fund Global, Norges Bank
Investment Management. Social and political risks – components of the S part of ESG – are getting
increased attention in the academic finance literature as well: see Pástor and Veronesi (2013) and Chen,
Lu, and Yang (2017).




                                                   4
2 The Use of ESG Criteria in Asset Management

Assets under management of professional investors whose strategies mention Environ-
mental, Social and Governance (ESG) criteria has grown from $13.3 trillion in 2012 to
$22.9 trillion in 2016.6 This represents 52.6% of the total managed assets in Europe,
21.6% in USA, 37.8% in Canada, 50.6% in Australia/New Zealand, and 0.8% in Asia.
      Although the principal fiduciary responsibility of institutional investors and money
managers is to maximize returns, the call for considering ESG criteria while making
investment decisions is not new. For example, Powers and Gunnemann (1969) “called
on universities and other nonprofit institutions to consider the social consequences of
corporate activities from which these institutions derive an endowment return.”7 In 1972
Yale established its advisory committee on investor responsibility as suggested in Simon,
Powers, and Gunnemann (1972). However, the attention to environmental, social, and
governance issues in investment decisions among professional money managers has only
become widespread since the launch of the Principles for Responsible investment in 2006
by the United Nations.8
      The following factors have contributed to increased investor attention to ESG criteria.
First, firms may produce socially undesirable public bads, even when operating within
the laws of the land, as regulation may take time to catch up with social concerns. For
example, it took time for the public to realize that many cigarette advertisements were
targeted at increasing addiction among the youth, and to enact legislation to regulate
these advertisements9
      In response to these negative externalities, local protests and resistance, alongside
global media shaming, can harm firms’ images and hurt their profits – more easily now
due to the increased use of social media by the general public10 – increasing the risks
  6
      2016 Global Sustainable Investment Review, page 8 & 2012 Global Sustainable Investment Review,
pages 9-10
   7
     Yale Advisory Committee on Investment Responsibility: Committee History and Mission
   8
     https://www.unpri.org/
   9
     See the appendix for a discussion of the tobacco industry and regulation.
  10
     On 25 April 2017, a CNBC news article mentioned that scandals may have knocked the valuation



                                                  5
to investors in those firms. ESG criteria may be useful in identifying firms that are
inattentive to these issues, and whose returns will be compromised when the changes
come.11
    Second, stocks are long lived assets, as most of the value is from cash flows that
occur in the distant future. For example, from 1926-2015, less than 30% of the present
value of the average 10-year investment in the S&P 500 index came from cash dividends
received during the ten years following the investment (see Figure 1). The majority
of the present value came from capital gains realized at the end of the ten year period,
which in turn depended on investors’ expectations about what will happen over the years
that followed.12
    Such long horizon cash flows are difficult to forecast and can be affected by future
changes in regulations and socially acceptable business practices. It is not surprising
that active portfolio managers, who rely on fundamental analysis and take concentrated
positions, tend to invest in well managed firms in good businesses: These firms are better
positioned to adapt to changing regulatory conditions and consumer tastes. Further,
there is growing evidence that all else being equal, the returns on stocks of well governed,
socially responsible firms may contribute less to portfolio risk.13
    Finally, many individual investors have ethical considerations about investments that
are somewhat blind to fiduciary responsibilities14 . Easier access to information has al-
lowed more people to become informed on these issues, and put pressure on money
of Uber from $60 billion to $50 billion. The article mentioned, “Uber has suffered a litany of negative
headlines that would have arguably dinged a publicly traded company....”
  11
     See Meyer and Kirby (2010) for an excellent discussion of the challenges facing corporate leaders in
an ”Age of Transparency”
  12
     Dividends are not the only method firms use for returning cash to investors. For every dollar of
cash dividend paid, firms paid out $0.40 through repurchase of shares net of issuances between 1990-
2002 and $0.95 during 2003-2015. We considered the case of an investor who did not participate in
repurchases/issuances.
  13
     Frazzini, Kabiller, and Pedersen (2013)
  14
     Consistent with the views of such investors, Hart and Zingales (2017) argue that maximizing share-
holder value following the advice of Friedman (1970) is not necessarily the same as maximizing share-
holder welfare, and advocate voting by shareholders on corporate policies.



                                                   6
Figure 1: Consider investing $1 in the S&P 500 index in 10-year rolling, overlapping
windows from 1926-2016. Bars 1-9 represent the share of the total net present value
of the investment, paid as dividends on that year after the initial investment. Bar 10
represents the net present value of dividends paid that year, plus the terminal value of
the portfolio. Dividends are not reinvested. Present value is calculated with respect to
the internal rate of return over the same 10-year period. Data is from Robert Shiller’s
Website.




                                           7
managers and firms to reduce negative externalities. Increasingly, investors are demand-
ing total divestment from fossil fuel interests.15


3 Environmental Issues

3.1 Carbon Emissions

There is a consensus among scientists16 that excessive carbon emissions are a concern to
society because they contribute to global warming. Climate change can threaten human
health, well-being, and economic productivity,17 as well as the world’s biodiversity and
natural ecosystems.18 Bansal, Ochoa, and Kiku (2016) and Daniel, Litterman, and Wag-
ner (2016) argue that there is a strong case for acting soon to reduce carbon emissions.
These threats are also increasingly recognized by the American and global public.19
       As a result, curbing carbon emissions is becoming a political and policy priority
in international spaces such as the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change Conference of Parties. At the Paris climate conference in December 2015, 195
countries adopted a new and unprecedented international climate deal.20 In the agree-
ment, countries made specific commitments to curb emissions.21 Further changes were
made at the sub-national level, where some jurisdictions like California are taking addi-
tional steps to limit emissions from the private sector22 .
  15
       The 2016 annual report on responsible investment of the Government Pension Fund of Norway
mentions risk based divestment from 23 companies in 2016 of which three were in the oil sands sector
and one in the coal fired power generation sector.
  16
     Pachauri, Allen, Barros, Broome, Cramer, Christ, Church, et al. (2014)
  17
     Knox, Hess, Daccache, and Wheeler (2012)
  18
     Bellard, Bertelsmeier, Leadley, Thuiller, and Courchamp (2012).
  19
     Saad and Jones (2016)
  20
     http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris/index en.htm
  21
     There are no penalties for noncompliance, except loss of reputation.
  22
     http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/ab32/ab32.htm




                                                  8
3.2 Carbon Regulation: Present and Future

Although many view the Paris Agreement of 2015 as a milestone achievement for coor-
dinated international climate change mitigation policy, the agreement has had limited
practical effects.23 The broad commitment of limiting warming to 2 degrees Celsius was
non-binding, and countries were left to determine their own contributions to the inter-
national climate change mitigation campaign (so-called Nationally Determined Contri-
butions, or NDCs).
      There are divergent views regarding the importance of the Paris agreement for invest-
ment managers. Some institutional investors and fund managers believe that interna-
tional climate policy is non-threatening to profits, assuring their investors that existing
policies will not generate stranded assets or compromised revenue streams.24
      Others take the view that while international climate policy has yet to threaten
firm profitability, impending regulations will impair firms’ cash flows. Environmental
regulations surrounding pollution have been bolstered by the political energy of the
climate movement, both in the United States and elsewhere. For example, California
has passed stricter emissions regulations, supported by a broad political coalition for
environmental health and justice.25 These types of regulations are likely to emerge in
other sub-national jurisdictions in the United States, even as the federal government
seeks to roll back environmental regulations.


3.3 Implications for Firms and Investors

While carbon emissions caps have yet to seriously alter firms’ operations, it is possible
that growing emissions could cause permanent and irreversible environmental damage
resulting in serious harm to living conditions of households around the world. This,
and other factors discussed below, may motivate firms and investors to limit carbon
emissions.
 23
    Nordhaus and Lovering (2016)
 24
    London (2016)
 25
    London (2016).




                                              9
      First, many consumers feel an ethical obligation to shift production towards lower
emissions, as the negative externalities disproportionately affect the already poor and
marginalized.26 Given increased awareness of these issues, and desire by consumers for
ethically produced goods, it makes sense for firms to change their business practices.
Second, public concern over climate change is growing, with recent events underscoring
the magnitude of the problem. For example, global temperature records are broken with
greater frequency than ever before27 , and February 2016 was by far the warmest month
on record, generating concern among scientists at NASA and NOAA.28 As communities
around the world feel the effects of climate change, the likelihood of future policies to cap
private sector emissions increases. Studies have shown that perceptions of risk motivate
policy action, both at the local level and national levels29 , although at the national level,
many factors interact in complex ways to shape climate change mitigation policy30 . As
environmental regulations proliferate, firms and investors that explore strategies to re-
duce carbon emissions, and position themselves effectively to take advantage of emerging
and increasingly robust carbon markets, could be more competitive and ultimately more
likely to succeed.
      There is also the possibility that, beyond regulation, political movements can shift
markets, and even strand assets, as citizens organize to penalize firms they perceive as
inattentive to their values. For example, in Boulder, Colorado, citizens voted in 2011 to
authorize a municipal takeover of Xcel Energy’s generating capacity and transmission
infrastructure to set up a municipal utility, exercising their power of eminent domain.
While at time of writing, the legal battle over the cost of this infrastructure is still on-
going, the event marked a new precedent: political movements motivated by the threat
of global climate change can use the power of the State to strip private entities of their
productive assets if the public does not believe that private firms are sufficiently sustain-
 26
    Wheeler and Von Braun (2013), and Mendelsohn, Dinar, and Williams (2006)
 27
    Tollefson (2016), and Pachauri, Allen, Barros, Broome, Cramer, Christ, Church, et al. (2014).
 28
    CBS News March 17, 2016
 29
    Dilling, Pizzi, Berggren, Ravikumar, and Andersson (2017).
 30
    Lachapelle and Paterson (2013).




                                                 10
able. As the perceived impacts of climate change increase over time, public discontent
may lead to more frequent and intense political action that constraints firms. Further,
the likelihood that regulations these movements demand are implemented may increase.
These relatively unpredictable political events challenge investors’ assumptions about
stable property rights, and can introduce truly stranded assets even without interna-
tional climate policy.
      There is some international support for this view. In the UK and Germany, policy-
makers have promised to shut down coal plants in the near future, with Britain aiming
to be coal-free by 2025. While private firms operating coal plants have historically
succeeded in demanding compensation for these shutdowns31 , it is conceivable that future
payouts will be lower. Firms tied entirely to these fuel sources could lose value quickly as
new policies emerge and long term contracts expire. Carbon Tracker32 calculated that
if the commitments of the Paris agreement are kept, billions of dollars of assets in the
coal sector will be stranded.


4 The Case of Two Commodities

In this section we discuss recent developments from two emblematic commodity sectors:
coal and oil palm. These two sectors have strong interests in activities that come into
conflict with environmental sustainability, and as such have been at the forefront of
managing and anticipating regulations.


4.1 Coal

Both regulation and deregulation can come fast, and if unanticipated, can lead to sudden
moves in asset prices. In this section, we explore the effect of the 2016 US presidential
election on coal firms.
      One of Donald Trump’s campaign promises was to end the “war on coal.” According
to President Trump’s twitter,“Obama’s war on coal is killing American jobs, making
 31
      http://energypost.eu/realistic-uk-governments-promise-phase-coal/
 32
      Carbon Tracker (2013), Unburnable Carbon: Wasted Capital and Stranded Assets.


                                                11
us more energy dependent on our enemies & creating a great business disadvantage.”
Further, his America First Energy Plan33 discusses his commitment to “reviving Amer-
ica’s coal industry.” If Donald Trump’s win was unanticipated, we would expect coal
producers’ stocks to rise in response, as investors expect higher profits in a deregulated
environment.
       Based on political betting markets34 and sophisticated prediction algorithms35 , Trump
was an unlikely winner. Consistent with this, there was a large swing in coal stock prices
on November 9, 2016, suggesting Trump’s proposed regulatory changes were not already
incorporated into asset prices. Table 1 shows the firm-level results.
       Almost all the coal firms greatly outperformed the market, and there are reasonable
explanations for the weaker performances: (1) NACCO is not a pure coal firm - for
example, it also owns Hamilton Beach appliances. It was included in this list because
it is still the 8th largest coal producer in the US. (2) Yanzhou Coal Mining Co Ltd
is majority owned by Yankuang Group, a Chinese state-owned enterprise, with no US
operations. (3) Natural Resource Partners is a diversified mining company (4) Suncoke is
not a coal mining firm, but a substantial part of its revenue comes from its coal logistics
business. Notably, Peabody Energy, the largest US coal producer, is omitted from this
list because it declared bankruptcy in April, 2016.
       Consistent with his campaign promises, Trump’s administration has already rolled
back regulation on coal: He signed resolutions disapproving the Stream Protection Rule
under the Congressional Review Act;36 He also signed an Executive Order regarding
the “waters of the US” rule;37 Scott Pruitt, who is known for suing the EPA over the
Clean Power Plan, was made Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Further, Trump’s budget plan proposes a 31% cut to the EPA’s funding, which could
further loosen restrictions on the coal industry.
  33
     Available at: https://www.whitehouse.gov/america-first-energy
  34
     As of November 8, 2016, predictwise had his chances of winning at 7%, predictit at 22%
  35
     FiveThirtyEight assigned a 29% probability to a Trump win.
  36
     https://www.congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-joint-resolution/38/text
  37
     https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/02/28/presidential-executive-order-restoring-
rule-law-federalism-and-economic


                                                 12
Table 1: Excess returns of publicly traded coal firms on the day after the 2016 US
Presidential Election. This includes all firms in CRSP data with SIC codes 1200-1299
and/or NAICS codes 212111, 212112, 213113. Excess returns are calculated using the
daily risk-free rate from Ken French.

                                             Firm                               11/9/2016 Return

                      Westmoreland Resource Partners LP                                  18.96%
                            Suncoke Energy Partners LP                                   6.93%
                               CNX Coal Resources LP                                     11.80%
                                       Arch Coal Inc                                     10.44%
                                NACCO Industries Inc                                     2.79%
                                Westmoreland Coal Co                                     18.59%
                           Yanzhou Coal Mining Co Ltd                                    1.73%
                                 CONSOL Energy Inc                                       9.02%
                             Alliance Resource Partners                                  17.21%
                         Hongli Clean Energy Tech Corp                                   12.81%
                          Natural Resource Partners LP                                   5.41%
                              Alliance Holdings GP LP                                    11.42%
                                Cloud Peak Energy Inc                                    13.35%

                                     Average Return:                                     10.80%
                                      Market Return:                                     1.46%
 This list does not include every publicly traded coal-producing firm - for example, Hallador Energy (HNRG) is assigned a SIC
code “9999” even though most of their revenue is from coal sales. This classification is likely the result of HNRG being a holding
          company with one coal subsidiary, one oil and gas exploration subsidiary, and one gas exploration subsidiary




                                                               13
       Given all these changes, one would expect coal firms to have performed strongly since
Trump took office. Table 2 shows the cumulative returns for coal firms from November
2016 - March 2017. Almost all of them underperformed the market, most by substantial
amounts.
       One explanation for coal’s poor performance, despite a favorable regulatory environ-
ment, is that the concerns which led to earlier coal regulation, also provided the neces-
sary incentives for developing more environmentally friendly alternatives. It is clear now
that regulation alone was not to blame for the coal industry’s general decline over the
past several years. In 2015, Goldman Sachs was already calling peak coal. According to
Bloomberg, coal is being out-competed on price by natural gas, which has expanded with
the development of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling38 . Finally, countries like
China are shutting down coal-fired electricity plants in response to the continued smog
and toxic soil crises, affecting global demand for coal. This latter point underscores that
even if some policies stand to deregulate environmentally damaging sectors in the short
term, the longer term global trend is toward increased regulation over time.
       For coal, Trump’s election led to expectations of deregulation. Similarly large swings
can occur in response to expectations of increased regulation. For example, more strin-
gent health care regulation was expected following Bill Clinton’s election as US President
on November 3, 1991. Consistent with this, pharmaceutical stocks declined sharply from
October 30, 1992 to February 26, 1993: An equally weighted portfolio of Bristol Myers
Squibb, Pfizer, Merck & Co, and Eli Lilly & Co lost 15.2% while the S&P 500 index
gained 5.35%.
       Even when governments roll back sector-specific regulations, markets may not re-
spond if there are broader trends that make those sectors risky. Coal’s performance
after Trump’s election suggests that investors may reduce portfolio risk by considering
the long-term, systemic effects of environmental regulation.
  38
       Even with deregulation, the lost coal mining jobs may not return. To reduce costs and increase
safety, coal mines have increasingly switched to self-driving trucks and drills.




                                                    14
Table 2: Cumulative excess returns of publicly traded coal firms from November 2016
- March 2017. This includes all firms in CRSP data with SIC codes 1200-1299 and/or
NAICS codes 212111, 212112, 213113. Excess returns are calculated using the monthly
risk-free rate from Ken French. Yanzhou Coal Mining Co Ltd went off exchange in
February 17, 2017, so the return is calculated using the last available price.

                                                           11/16-3/17
                               Firm                    Cumulative Return

              Westmoreland Resource Partners LP              -21.31%
                  Suncoke Energy Partners LP                 -22.47%
                     CNX Coal Resources LP                   -10.55%
                          Arch Coal Inc                      -11.65%
                      NACCO Industries Inc                   -26.53%
                     Westmoreland Coal Co                    -16.17%
                  Yanzhou Coal Mining Co Ltd                 15.00%
                        Consol Energy Inc                    -18.46%
                   Alliance Resource Partners                 -8.65%
                 Hongli Clean Energy Tech Corp               -50.13%
                  Natural Resource Partners LP                9.21%
                    Alliance Holdings GP LP                   -5.28%
                     Cloud Peak Energy Inc                   -20.21%

                             Average                         -14.40%
                    Market over Same Period                  12.12%




                                            15
4.2 Palm Oil

The unpredictable regulatory changes that climate crises might provoke can increase
risks for investors and firms. Even without impending regulations, many private firms
voluntarily reduced emissions and improved environmental practices, partly in anticipa-
tion of future regulations, and partly as a matter of corporate social responsibility in
response to consumer pressure. Such firms may offer a better risk return profile to long
term investors, especially active portfolio managers with concentrated holdings. To illus-
trate, we examine the case of palm oil in Indonesia, and its connection to deforestation
and global climate change.
      Globally, between 10% and 30% of carbon emissions arise from deforestation and
land use change, primarily in the tropics, where dense forests and organic soils store
tremendous amounts of carbon in woody biomass.39 When forests are cut, and usually
burned, the majority of the carbon stored there is released into the atmosphere, exac-
erbating global warming, and removing the forests’ crucial ability to recapture carbon
from atmospheric carbon dioxide. The majority of such deforestation is caused by the
expansion of agriculture.
      Environmental groups and social justice advocates have set their sights on oil palm
(Note: “oil palm” refers to the crop, while “palm oil” refers to the oil produced from
the crop) in particular for its role in driving deforestation and climate change. Palm oil
is a vegetable oil with many uses, ranging from cosmetics to foods. Indonesia became
the leading producer of palm oil in 2006, overtaking Malaysia, producing 34 million tons
of palm oil in 2016.40 While it is difficult to know with certainty the amount of land
dedicated to oil palm production, the latest estimates suggest that there are at least 8
million hectares in production.41
      Despite its proliferation, oil palm plantations have caused tremendous deforestation
in Indonesia, particularly in the carbon-rich peat forests of Kalimantan (Indonesian
 39
    Tubiello, Salvatore, Ferrara, House, Federici, Rossi, Biancalani, Condor Golec, et al. (2015)
 40
    Indonesia-Investments, February 2, 2017
 41
     USDA Foreign Agricultural Service, June 26, 2013




                                                  16
Borneo) and in Sumatra. Experts estimate that millions of hectares of peatlands have
been deforested in the region, and that much, but not all, of this cleared peatland is
now dedicated to palm oil production.42 Cleared peatlands have resulted in roughly
500 million Mg of carbon dioxide emissions from the loss of above ground biomass,
in addition to millions of Mg of annual emissions from the oxidation of subterranean
peat.43 Citizens, lobbyists, and experts are concerned about deforestation associated
with oil palm for multiple reasons, all of which are likely to lead to more stringent
regulations.
      First, the emissions caused by deforestation are high, and the international com-
munity is invested in reducing deforestation in Indonesia as part of a broader climate
change mitigation strategy. An important development in curtailing deforestation in
Indonesia was the Norway-Indonesia memorandum of understanding signed in 2011.44
The Norwegian government put $1 billion on the table as an incentive for Indonesia
to halt deforestation in pristine forests, including the carbon-dense peatlands. Norway
encouraged Indonesia to adopt a moratorium on new forestry and oil palm concessions
as part of this arrangement, although results have been mixed.45
      Second, there are regional effects associated with deforestation for oil palm trees.
Peat soils in Kalimantan contain dense stores of organic matter up to 12 meters below
the surface.46 Fires on the surface of the land, sometimes caused by smallholders, but
increasingly near oil palm plantations, can spread underground, where they cannot be
controlled. These fires have acute regional effects: smoke and haze blanketed Southeast
Asia in 2015 and 2016, halting air traffic and stalling economic activity.47 Regional
governments, including Singapore and Malaysia, are actively encouraging Indonesia to
slow these fires, which are associated with oil palm plantations.48

 42
    Edwards, Koh, and Laurance (2012)
 43
    ibid
 44
    ibid
 45
    ibid
 46
    Warren, Hergoualc’h, Kauffman, Murdiyarso, and Kolka (2017)
 47
    Krol, Nechita, Van Leeuwen, Basu, Coheur, and Clerbaux (2016)
 48
    Tacconi (2016)


                                              17
Figure 2: Reproduced with permission from the Global Forest Watch and the Global Fire
Emissions Database. See the World Resources Institute website for more information.




      According to data from the World Fire Emission Database of the World Resources
Institute, Indonesian fires generated emissions during September and October 2015 that
exceeded the average daily emission from all US economic activity (see Figure 2).
      As the Indonesian government has struggled to address unchecked oil palm prolifer-
ation for a variety of reasons,49 the private sector has taken matters into its own hands.
Companies like Unilever, Nestle, and McDonald’s have committed to eliminating de-
forestation from their commodity chains, and pledged to cease buying palm oil from
 49
      Myers, Larson, and Ravikumar (2016)




                                            18
producers who cause deforestation. These firms buy a significant share of the world’s
palm oil – for example, Unilever alone buys 3% of global production.50 Unilever re-
sponded to these issues, pledging to eliminate net deforestation from all of its value
chains, including oil palm, by 202051 .
       While the success of Unilever’s initiatives in reducing deforestation is not yet known,
their commitment - and their continued success as a firm - showcases the potential
synergies between sustainable production, long run risks, and profitability.52
       Corporate pledges have teeth. According to a recent report, the unwillingness of
major global palm oil buyers to purchase unsustainable palm oil, based on standards set
by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), has stranded 6.1 million hectares,
or 10 million football fields, of oil palm assets in Indonesia.53 . Not only are foreign
governments like Norway and firms like Unilever urging action, but growing coalitions
within Indonesia are pressing for regulatory changes. Such changes are required as India,
China, Pakistan, Egypt, Bangladesh and Myanmar together account for nearly half of
the palm oil imports, and consumers in those countries are much more sensitive to price
than environmental issues. The coalescence of these local and global movements has
already had unprecedented impacts on land use policy in Indonesia, and will likely have
similar effects across the global South.
       The indigenous peoples’ (adat) movement has long lobbied for customary lands held
by them to be recognized formally by the government. While Indonesia’s constitution
  50
     Alonso-Fradejas, Liu, Salerno, and Xu (2016)
  51
     https://www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/transformational-change/eliminating-deforestation/
  52
     Unilever CEO Paul Polman discussed these at the UN COP 20 in Lima in 2014. As of 2017, 36%
of its palm oil is certified by Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil, and Unilever has stated its refusal to
buy additional palm oil from producers who are in violation of its Sustainable Living Plan, even though
it may cost more. See Levin, Ng, Fortes, Garcia, Lacey, and Grubba (2012) for a rigorous assessment
of the costs and benefits of sustainable palm oil production. This includes producers who generate net
deforestation, grow oil palm on peatlands, or that the company deems to exploit local people. See Morel,
Friedman, Tulloch, and Caldecott (2016)
  53
     https://seekingalpha.com/article/4046193-indonesian-palm-oils-stranded-assets-10-million-football-
fields




                                                   19
ostensibly recognizes indigenous rights, there had been no policies enacted to formally
title communities on the basis of customary usage until 2012. The Constitutional Court
of Indonesia, likely responding to growing indigenous discontent alongside international
pressure, ruled that the government must recognize customary lands. A side effect of
this policy was to move more land off the table for environmentally destructive oil palm
production.54
      As mounting evidence underscores the gravity of the global climate crisis, a growing
number of firms are acting proactively to manage risks from regulatory exposure. This
is not limited to firms in the energy sector. From the technology sector, to clothing,
to agriculture, firms are making voluntary commitments to sustainable and socially
responsible practices in their supply chains. Examples include: Apple, which recently
reported that all current products’ supply chains have participated in an independent
third-party conflict minerals audit program;55 Patagonia, which responded to pressure
from consumers by pledging to eliminate toxic materials from its inventory following
a damaging report from Greenpeace; and large firms like Tesco and H&M which have
committed to 100% sustainable cotton by 2025.56 .


5 Conclusion

While the principal fiduciary responsibility of professional money managers is to maxi-
mize returns, they may reduce portfolio risks by considering their clients’ Environmental,
Social, and Governance (ESG) concerns. While it may appear that ESG considerations
come at the expense of higher returns, we argue otherwise. Even those who care only
about risks and returns may reduce exposure to systematic risks by incorporating ESG
criteria into their investment process.
      Given their increased severity and frequency, environmental crises are more likely
to cause sudden changes in regulations, technology and consumer tastes. These rapid
 54
    Myers, Larson, and Ravikumar (2016)
 55
    Form SD filed on 5/5/2017 filed with the SEC.
 56
     Thirteen firms set 2025 deadline to source 100 percent sustainable cotton



                                                 20
changes can cause large swings in asset prices, leaving investors with limited ability to
react. By incorporating ESG criteria in their investment strategy, portfolio managers
can proactively select firms which are well prepared to deal with these changes, and
protect themselves from downside risk.
       It is difficult to measure whether information available in ESG criteria are already
priced in by the market, as reliable firm-level data on ESG measures over sufficiently
long periods of time are not publicly available. Investors who believe in informationally
efficient markets focus on allocation across asset classes to construct well diversified
portfolios. ESG-related risks, however, can be rare, large, and non-diversifiable.57 ESG
criteria may help such investors assess exposure to these risks better than a purely
statistical model which relies on historical data. Investors who believe that the market
can be inefficent at times, and take concentrated positions to reflect their views58 may
also reduce risks by considering ESG criteria.
       Incorporating ESG criteria into quantitative investment models requires additional
work and creation of reporting standards.59 Research has already started in this di-
rection.60 Turning a qualitative procedure, such as evaluating risk of environmental
regulation, into a quantitative procedure, however, will take time: Warren Buffett was
investing for over 50 years before researchers have come up with a way to replicate his
strategy using quantitative methods.61


  57
     See Hamilton (1996) for a discussion of the relation between oil prices and recessions.
  58
     See Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994), Shleifer (2000), and Piotroski (2000).
  59
     The Sustainability Accounting Standards Board is working towards creating reporting standards.
Measurement issues, however, are still first-order. For example, over 70% of financial firms that went
bankrupt in the 07-08 crisis, including those who were making many “low-doc” loans, had above average
governance scores according to MSCI. Further, as supply chains continue to move overseas, it may
become more difficult to measure a firm’s true environmental impact.
  60
     For example, Dunn, Fitzgibbons, and Pomorski (2017) find that ESG criteria have predictive power
for future realized risk, even conditioning on a sophisticated statistical model and well-known risk factors.
  61
     Frazzini, Kabiller, and Pedersen (2013) find that Berkshire Hathaway’s alpha with respect to a 4-
factor model is insignificant after adding low risk and high quality factors from Frazzini and Pedersen
(2014) and Asness, Frazzini, and Pedersen (2014).


                                                     21
References

Alonso-Fradejas, A., J. Liu, T. Salerno, and Y. Xu (2016): “Inquiring into the
  political economy of oil palm as a global flex crop,” The Journal of Peasant Studies,
  43(1), 141–165.

Asness, C. S., A. Frazzini, and L. H. Pedersen (2014): “Quality minus junk,” .

Bansal, R., M. Ochoa, and D. Kiku (2016): “Climate change and growth risks,”
  Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bellard, C., C. Bertelsmeier, P. Leadley, W. Thuiller, and F. Courchamp
  (2012): “Impacts of climate change on the future of biodiversity,” Ecology letters,
  15(4), 365–377.

Chen, Z., A. Y. Lu, and Z. Yang (2017): “Growing Pains: International Instability
  and Equity Market Returns,” Financial Management, 46(1), 59–87.

Daniel, K. D., R. B. Litterman, and G. Wagner (2016): “Applying asset pricing
  theory to calibrate the price of climate risk,” Discussion paper, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Dilling, L., E. Pizzi, J. Berggren, A. Ravikumar, and K. Andersson (2017):
  “Drivers of adaptation: Responses to weather-and climate-related hazards in 60 local
  governments in the Intermountain Western US,” Environment and Planning A, p.
  0308518X16688686.

Dunn, J., S. Fitzgibbons, and L. Pomorski (2017): “Assessing Risk Through Envi-
  ronmental, Social and Governance Exposures,” Journal of Investment Management.

Edwards, D. P., L. P. Koh, and W. F. Laurance (2012): “Indonesia’s REDD+
  pact: Saving imperilled forests or business as usual?,” Biological Conservation, 151(1),
  41–44.




                                           22
Frazzini, A., D. Kabiller, and L. H. Pedersen (2013): “Buffett’s alpha,” Discus-
  sion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Frazzini, A., and L. H. Pedersen (2014): “Betting against beta,” Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics, 111(1), 1–25.

Friedman, M. (1970): “The Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase Its Profits,”
  New York Times, September.

Garvey, G. T., J. Kazdin, R. LaFond, J. Nash, and H. Safa (2017): “A Pitfall
  in Ethical Investing: ESG Disclosures Reflect Vulnerabilities, not Virtues,” Journal
  of Investment Management, 15(2), 51–64.

Hamilton, J. D. (1996): “This is what happened to the oil price-macroeconomy rela-
  tionship,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 38(2), 215–220.

Hart, O., and L. Zingales (2017): “Companies Should Maximize Shareholder Welfare
  Not Market Value,” Forthcoming Journal of Law, Finance, and Accounting.

Knox, J., T. Hess, A. Daccache, and T. Wheeler (2012): “Climate change im-
  pacts on crop productivity in Africa and South Asia,” Environmental Research Letters,
  7(3), 034032.

Krol, M., N. Nechita, T. Van Leeuwen, S. Basu, P.-F. Coheur, and C. Cler-
  baux (2016): “Carbon Emissions from the 2015 Indonesian fires,” in Living Planet
  Symposium 2016.

Lachapelle, E., and M. Paterson (2013): “Drivers of national climate policy,”
  Climate policy, 13(5), 547–571.

Lakonishok, J., A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1994): “Contrarian investment,
  extrapolation, and risk,” The journal of finance, 49(5), 1541–1578.

Levin, J., G. Ng, D. Fortes, S. Garcia, S. Lacey, and D. Grubba (2012): “Prof-
  itability and sustainability in palm oil production,” Analysis of Incremental Financial
  Costs and Benefits of RSPO Compliance. WWF-US, FMO, CDC.

                                           23
London, J. K. (2016): “Environmental Justice and Regional Political Ecology converge
  in the other California,” Journal of Political Ecology, 23(1), 147–158.

Mendelsohn, R., A. Dinar, and L. Williams (2006): “The distributional impact
  of climate change on rich and poor countries,” Environment and Development Eco-
  nomics, 11(2), 159–178.

Merton, R. C. (1980): “On estimating the expected return on the market: An ex-
  ploratory investigation,” Journal of financial economics, 8(4), 323–361.

Meyer, C., and J. Kirby (2010): “Leadership in the Age of Transparency,” Harvard
  Business Review, 88(4), 38–46.

Morel, A., R. Friedman, D. J. Tulloch, and B. Caldecott (2016): “Stranded
  Assets in Palm Oil Production: A Case Study of Indonesia,” .

Myers, R., A. Larson, and A. Ravikumar (2016): “Analyzing multilevel governance
  in Indonesia: lessons for REDD+ through land use change and benefit sharing in
  Central and West Kalimantan, Indonesia,” CIFOR Occasional Paper.

Nordhaus, T., and J. Lovering (2016): “Does Climate Policy Matter?—Evaluating
  the Efficacy of Emissions Caps and Targets Around The World,” The Breakthrough
  Institute, 28.

Olivier, J. G., G. Janssens-Maenhout, M. Muntean, and J. A. Peters (2016):
  “Trends in Global CO2 Emissions 2016 Report,” SSRN Working Paper.

Pachauri, R. K., M. R. Allen, V. R. Barros, J. Broome, W. Cramer,
  R. Christ, J. A. Church, et al. (2014): Climate change 2014: synthesis re-
  port. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the fifth assessment report of
  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. IPCC.

Pástor, L., and P. Veronesi (2013): “Political uncertainty and risk premia,” Journal
  of Financial Economics, 110(3), 520–545.


                                           24
Piotroski, J. D. (2000): “Value investing: The use of historical financial statement
  information to separate winners from losers,” Journal of Accounting Research, pp.
  1–41.

Powers, C. W., and J. P. Gunnemann (1969): “Institutions, Investments and In-
  tegrity,” The Christian Century January, 29, 144–148.

Saad, L., and J. M. Jones (2016): “U.S. Concern About Global Warming at Eight-
  Year High,” Gallup Poll, Mar 2-6.

Shleifer, A. (2000): Inefficient markets: An introduction to behavioural finance. OUP
  Oxford.

Simon, J. G., C. W. Powers, and J. P. Gunnemann (1972): “The ethical investor:
  Universities and corporate responsibility,” .

Tacconi, L. (2016): “Preventing fires and haze in Southeast Asia,” Nature Climate
  Change, 6(7), 640–643.

Tollefson, J. (2016): “2015 breaks heat record: Pacific Ocean warming helped to
  make last year the hottest in history,” Nature, 529(7587), 450–451.

Tubiello, F. N., M. Salvatore, A. F. Ferrara, J. House, S. Federici, S. Rossi,
  R. Biancalani, R. D. Condor Golec, et al. (2015): “The contribution of agri-
  culture, forestry and other land use activities to global warming, 1990–2012,” Global
  change biology, 21(7), 2655–2660.

Warren, M., K. Hergoualc’h, J. B. Kauffman, D. Murdiyarso, and R. Kolka
  (2017): “An appraisal of Indonesia’s immense peat carbon stock using national peat-
  land maps: uncertainties and potential losses from conversion,” Carbon balance and
  management, 12(1), 12.

Wheeler, T., and J. Von Braun (2013): “Climate change impacts on global food
  security,” Science, 341(6145), 508–513.


                                            25
Appendix
Tobacco and Regulation
      Although tobacco regulation increased significantly over the past 40 years, tobacco
stocks have outperformed the S&P 500 index each decade, except the 1990’s (see Figure
3). Poor performance in the 90’s may be due to several regulations and lawsuits: (1)
1993 laws to increase the minimum smoking age and increase enforcement of laws against
selling tobacco to minors (2) FDA rule of 1996 to regulate tobacco.            62   (3) 1998 Master
Settlement, as well as individual state settlements, which forced tobacco companies to
make large payments in perpetuity to recover Medicaid costs. The Master Settlement
also stopped certain tobacco advertisements, such as those targeted at children.
      One explanation for tobacco firms’ high returns after the 90’s is that they earn a risk
premium for exposure to future regulation/lawsuits, which would impair returns as they
did in the 90’s. As argued by Merton (1980), however, a long time series is required to
accurately measure average returns or jump risk. As reliable ESG data does not have a
long history, we leave future research to determine whether or not this type of regulation
risk earns a premium in equilibrium.




 62
      The Supreme Court overturned this in 2000, ruling that the FDA could not regulate tobacco.


                                                  26
Figure 3: Value of $1 invested at the start of each decade, reinvesting all dividends.
The smoke industry, based on the 48 industry portfolios on Ken French’s website, is
all firms with SIC codes between 2100 and 2199, which includes the following Industry
Groups: Cigarettes, Cigars, Chewing Tobacco/Snuff and Tobacco Stemming/Redrying.
The smoke portfolio is a value-weighted average of all firms in the smoke industry. S&P
500 returns are from CRSP. Smoke industry returns are from Ken French’s website.




                                          27
