NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

NEW EVIDENCE OF GENERATIONAL PROGRESS FOR MEXICAN AMERICANS
Brian Duncan
Jeffrey Grogger
Ana Sofia Leon
Stephen J. Trejo
Working Paper 24067
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24067

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We thank the Russell Sage Foundation for support and conference and seminar participants at the
ZEW Workshop on the Assimilation and Integration of Immigrants, the Population Association
of America, the Western Economic Association, the Society of Labor Economists, the Southern
Economic Association, and ITAM University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Brian Duncan, Jeffrey Grogger, Ana Sofia Leon, and Stephen J. Trejo. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

New Evidence of Generational Progress for Mexican Americans
Brian Duncan, Jeffrey Grogger, Ana Sofia Leon, and Stephen J. Trejo
NBER Working Paper No. 24067
November 2017
JEL No. J61,J62
ABSTRACT
U.S.-born Mexican Americans suffer a large schooling deficit relative to other Americans, and
standard data sources suggest that this deficit does not shrink between the 2nd and later
generations. Standard data sources lack information on grandparents’ countries of birth,
however, which creates potentially serious issues for tracking the progress of later-generation
Mexican Americans. Exploiting unique NLSY97 data that address these measurement issues, we
find substantial educational progress between the 2nd and 3rd generations for a recent cohort of
Mexican Americans. Such progress is obscured when we instead mimic the limitations inherent
in standard data sources.
Brian Duncan
Department of Economics
University of Colorado
Campus Box 181
Denver, CO 80217-3364
brian.duncan@ucdenver.edu
Jeffrey Grogger
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
1155 E. 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jgrogger@uchicago.edu

Ana Sofia Leon
Instituto Politicas Publicas
Universidad Diego Portales
asleon.uchicago@gmail.com
Stephen J. Trejo
Department of Economics
University of Texas at Austin
2225 Speedway Stop C3100
Austin, TX 78712
and NBER
trejo@austin.utexas.edu

I. Introduction
Understanding the progress that takes place across immigrant generations is crucial for
assessing the long-term impact of immigration on society. In many respects, 2nd-generation
immigrants—the U.S.-born children of foreign-born migrants to the United States—show signs
of rapid integration. On average, the 2nd generation as a whole and 2nd-generation members from
most contemporary national origin groups meet or exceed the schooling level of the typical
American (Duncan and Trejo 2018). Not conforming to this pattern, however, are Mexican
Americans, who because of historical continuity and demographic size constitute arguably the
most significant U.S. immigrant flow.
Panel A of Table 1 illustrates the seemingly persistent educational disadvantage of
Mexican Americans. These calculations of average years of schooling for men use 2003-2016
data from the Current Population Survey (CPS).1 Mexican Americans display impressive growth
in educational attainment between the 1st generation (9.5 years) and the 2nd generation (12.7
years), but no further improvement is evident for the 3rd+ generation (the grandchildren and later
descendants of Mexican immigrants). As a result, even when the comparisons are confined to
individuals whose families have lived in the United States for at least a couple of generations
(i.e., the 3rd+-generation), Mexican Americans possess schooling deficits of more than a year
relative to non-Hispanic whites and almost one-third of a year relative to African Americans.
Considering the low levels of schooling, English proficiency, and other types of human
capital brought to the United States by the typical Mexican immigrant, it is not surprising that
their U.S.-born children do not eliminate all of these enormous socioeconomic deficits in a single
generation (Perlmann 2005; Smith 2006). Of potentially greater concern, however, is the
1
See the note to Table 1 and Duncan and Trejo (2018) for further details about the data and calculations. Patterns for
women are very similar.

2
evidence that progress seems to stall after the 2nd generation for Mexican Americans.2 Certainly,
Mexican immigrants to the United States confront obstacles that might account for slowed or
stalled progress among later generations (Portes and Rumbaut 2001), including discrimination
(Telles and Ortiz 2008) and widespread undocumented status (Bean et al. 2011).
In addition, Huntington (2004) points to several other factors that could slow the pace of
intergenerational integration by Hispanics today as compared to Europeans in the past. These
factors include the large scale of current immigration flows from Mexico and other Spanishspeaking countries, the substantial (though lessening) geographic concentration of these flows
within the United States, and the fact that such flows have remained sizeable over a much longer
period of time than did the influx from any particular European country. In addition, the close
proximity of Mexico to the United States facilitates return and repeat migration. These unique
features of Hispanic immigration might foster the growth of ethnic enclaves in the United States
where immigrants and their descendants could, if they so choose, live and work without being
forced to learn English or to Americanize in other important ways.3 Because of these and other
concerns, Mexican Americans’ prospects for future upward mobility are subject to much recent
debate.4
In evaluating such theoretical arguments for slower integration by Mexican Americans,
however, it is important to consider several potentially serious limitations of the existing
Table 1 suggests educational stagnation beyond the 2nd generation for Mexican Americans, and the same pattern has
been observed for earnings. Studies reporting limited progress in education and/or earnings after the 2nd generation for Mexican
Americans include Trejo (1997, 2003), Fry and Lowell (2002), Farley and Alba( 2002), Grogger and Trejo (2002), Livingston
and Kahn (2002), Duncan, Hotz, and Trejo (2006), Blau and Kahn (2007), Telles and Ortiz (2008), and Duncan and Trejo (2018).
2

3
Contrary to Huntington’s thesis, however, available evidence suggests rapid linguistic assimilation for the U.S.-born
descendants of contemporary immigrant groups (Alba et al. 2002). This holds even for Hispanics who live in areas with high
concentrations of Spanish-speaking immigrants. In Southern California, for example, 96 percent of 3rd-generation Mexican
Americans prefer to speak English rather than Spanish at home, and only 17 percent of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans retain
the ability to speak fluent Spanish (Rumbaut, Massey, and Bean 2006).
4

See, for example, Perlmann (2005), Portes (2006), Telles and Ortiz (2008), Alba, Abdel-Hady, Islam, and Marotz
(2011), Alba, Kasinitz, and Waters (2011), Haller, Portes, and Lynch (2011a, 2011b), Perlmann (2011), Alba, Jimenez, and
Marrow (2014), Park, Myers, and Jimenez (2014), and Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier (2015).

3
empirical evidence. We consider, in turn, the following three measurement issues: (1)
comparisons of immigrant generations in cross-sectional data, (2) ethnic attrition, and (3) the
inability to distinguish the 3rd generation from higher generations.
First, as noted by Borjas (1993, 2006) and Smith (2003, 2006), generational comparisons
in a single cross-section of data—like those reported in Panel A of Table 1—can be misleading
because they do a poor job of matching parents and grandparents in an earlier generation with
their actual descendants in later generations. If we assume that schooling is essentially complete
by the age of 25 and changes little thereafter, we can use CPS data to conduct an analysis of
intergenerational changes in educational attainment similar in spirit to Smith (2003). Panel B of
Table 1 reports the relevant calculations. This panel presents average schooling levels for
Mexican Americans similar to those displayed in Panel A, except that now separate calculations
are reported for two particular age groups: 25-34 and 50-59. By choosing age groups 25 years
apart, we create a situation in which the older age group from a particular generation potentially
represents the parental cohort for the younger age group in the next generation. For example, the
cohort of 1st-generation men aged 50-59 includes fathers of the 2nd-generation cohort of sons
aged 25-34.
Panel B reveals only slightly more progress beyond the 2nd-generation for Mexican
Americans than did Panel A. When we compare age/generation groups that potentially match
Mexican-American fathers with their sons (by moving northeast between the connected cells
with similar shading in Panel B), average schooling rises from 12.6 years for the older 2nd
generation to 12.7 years for the younger 3rd+ generation, a positive but small gain.5 Therefore,
the evidence of educational stagnation for later-generation Mexican Americans does not seem to
5
Note, however, that calculating schooling progress between 1st- and 2nd-generation Mexican Americans in this same
way produces even bigger gains than those observed in Panel A: 4.2 years in Panel B compared with 3.2 years in Panel A.

4
derive largely from biases associated with comparing immigrant generations in a cross-section.
Further, note in Panel B that young 3rd+-generation Mexican Americans continue to trail the
average schooling of their non-Hispanic white and African-American peers by the same
substantial amounts observed in Panel A.
Potential measurement bias arising from “ethnic attrition” is a second issue that might
make it difficult to track progress across immigrant generations. In Table 1, 1st- and 2ndgeneration Mexican Americans are identified using the relatively “objective” information
collected by the CPS on the countries of birth of the respondent and his parents (e.g., a 2ndgeneration Mexican American is a U.S.-born individual with at least one parent born in Mexico).
Virtually no large, nationally-representative data sets, however, provide information on the
countries of birth of an adult respondent’s grandparents. As a result, 3rd-and-higher-generation
Mexican Americans (or the so-called 3rd+ generation) must be assigned using more “subjective”
measures of racial/ethnic identification. In Table 1, we follow standard practice in defining 3rd+generation Mexican Americans as those who are U.S.-born, have two U.S.-born parents, and
identify as “Mexican” or “Mexican American” in response to the Hispanic origin question.
Given data limitations, researchers seeking to study later-generation Mexican Americans seldom
have a better option. Nevertheless, the problem with using subjective measures of racial/ethnic
identification is that assimilation and intermarriage can cause ethnic attachments to fade across
generations (Alba 1990; Waters; 1990; Perlmann and Waters 2007). Consequently, subjective
measures of racial/ethnic identification might miss a significant portion of the later-generation
descendants of immigrants. Furthermore, if such ethnic attrition is selective on socioeconomic
attainment, then it can distort assessments of integration and generational progress. For Mexican
Americans, Duncan and Trejo (2007, 2011, 2017) provide evidence that ethnic attrition is

5
substantial and could produce significant downward bias in standard measures of attainment for
later generations. In this way, measurement biases generated by ethnic attrition could create a
misleading appearance of socioeconomic stagnation after the 2nd generation for Mexican
Americans, similar to what is observed in Table 1.
A third but related measurement issue is that the data limitations just described also imply
that, for adults, researchers typically cannot distinguish the “true” 3rd generation from higher
generations. For this reason, Table 1 and the discussion so far refer to the “3rd+” generation.
This is potentially a problem because Mexican Americans in generations beyond the 3rd are
disproportionately descended from ancestors who came of age in places (e.g., Texas rather than
California) and times (e.g., before the Civil Rights era) where Mexican Americans faced
discrimination that was more severe and often institutionalized (Foley 1997; Alba 2006;
Montejano 1987). The more limited opportunities for advancement experienced by these
families may result in lower attainment for Mexican Americans in the 4th and higher generations
compared with their 3rd-generation counterparts whose families experienced less hostile
environments. Alba, Abdel-Hady, Islam, and Marotz (2011) and Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier
(2015) provide evidence of this pattern for schooling levels, highlighting the importance of
distinguishing 3rd-generation Mexican Americans from higher generations.
In the current paper, we exploit previously untapped information from the National
Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 (NLSY97) that allows us to address the last two
measurement issues just discussed: ethnic attrition and distinguishing the 3rd generation from
higher generations. For our purposes, a key feature of the NLSY97 is that it reports the countries
of birth of respondents’ grandparents. This means that we can minimize ethnic attrition by
identifying 3rd-generation Mexican Americans using ancestors’ countries of birth rather than

6
subjective ethnic identification. It also means that we can distinguish 3rd-generation Mexican
Americans from higher generations.
We use these data to analyze educational progress between 2nd- and 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans. Once we address the measurement issues just described, we find a
substantial increase in educational attainment between generations. Moreover, we show that
such progress is largely hidden when we mimic standard data sets and aggregate the 3rd and
higher generations into a “3rd+” generation. Our analysis thus provides promising evidence of
generational progress for a recent cohort of Mexican-Americans. Indeed, for this birth cohort,
the high school graduation rate of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans is only slightly below that
of non-Hispanic whites from the 4th and higher generations.6
Our paper relates most closely to two important recent studies of Mexican Americans
that, through ambitious data collection efforts for specific locations, are also able to distinguish
the 3rd generation from higher generations and, at least in part, account for ethnic attrition.
Starting with a survey conducted in 1965 of Mexican-American families living Los Angeles and
San Antonio, Telles and Ortiz (2008) re-interview in 2000 available original respondents and
their U.S.-born children. They find little evidence of educational or earnings progress beyond
the 2nd generation. Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier (2015) rely on survey information collected
from multiple generations of Mexican-origin individuals living in the greater Los Angeles
metropolitan area in 2004. Their analysis does suggest significant schooling and earnings gains
for Mexican Americans between the 2nd and 3rd generations.
Our analysis contributes in several important ways to the ongoing scholarly debate over
Mexican-American progress after the 2nd generation. First, we employ nationally-representative
6
This finding is consistent with other recent evidence of improving high school completion rates for U.S.-educated
Hispanics (Murnane 2013, Gramlich 2017).

7
data from the NLSY97. In this way, we avoid issues of selective geographic mobility that can
make it difficult to interpret results from studies of particular locations (Alba, Jimenez, and
Marrow 2014). Second, we are in a better position to assess and account for the effects of ethnic
attrition, because roughly half of our Mexican-American respondents come from a sampling
design that did not screen on race or ethnicity. In contrast, most of the original 1965 respondents
in Telles and Ortiz (2008) and the Mexican-origin respondents in Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier
(2015) had to subjectively identify as being of Mexican descent to be included in these surveys.
Third, the recency and youth of our sample—described in greater detail below—imply that our
analyses provide better information about the future trajectories of U.S.-born Mexican
Americans than previous work could.

II. Data
The NLSY97 provides longitudinal information for a nationally-representative sample of
just fewer than 9,000 youth born in the years 1980-84 who were living in the United States when
the survey began in 1997. Importantly for our purposes, there are two subsamples: a “crosssectional sample” that is representative of all U.S. youth in the sampling universe at the time the
survey began, and a “supplemental sample” designed to oversample black and Hispanic youth.
Roughly half of Mexican-origin respondents in the NLSY97 come from each of these
subsamples. Note that, because Hispanic identification by the respondent (or by his parent) is
used to determine inclusion in the supplemental sample but not the cross-sectional sample, the
supplemental sample of Mexican Americans is subject to ethnic attrition.
Here, we use the data available through round 17 of the NLSY97, which was conducted
in 2015-16 when the respondents were between the ages of 30-36. The NLSY97 provides

8
information on the countries of birth of the respondent, his biological parents, and his biological
grandparents. Using this information, we define generations of Mexican Americans as follows:
1.5 generation: Respondent was born in Mexico.7
2nd generation: Respondent was born in the United States but at least one of his parents
was born in Mexico.
3rd generation: Respondent and both of his parents were born in the United States, but at
least one of his grandparents was born in Mexico.
4th+ generation: Respondent, both parents, and all grandparents were born in the United
States, but the respondent or one of his parents subjectively identifies as Mexican
or Mexican American.
As interesting reference groups, we can also define 4th+-generation groups for nonHispanic whites and non-Hispanic blacks. Based on these criteria, the NLSY97 data yield a
sample of over 1,000 Mexican-origin respondents across the four generation categories, with
sample sizes of 150 or more in each generation (see Table 2 below). These sample sizes are
roughly similar to those employed by Telles and Ortiz (2008) and Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier
(2015), but note that our samples are nationally representative, rather than coming from
particular metropolitan areas. Substantially larger samples are available for the non-Hispanic
white and black reference groups.

III. Generational Patterns of Educational Attainment
The primary aims of our analysis are to compare educational outcomes across generations
of Mexican Americans and to make similar comparisons between later-generation Mexican
7

Because foreign-born respondents in the NLSY97 must have been resident in the United States by the age of 12-16 to
be included in the sample, we adopt the standard nomenclature of “1.5 generation” when referring to such immigrants who
arrived in the destination country as children.

9
Americans and the non-Hispanic white and black reference groups. We focus on education
because it is a fundamental determinant of economic success, social status, health, family
stability, and life opportunities (Hout 2012; Heckman, Humphries, and Veramendi 2017). In
addition, information on educational attainment is available for all adults, whereas earnings data
are available only for those currently working. When we can distinguish the 3rd generation from
higher generations, and when we can limit the effects of ethnic attrition, do we see schooling
gains for Mexican Americans between the 2nd and 3rd generations? If so, how much of a
schooling gap remains between 3rd-generation Mexican Americans and other Americans?
The tabulations reported in Table 2 suggest that the answer to the first question is a
resounding yes. Table 2 presents various measures of educational attainment—average years of
schooling and the percent completing at least a high school degree, some college, or a bachelors
degree—for each of the Mexican-American generation groups and for the non-Hispanic white
and black reference groups.8 Standard errors are shown in parentheses. All calculations reported
in the paper employ sampling weights based on the initial sampling universe in 1997, but
unweighted results show similar patterns.
For every schooling measure in Table 2, Mexican Americans exhibit steady improvement
from the 1.5 to the 2nd to the 3rd generation. In most cases, this is followed by a marked decline
from the 3rd to the 4th+ generation. For example, average years of schooling for Mexican
Americans grow from 11.9 for the 1.5 generation to 13.0 for the 2nd generation to 13.5 for the 3rd
generation, but average years of schooling then regress to 12.8 for the 4th+ generation. Similarly,
the proportion of Mexican Americans with a high school diploma rises from 61.5 percent for the

8

For the respondents in our sample, completed years of schooling ranges from of minimum of 2 to a maximum of 20.
The sample sizes reported in Table 2 are for the completed years of schooling variable. Because there is less missing information
regarding degree completion, the corresponding sample sizes are slightly larger for the binary measures of educational
attainment.

10
1.5 generation to 76.2 percent for the 2nd generation to 84.3 percent for the 3rd generation before
falling back to 68.3 percent for the 4th+ generation. The high school completion rate of 84.3
percent for 3rd-generation Mexican Americans approaches the 86.2 percent rate for 4th+generation whites and exceeds by a considerable margin the 75.0 percent rate for 4th+-generation
blacks.9 The only education measure that does not conform to this generational pattern is
bachelor’s degree completion, which increases slightly between the 3rd and 4th+ generations. For
all education measures besides high school completion, however, large gaps ultimately remain
between 3rd-generation Mexican Americans and 4th+-generation whites (i.e., deficits of 0.9 years
for average schooling, 11.5 percentage points for college attendance, and 19.6 percentage points
for bachelors degree completion).10
In marked contrast to the CPS data in Table 1 and virtually all existing studies of
Mexican-American educational progress, the NLSY97 data in Table 2 reveal substantial
improvement after the 2nd generation. One crucial advantage of the NLSY97 data in Table 2 is
the ability to distinguish 3rd-generation from higher-generation Mexican Americans. The final
row of tabulations for Mexican Americans in Table 2 shows what happens when the 3rd and 4th+
generations are aggregated into the “3rd+ generation,” similar to what must be done in Table 1
due to limitations of CPS data. For all education measures other than bachelor’s degree
completion, the NLSY97 data show little improvement after the 2nd generation and a larger
remaining deficit relative to 4th+-generation whites when 3rd- and 4th+-generation Mexican
9

In these tabulations, those with a GED (rather than a high school diploma) and no further education are counted as not
having completed high school. If GED recipients are instead counted as high school completers, completion rates rise for all
groups, but especially for later-generation Mexican Americans and blacks, such that the gap between 3rd-generation Mexican
Americans and 4th+-generation whites almost entirely disappears (i.e., the revised rates are 94.3 percent for 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans, 94.7 percent for 4th+-generation whites, and 91.5 percent for 4th+-generation blacks).
10

Alon, Domina, and Tienda (2010) present evidence that the relatively low rates of post-secondary enrollment and
degree attainment observed for U.S.-born Hispanics derive not just from having parents with lower rates of college attendance
and completion, but also from those Hispanic parents who did attend college being less successful than other groups at getting
their children to follow suit.

11
Americans are aggregated in this way. Average years of schooling, for example, rise from 13.0
for the 2nd generation to 13.5 for the 3rd generation, whereas the corresponding increase is
negligible (0.07 years) when the 3rd and higher generations are pooled together. Likewise,
improvements in high school completion and college attendance between 2nd- and 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans instead appear to be modest declines when the 3rd+ generation is used in
place of the 3rd generation.
For the same samples and schooling measures introduced in Table 2, Table 3 presents
least squares regressions describing how educational outcomes vary by race/ethnicity and
generation. The dependent variables are the various measures of educational attainment, and the
reported figures are estimated coefficients on dummy variables identifying groups defined by
race/ethnicity and generation (with 4th+-generation non-Hispanic whites as the omitted reference
group). Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample sizes
are 4,851 for regressions where the dependent variable is completed years of schooling and 4,893
for regressions where the dependent variables are the binary measures of educational attainment.
Specification (1) includes as independent variables only an intercept and the dummy
variables identifying race/ethnicity and generation groups. These estimates simply reproduce,
for comparison purposes, the unadjusted education differences implicit in Table 2. For example,
the specification (1) estimates for completed years of schooling in Table 3 indicate that the
educational deficit for Mexican Americans (relative to 4th+-generation whites) shrinks from 2.6
years for the 1.5 generation to 1.5 years for the 2nd generation to 0.9 years for the 3rd generation
before climbing back to 1.7 years for the 4th+ generation. As noted earlier, the high school
completion rate of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans almost converges to that of the white
reference group, and the remaining deficit of 1.9 percentage points, shown in the third column, is

12
not statistically significant.
An advantage of the regression analysis is that it allows us to introduce control variables,
the omission of which could potentially distort these estimates of educational progress.
Specification (2) reproduces these educational comparisons while conditioning on each
respondent’s sex, birth year, and state of birth. By comparing the estimates in specifications (1)
and (2), we see that adding the control variables has little impact on the estimated coefficients
and therefore on the implied schooling differences across race/ethnicity and generation groups.
In particular, the striking pattern of intergenerational gains in education for Mexican Americans
through the 3rd generation followed by a substantial decline for the 4th+ generation is robust to
the inclusion of the control variables, and even the magnitudes of these generational differences
are altered only slightly by the controls.

IV. Ethnic Attrition
Biases from selective ethnic attrition are likely to be more severe in our NLSY97 sample
of 4th+-generation Mexican Americans than in the corresponding sample of 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans. One reason is that the 3rd-generation can be identified objectively (from
information on the countries of birth of the respondent, his parents, and his grandparents),
whereas inclusion in the 4th+-generation sample requires that the respondent or a parent
subjectively identifies as being of Mexican descent. In addition, ethnic attachments tend to fade
with more generations since immigration, and this tendency produces more extensive ethnic
attrition in higher generations. Consequently, greater downward bias from ethnic attrition is one
potential explanation for the relatively poor educational outcomes we observe for 4th+-generation
Mexican Americans.

13
Previous work by Duncan and Trejo (2007, 2011, 2017) establishes the direction and
potential importance of the biases created by selective ethnic attrition, but that work suffers from
significant limitations. Of particular concern is that the 3rd-generation samples in these earlier
studies are confined to children living in intact families, and therefore the earlier findings can
only indirectly suggest the extent and selectivity of ethnic attrition that would be observed
among adults. Because the cross-sectional sample of the NLSY97 allows us to construct a
sample of 3rd-generation Mexican-American adults that is free from ethnic attrition, these data
offer some key advantages for further exploration of this issue. One notable disadvantage of
using NLSY97 data for this purpose, however, is the small sample size: the cross-sectional
sample includes only 81 3rd-generation Mexican Americans (see Table 4 below).
Table 4 reports the percentage of Mexican Americans from each generation who identify
subjectively as being of Hispanic origin, based on information collected at the beginning of the
survey in 1997. 11 The top panel of the table shows the relevant calculations for the crosssectional sample that is representative of all U.S. youth in the sampling universe at the time the
NLSY97 began. The middle panel repeats these calculations for the supplemental oversample of
Hispanics, and the bottom panel does this for the combined sample that pools together
observations from both the cross-sectional and supplemental samples.
The middle panel of Table 4 reveals perfect Hispanic identification rates for every
generation of Mexican Americans in the supplemental sample. This result confirms that the
selection criteria for inclusion in the supplemental sample have effectively excluded from this
11

The NLSY97 also collected information about Hispanic identification in 2002 and at other times. These alternative
measures of Hispanic identification display the same patterns as the 1997 measure reported in Table 4. We employ here a broad
indicator of “Hispanic” identification rather than a more specific indicator for “Mexican” identification so that the resulting
estimates of ethnic attrition are conservative. In addition to capturing individuals who identify as Mexican or Mexican American,
Hispanic identification also captures some individuals who would not identify specifically as Mexican-origin, including those
who identify with other Hispanic national origin groups (such as Puerto Rican or Cuban) as well those who identify with panethnic labels such as Hispanic or Latino.

14
subsample any Mexican Americans who do not identify as Hispanic. Because the supplemental
sample does not provide useful information about ethnic attrition, we instead focus our attention
on the cross-sectional sample in the top panel of Table 4.
The rates of Hispanic identification reported in the top panel of Table 4 indicate that
ethnic attrition is negligible for the 1.5 and 2nd generations of Mexican Americans in the
NLSY97, but it does become a significant issue by the 3rd generation. Everyone born in Mexico
(i.e., the 1.5 generation) identifies as Hispanic, as do 95 percent of U.S.-born individuals with a
parent born in Mexico (i.e., the 2nd generation). Among objectively-defined 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans, however, only 80 percent identify as Hispanic, implying an ethnic attrition
rate of 20 percent. This pattern of ethnic attrition across generations of Mexican Americans is
roughly similar to what Duncan and Trejo (2016) report in recent CPS data.12
For ethnic attrition to bias estimates of socioeconomic progress, not only must it exist,
but it must also be selective. Table 5, which restricts attention to 3rd-generation Mexican
Americans in the cross-sectional sample, provides some evidence that this is indeed the case.
Among such individuals, those who do not identify as Hispanic average about three-fifths of a
year more schooling than those who do so identify. Similarly, the rate of bachelor’s degree
completion is higher for those not identifying as Hispanic (29 percent) than for those who do
identify (22 percent). Rates of high school graduation and college attendance do not conform to
this pattern, however, with slight advantages observed for 3rd-generation Mexican Americans
who identify as Hispanic. Although suggestive, these estimates are imprecise because of the
small samples involved (e.g., the calculations for 3rd-generation Mexican Americans who do not
identify as Hispanic are based on a sample size of 11). Nonetheless, the educational selectivity

12

In particular, see Appendix Tables A.1-A.3 in Duncan and Trejo (2016).

15
of ethnic attrition among 3rd-generation Mexican Americans that we directly observe for adults
in NLSY97 data conforms to what prior studies inferred indirectly from 3rd-generation samples
that were limited to children (Duncan and Trejo 2007, 2011, 2017).
Table 5 and previous research suggest that selective ethnic attrition generates downwardbiased estimates of socioeconomic attainment for later generations of Mexican Americans when,
as is typically the case, target sample members can only be detected using subjective measures of
ethnic identification. The analysis of educational attainment presented in the previous section
largely avoids this problem by using data that can identify 1.5-, 2nd-, and 3rd-generation Mexican
Americans without relying on subjective measures of ethnic identification. To preserve sample
size, Tables 2 and 3 in the previous section reported results based on the full NLSY97 sample
that pooled together observations from the cross-sectional and supplemental samples. Because
the supplemental sample filters out Mexican Americans who do not identify as Hispanic, the
resulting ethnic attrition may generate downward-biased measures of educational attainment for
Mexican Americans in Tables 2 and 3, particularly for the 3rd generation where ethnic attrition
becomes non-negligible. As it turns out, however, very similar patterns of generational
differences emerge when Tables 2 and 3 are reproduced using only the cross-sectional sample
that does not suffer from ethnic attrition. In light of this, we will continue to report results based
on the full NLSY97 sample, where appropriate, in order to increase sample sizes and improve
precision.
Given that selective ethnic attrition helps explain the apparent lack of generational
progress reported elsewhere, it is interesting to consider the source of selective ethnic attrition.
Previous research (Duncan and Trejo 2011, 2017) indicates that the selectivity of ethnic attrition
observed for Mexican Americans—i.e., the strong negative relationship between ethnic

16
identification and socioeconomic attainment—largely reflects patterns associated with
intermarriage. Mexican Americans with mixed ethnic origins are less likely to identify as
Mexican or Hispanic and also display higher levels of average attainment.
Table 6 suggests that something similar occurs within our sample of 3rd-generation
Mexican Americans from the NLSY97. In particular, average years of schooling are higher for
3rd-generation individuals with weaker ancestral attachments to Mexico. In the top part of Table
6, 3rd-generation Mexican Americans are distinguished by how many of their grandparents were
born in Mexico. The vast majority of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans (88 percent) have only
one or two grandparents born in Mexico, and such individuals average about 1.75 more years of
schooling than their counterparts with stronger ethnic attachments (i.e., those with three or four
Mexican-born grandparents).
The bottom part of Table 6 instead distinguishes 3rd-generation Mexican Americans
according to whether their Mexican ancestry is observed on their father’s side only, on their
mother’s side only, or on both sides of their family. In this typology, Mexican ancestry is said to
be observed on the father’s side of the family when at least one of the following two things is
true: (1) the respondent has a paternal grandparent who was born in Mexico, or (2) the
respondent’s father subjectively identifies as Mexican American. Analogously, presence of a
Mexican-born maternal grandparent and/or the mother’s subjective identification as Mexican
American determine whether a respondent is observed to have Mexican ancestry on his mother’s
side of the family.13 The distribution of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans is almost evenly
distributed across the three groups defined in the bottom part of Table 6. Average years of

13

Here, we make use of information on the subjective Mexican identification of the respondent’s parents in order to
construct a broader definition of Mexican ancestry. If we instead adopt a narrower but more objective definition of Mexican
ancestry that is based solely on the presence of Mexican-born grandparents, similar schooling patterns emerge, but the fraction of
3rd-generation Mexican Americans defined to have Mexican ancestry on both sides of their family is cut in half (to 16 percent).

17
schooling are markedly higher for those with Mexican ancestry on just one side of their family
(13.7 for father’s side only and 14.0 for mother’s side only) than for those with Mexican ancestry
on both sides of their family (13.0). Once again, a substantial educational advantage is observed
for those with seemingly weaker ancestral attachments to Mexico. Given previous research
(Duncan and Trejo 2011, 2017) documenting that later-generation Mexican Americans with
weaker ancestral attachments are much less like to identify as Mexican or Hispanic, the
schooling patterns in Table 6 are consistent with other work indicating that ethnic attrition
among Mexican Americans is positively selected on socioeconomic attainment.

V. Why Is Schooling Lower for the 4th+ Generation?
A somewhat surprising finding in Tables 2 and 3 is the low level of educational
attainment for 4th+-generation Mexican Americans. In terms of average years of schooling, high
school completion, and college attendance, Mexican Americans in the 4th+ generation exhibit
large deficits relative to the 3rd generation and smaller but still sizeable gaps relative to the 2nd
generation. As noted in the previous section, one possible explanation for this pattern is that
ethnic attrition generates greater downward bias for the 4th+-generation sample. In this section,
we consider alternative explanations that focus on disadvantaged family and social environments
for 4th+-generation Mexican Americans.
Table 7 shows how the samples of 3rd-generation and 4th+-generation Mexican
Americans compare with respect to their geographic “roots” and their parents’ educational
attainment. In Panels A and B of Table 7, an individual is defined as having California roots
when at least one of the following three things is observed: (1) the respondent was born in
California; or (2) the respondent resided in California in 1997 when the survey began; or (3)

18
either (or both) of the respondent’s parents was born in California. An analogous procedure
determines whether an individual is defined as having Texas roots.
Mexican Americans in the 3rd generation are equally distributed among those with any
California roots, those with any Texas roots, and those with neither California nor Texas roots.14
Compared with the 3rd generation, the 4th+ generation displays a dramatic decline in the
proportion with any California roots (from 36 percent to 10 percent) and a corresponding
increase in the proportion with neither California nor Texas roots (from 36 percent to 60
percent), with relatively little change in the proportion with any Texas roots. These differences
in the geographic roots of the 3rd generation versus the 4th+ generation are potentially important
because Mexican Americans arguably faced less severe discrimination and enjoyed better
opportunities for advancement in California than in Texas or other parts of the United States,
especially prior to the civil rights reforms of the 1960s and 1970s (Foley 1997; Alba 2006;
Montejano 1987).
Panel C of Table 7 indicates that 4th+-generation Mexican Americans are also somewhat
disadvantaged relative to the 3rd generation when it comes to parental education levels. In
particular, mothers’ average years of schooling are 12.6 for the 3rd generation versus 12.1 for the
4th+ generation, whereas the corresponding difference is smaller for fathers’ average years of
schooling (12.3 for the 3rd generation versus 12.2 for the 4th+ generation).
Do these deficits in California roots and parental schooling for 4th+-generation Mexican
Americans relative to the 3rd generation help to account for the lower educational attainment of
the 4th+ generation? Table 8 presents least squares regressions which suggest that these

14

Given the way we define geographic roots, it is possible for someone to have both California and Texas roots. In our
sample of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans, 8 percent have both California and Texas roots, 28 percent have California but not
Texas roots, and another 28 percent have Texas but not California roots. Among the 4th+generation, however, the proportion
with overlapping California and Texas roots falls to just 1 percent of the sample.

19
observable differences between 3rd-generation and 4th+-generation Mexican-Americans do not
explain the lion’s share of the corresponding education gap. The dependent variable is
completed years of schooling, and the estimation sample includes 3rd-generation and 4th+generation Mexican Americans. All specifications include a dummy variable identifying
membership in the 4th+ generation (as opposed to membership in the reference group consisting
of the 3rd generation) and indicators for the respondent’s sex and birth year. Specification (1)
includes only these variables, and the estimated coefficient on the 4th+-generation dummy
reproduces the average schooling deficit for 4th+-generation Mexican Americans (relative to the
3rd generation) of about three-quarters of a year that was observed previously in Tables 2 and 3.
In regression specification (2), we add to specification (1) an indicator for whether the
respondent has any California roots, as defined previously. All else equal, later-generation
Mexican Americans with California roots average three-fifths of a year more schooling than
those without California roots, and adding this variable to the regression shrinks (in absolute
value) the estimated coefficient of the 4th+-generation dummy from -.76 to -.58.15 Similarly,
specification (3) instead adds to specification (1) a vector of parental schooling variables
(including indicators for missing information on parental schooling). Not surprisingly, mother’s
and father’s years of schooling have strong positive effects on the respondent’s educational
attainment. In addition, controlling for parental education changes the estimated coefficient of
the 4th+-generation dummy to -.50. Finally, specification (4) includes all of these controls—the
California roots dummy and the parental schooling variables—in the same regression, and the
estimated coefficient of the 4th+-generation dummy becomes -.45.
In summary, controlling for differences in geographic roots and parental education
The impact on the estimated coefficient of the 4th+-generation dummy is virtually identical when we replace the
single indicator variable for California roots with a vector of indicators distinguishing the more detailed categories of geographic
roots listed in Panel A of Table 7.
15

20
shrinks (by up to 40 percent) but does not eliminate the substantial schooling deficit for 4th+generation Mexican Americans relative to their 3rd-generation counterparts. For reasons
discussed previously, greater downward bias from ethnic attrition in the 4th+-generation sample
is another potential explanation for this schooling deficit. Indeed, more severe ethnic attrition in
the 4th+ generation is a potential explanation for the differences in geographic roots and parental
schooling we observe between 3rd-generation and 4th+-generation Mexican Americans, because
previous research suggests that ethnic attrition is more prevalent among later-generation
Mexican Americans with relatively advantaged family backgrounds (Duncan and Trejo 2011,
2017). As a result, although the regressions reported in Table 8 indicate that geographic roots
and parental schooling provide proximate explanations for a portion of the schooling deficit
observed for 4th+-generation Mexican Americans, it is still possible that ethnic attrition generates
these proximate correlations as well as the portion of the schooling deficit not accounted for by
geographic roots and parental schooling. Moreover, to the extent that ethnic attrition ultimately
accounts for the schooling deficit observed for 4th+generation Mexican Americans, then this
deficit is illusory rather than real. An important goal for future research, therefore, should be to
better understand the role that ethnic attrition plays in generating observed schooling differences
across generations of Mexican Americans.

VI. Conclusion
In contrast with the descendants of almost every other contemporary immigrant group,
U.S.-born Mexican Americans maintain a large schooling deficit relative to other Americans.
Moreover, standard data sources suggest that this deficit does not shrink between the 2nd and
later generations of Mexican Americans. The apparent intergenerational stagnation of

21
educational attainment for Mexican Americans raises concerns about this important group’s
prospects for long-term integration into American society.
Available evidence on this issue, however, suffers from some potentially serious
limitations. A major problem is that data sources rarely provide information on the countries of
birth of an adult respondent’s grandparents. As a result, Mexican Americans beyond the 2ndgeneration almost always must be identified from subjective measures of ethnic identification,
such as the Hispanic origin question asked in U.S. Census Bureau surveys. These data
limitations create two key measurement issues for tracking the generational progress of Mexican
Americans: (1) ethnic attrition, and (2) aggregation of 3rd–generation and higher-generation
individuals. Both of these measurement issues could lead standard analyses to understate
socioeconomic improvement between 2nd-generation and 3rd-generation Mexican Americans.
Ethnic attrition takes place when U.S.-born descendants of Mexican immigrants do not
subjectively identify as Mexican American or Hispanic. Previous research indicates that ethnic
attrition is substantial among later-generation Mexican Americans and that such attrition
typically arises in families with mixed ethnic origins. Moreover, previous research suggests that
selective intermarriage and the resulting ethnic attrition produce downward bias in estimates of
socioeconomic attainment that rely on subjective measures of ethnic identification to detect latergeneration Mexican Americans.
The lack of information on grandparents’ countries of birth also implies that analysts
cannot distinguish 3rd-generation from higher-generation Mexican Americans. Instead, the only
group beyond the 2nd generation available for study is an aggregated “3rd+” generation that pools
together individuals from the 3rd and all higher generations. Such aggregation could hide
progress for the disaggregated 3rd generation, because Mexican Americans beyond the 3rd

22
generation may have experienced harsher family and social environments, and also because the
biases from ethnic attrition are likely to be more severe for higher generations.
In this paper, we are able to address both of these measurement issues by exploiting
previously untapped information from the NLSY97 on the countries of birth of respondents’
grandparents. With these data, we can identify 3rd-generation Mexican Americans using
ancestors’ countries of birth rather than subjective ethnic identification, thereby minimizing
ethnic attrition and isolating the 3rd generation from higher generations. To our knowledge, we
are the first to address these measurement issues using nationally-representative data. In
addition, compared to two related studies that focus on particular metropolitan areas (Telles and
Ortiz 2008; Bean, Brown, and Bachmeier 2015), our analysis is better able to account for ethnic
attrition. Finally, we study a more recent cohort of Mexican Americans than others have studied,
and therefore our findings provide timely insights into future trends.
Using NLSY97 data that allow us to minimize ethnic attrition and distinguish the 3rdgeneration from higher generations, we find substantial educational progress between 2nd- and
3rd-generation Mexican Americans. Such progress is hidden when we instead mimic standard
data sets and aggregate the 3rd and higher generations into a 3rd+ generation. For a recent cohort
of Mexican-Americans, our analysis thus provides promising evidence of generational advance.
In particular, for this cohort of individuals born in the years 1980-84, the high school graduation
rate of 3rd-generation Mexican Americans is only slightly below that of later-generation nonHispanic whites. Other measures of educational attainment—completed years of schooling,
college attendance, and bachelors degree completion—also show sizable gains for Mexican
Americans between the 2nd and 3rd generations. In contrast with high school completion,
however, for these other education measures 3rd-generation Mexican Americans maintain large

23
deficits relative to non-Hispanic whites, despite their generational gains. Further analyses
document patterns of ethnic attrition among 3rd-generation Mexican-American adults in the
NLSY97 that are similar to those reported previously in CPS data where the 3rd-generation
samples are confined to children. Ultimately, our findings suggest that Mexican Americans do
indeed experience substantial socioeconomic progress beyond the 2nd generation, and that this
progress is obscured by limitations of the data sources commonly used to look for it.

24
References
Alba, Richard D. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press, 1990.
Alba, Richard D. “Mexican Americans and the American Dream.” Perspectives on Politics,
June 2006, 4(2), pp. 289-96.
Alba, Richard D.; Abdel-Hady, Dalia; Islam, Tariqul; and Marotz, Karen. “Downward
Assimilation and Mexican Americans: An Examination of Intergenerational Advance and
Stagnation in Educational Attainment,” in Richard Alba and Mary C. Waters, eds., The
Next Generation: Immigrant Youth in a Comparative Perspective. New York: New York
University Press, 2011.
Alba, Richard D.; Jimenez, Tomas R.; and Marrow, Helen B. “Mexican Americans as a
Paradigm for Contemporary Intra-Group Heterogeneity.” Ethnic and Racial Studies,
February 2014, 37(3), pp. 446-66.
Alba, Richard D.; Kasinitz, Philip; and Waters, Mary C. “The Kids Are (Mostly) Alright:
Second Generation Assimilation; Comments on Haller, Portes and Lynch.” Social
Forces, March 2011, 89(3), pp. 733-62.
Alba, Richard D.; Logan, John; Lutz, Amy; and Stults, John. “Only English by the Third
Generation? Loss and Preservation of the Mother Tongue among the Grandchildren of
Contemporary Immigrants.” Demography, August 2002, 39(3), pp. 467-84.
Alon, Sigal; Domina, Thurston; and Tienda, Marta. “Stymied Mobility or Temporary Lull? The
Puzzle of Lagging Hispanic College Degree Attainment.” Social Forces, June 2010,
88(4), pp. 1807-32.
Bean, Frank D.; Brown, Susan K.; and Bachmeier, James D. Parents without Papers: The
Progress and Pitfalls of Mexican-American Integration. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 2015.
Bean, Frank D.; Leach, Mark; Brown, Susan K.; Bachmeier, James; and Hipp, John. “The
Educational Legacy of Unauthorized Migration: Comparisons across U.S.-Immigrant
Groups in How Parents’ Status Affects Their Offspring.” International Migration
Review, Summer 2011, 45(2), pp. 348-385.
Blau, Francine D., and Kahn, Lawrence M. “Gender and Assimilation among Mexican
Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the United States.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 57-106.
Borjas, George J. “The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants.” Journal of Labor
Economics, January 1993, Part 1, 11(1), pp. 113-35.

25
Borjas, George J. “Making It in America: Social Mobility in the Immigrant Population.” The
Future of Children, Fall 2006, 16(2), pp. 55-71.
Duncan, Brian; Hotz, V. Joseph; and Trejo, Stephen J. “Hispanics in the U.S. Labor Market,” in
Marta Tienda and Faith Mitchell, eds., Hispanics and the Future of America.
Washington, DC: Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Ethnic Identification, Intermarriage, and Unmeasured
Progress by Mexican Americans,” in George J. Borjas, ed., Mexican Immigration to the
United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2007, pp. 227-69.
Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Intermarriage and the Intergenerational Transmission of
Ethnic Identity and Human Capital for Mexican Americans.” Journal of Labor
Economics, April 2011, 29(2), pp. 195-227.
Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications
for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians.” Working Paper
No. 21982. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2016.
Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “The Complexity of Immigrant Generations: Implications
for Assessing the Socioeconomic Integration of Hispanics and Asians.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, October 2017, 70(5), pp. 1146-75.
Duncan, Brian, and Trejo, Stephen J. “Socioeconomic Integration of U.S. Immigrant Groups
over the Long Term: The Second Generation and Beyond,” in Susan Pozo, ed.,
Immigration Policy Today, Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment
Research, forthcoming 2018.
Farley, Reynolds, and Alba, Richard. “The New Second Generation in the United States.”
International Migration Review, Fall 2002, 36(3), pp. 669-701.
Foley, Neil. The White Scourge: Mexicans, Blacks and Poor Whites in Texas Cotton Culture.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1997.
Fry, Richard, and Lowell, B. Lindsay. “Work or Study: Different Fortunes of U.S. Latino
Generations.” Report. Washington, DC: Pew Hispanic Center, 2002.
Gramlich, John. “Hispanic Dropout Rate Hits New Low, College Enrollment at New High.”
Pew Research Center Fact Tank, September 2017. Accessed on 9/29/2017 at:
http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2017/09/29/hispanic-dropout-rate-hits-new-lowcollege-enrollment-at-new-high/ .
Grogger, Jeffrey, and Trejo, Stephen J. Falling Behind or Moving Up? The Intergenerational
Progress of Mexican Americans. San Francisco: Public Policy Institute of California,
2002.

26
Haller, William; Portes, Alejandro; and Lynch, Scott M. “Dreams Fulfilled, Dreams Shattered:
Determinants of Segmented Assimilation in the Second Generation.” Social Forces,
March 2011a, 89(3), pp. 733-62.
Haller, William; Portes, Alejandro; and Lynch, Scott M. “On the Dangers of Rosy Lenses;
Reply to Alba, Kasinitz, and Waters.” Social Forces, March 2011b, 89(3), pp. 775-82.
Heckman, James J.; Humphries, John Eric; and Veramendi, Gregory. “The Non-Market Benefits
of Education and Ability.” Discussion Paper No. 11047. Bonn, Germany: IZA Institute
of Labor Economics, September 2017.
Hout, Michael. “Social and Economic Returns to College Education in the United States.”
Annual Review of Sociology, 2012, 38, pp. 379-400.
Huntington, Samuel P. Who Are We? The Challenges to America's National Identity. New
York: Simon and Schuster, 2004.
Livingston, Gretchen, and Kahn, Joan R. “An American Dream Unfulfilled: The Limited
Mobility of Mexican Americans.” Social Science Quarterly, December 2002, 83(4), pp.
1003-12.
Montejano, David. Anglos and Mexicans in the Making of Texas: 1836-1986. Austin, TX:
University of Texas Press, 1987.
Murnane, Richard J. “U.S. High School Graduation Rates: Patterns and Explanations.” Journal
of Economic Literature, June 2013, 51(2), pp. 370-422.
Park, Julie; Myers, Dowell; and Jimenez, Tomas R. “Intergenerational Mobility of the MexicanOrigin Population in California and Texas Relative to a Changing Regional Mainstream.”
International Migration Review, Summer 2014, 48(2), pp. 442-81.
Perlmann, Joel. Italians Then, Mexicans Now: Immigrant Origins and Second-Generation
Progress, 1890-2000. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2005.
Perlmann, Joel. “The Mexican American Second Generation in Census 2000: Education and
Earnings,” in Richard Alba and Mary C. Waters, eds., The Next Generation: Immigrant
Youth in a Comparative Perspective. New York: New York University Press, 2011.
Perlmann, Joel, and Waters, Mary C. “Intermarriage and Multiple Identities,” in Mary C. Waters
and Reed Udea, eds., The New Americans: A Guide to Immigration Since 1965.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2007, pp. 110-23.
Portes, Alejandro, and Rumbaut, Ruben G. Legacies: The Story of the Immigrant Second
Generation. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2001.
Portes, Alejandro. “Review Essay: Paths of Assimilation in the Second Generation.”

27
Sociological Forum, September 2006, 21(3), pp. 499-504.
Rumbaut, Rugen G.; Massey, Douglas S.; and Bean, Frank D. “Linguistic Life Expectancies:
Immigrant Language Retention in the Southern California.” Population and
Development Review, September 2006, 32(3), pp. 447-60.
Smith, James P. “Assimilation across the Latino Generations.” American Economic Review,
May 2003, 93(2), pp. 315-319.
Smith, James P. “Immigrants and the Labor Market.” Journal of Labor Economics, April 2006,
24(2): 203-33.
Telles, Edward E., and Ortiz, Vilma. Generations of Exclusion: Mexican Americans,
Assimilation, and Race. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2008.
Trejo, Stephen J. “Why Do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of Political
Economy, December 1997, 105(6), pp. 1235-68.
Trejo, Stephen J. “Intergenerational Progress of Mexican-Origin Workers in the U.S. Labor
Market.” Journal of Human Resources, Summer 2003, 38(3), pp. 467-89.
Waters, Mary C. Ethnic Options: Choosing Identities in America. Berkeley, CA: University of
California Press, 1990.

Table 1: Average Years of Schooling of Men,
by Race/Ethnicity, Age, and Immigrant Generation,
2003-2016 CPS Data
Race/Ethnicity and Age
A. Ages 25-59
Mexican American

1st

Immigrant Generation
2nd

9.49
(0.02)

12.69
(0.03)

12.65
(0.02)
13.80
(0.004)
12.95
(0.01)

9.92
(0.03)
8.50
(0.06)

12.67
(0.03)
12.56
(0.09)

12.65
(0.03)
12.51
(0.05)

Non-Hispanic White
Non-Hispanic Black
B. By Age Cohort
Mexican American:
Ages 25-34
Ages 50-59
Non-Hispanic White:
Ages 25-34
Ages 50-59
Non-Hispanic Black:
Ages 25-34
Ages 50-59

3rd+

13.80
(0.007)
13.79
(0.007)
12.96
(0.02)
12.80
(0.02)

Source: 2003-2016 Current Population Survey outgoing rotation group data.
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The samples include men in the relevant racial/ethnic and age
groups. For Mexican Americans, the “1st generation” consists of individuals born in Mexico, excluding those born
abroad of an American parent, and the “2nd generation” consists of U.S.-born individuals who have at least one
Mexican-born parent. The “3rd+ generation” (i.e., the 3rd and all higher generations) consists of U.S.-born
individuals who have two U.S.-born parents, and these individuals are assigned to racial/ethnic groups based on their
responses to the Hispanic origin and race questions. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

Table 2: Educational Attainment, by Race/Ethnicity and Immigrant Generation,
NLSY97 Data

Race/Ethnicity and Generation
Mexican American:
1.5 generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
4th+ generation
3rd+ generation
Non-Hispanic:
Black, 4th+ generation
White, 4th+ generation

Average
Years of
Schooling

Percent with at least:
High School
Some
Diploma
College

Bachelors
Degree

Sample
Size

11.85
(0.18)
12.97
(0.13)
13.54
(0.22)
12.79
(0.18)
13.04
(0.14)

61.53
(3.46)
76.23
(2.09)
84.25
(2.90)
68.28
(2.79)
73.55
(2.11)

27.49
(3.17)
47.71
(2.45)
53.53
(3.97)
42.37
(2.96)
46.05
(2.38)

8.61
(1.99)
13.50
(1.68)
19.74
(3.17)
21.16
(2.45)
20.69
(1.94)

197

13.37
(0.08)
14.46
(0.06)

74.97
(1.18)
86.17
(0.69)

52.08
(1.36)
65.00
(0.95)

19.84
(1.09)
39.34
(0.98)

1,330

412
155
276
431

2,481

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The samples include men and women whose race/ethnicity and
immigrant generation could be identified; see text for further information. Measures of educational attainment
incorporate all relevant information collected up through the most recent survey, when respondents were between
the ages of 30-36. The sample sizes listed above are for the completed years of schooling variable. Because of less
missing information regarding degree completion, the corresponding sample sizes are slightly larger for the binary
measures of educational attainment. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

Table 3: Education Regressions

Regressor
Race/Ethnicity and Generation
Mexican American:
1.5 generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
4th+ generation
Non-Hispanic:
Black, 4th+ generation
White, 4th+ generation
(reference group)
Control variables included?
R2

Completed Years
of Schooling
(1)
(2)

Dependent Variable
Indicator for completion of at least:
High School
Some
Bachelors
Diploma
College
Degree
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)

-2.61
(.19)
-1.48
(.15)
-.91
(.26)
-1.66
(.22)

-2.78
(.25)
-1.56
(.18)
-.93
(.28)
-1.63
(.22)

-.246
(.038)
-.099
(.023)
-.019
(.031)
-.179
(.032)

-.293
(.043)
-.111
(.026)
-.015
(.033)
-.161
(.031)

-.375
(.034)
-.173
(.028)
-.115
(.044)
-.226
(.035)

-.427
(.044)
-.197
(.033)
-.121
(.048)
-.216
(.035)

-.307
(.021)
-.258
(.021)
-.196
(.037)
-.182
(.030)

-.272
(.034)
-.235
(.026)
-.177
(.039)
-.171
(.030)

-1.09
(.10)

-.94
(.12)

-.112
(.014)

-.095
(.016)

-.129
(.018)

-.119
(.019)

-.195
(.015)

-.176
(.017)

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

No

Yes

.09

.03

.06

.03

.06

.04

.08

No
.05

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: The reported figures are estimated coefficients from least squares regressions in which the dependent variables are various measures of educational
attainment. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample sizes are 4,851 for regressions where the dependent variable is
completed years of schooling and 4,893 for regressions where the dependent variables are the binary measures of educational attainment. See Table 2 and the
text for further information about the sample. The “control variables” included in specification (2) are indicators for the respondent’s sex, birth year, and state of
birth. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

Table 4: Rates of Hispanic Identification (%) for Mexican Americans,
by Sample Type and Immigrant Generation

Sample Type and Generation
Cross-Sectional Sample
Mexican American:
1.5 generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
Supplemental Sample
Mexican American:
1.5 generation
2nd generation
3rd generation
Both Samples Combined
Mexican American:
1.5 generation
2nd generation
3rd generation

Percent
Identified
as Hispanic

100.00
(0.00)
95.15
(1.66)
79.85
(4.48)

Sample
Size

91
168
81

100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)
100.00
(0.00)

108

100.00
(0.00)
97.62
(0.75)
87.28
(2.65)

199

251
78

419
159

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The samples include men and women who could be identified as
1.5-, 2nd-, or 3rd-generation Mexican Americans based on the countries of birth reported for each respondent, his
parents, and his grandparents; see text for further information. The “sample type” indicates if a given observation is
part of the “cross-sectional” sample that is representative of all U.S. youth in the sampling universe when the survey
began in 1997, or if the observation instead comes from the “supplemental” oversample of blacks and Hispanics.
Hispanic identification is based on information collected at the beginning of the survey in 1997. Sampling weights
were used in the calculations.

Table 5: Educational Attainment of 3rd-Generation Mexican Americans from the
Cross-Sectional Sample, by Hispanic Identification
Sample Type and
Hispanic Identification
Cross-Sectional Sample
Identified as Hispanic
Not identified as Hispanic
All

Average
Years of
Schooling
13.60
(0.34)
14.22
(1.16)
13.72
(0.34)

Percent with at least:
High School
Some
Diploma
College
85.92
(4.22)
82.07
(11.57)
85.14
(3.98)

52.21
(6.06)
49.26
(15.07)
51.62
(5.59)

Bachelors
Degree

Sample
Size

22.35
(5.05)
29.17
(13.70)
23.72
(4.76)

67
11
78

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample includes men and women who could be identified as
3rd-generation Mexican Americans based on the countries of birth reported for each respondent, his parents, and his
grandparents; see text for further information. Hispanic identification is based on information collected at the
beginning of the survey in 1997. The sample sizes listed above are for the completed years of schooling variable.
Because of less missing information regarding degree completion, the corresponding sample sizes are slightly larger
for the binary measures of educational attainment. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

Table 6: Average Years of Schooling of 3rd-Generation Mexican Americans,
by Source of Mexican Ancestry

Source of Mexican Ancestry
Number of Mexican-born grandparents:
1

Percent of
Sample
61.0

2

27.0

3

4.6

4

7.5

All 3rd-generation Mexican Americans
Mexican ancestry observed on:
Father’s side only

100.0
36.5

Mother’s side only

31.3

Both sides of family

32.2

All 3rd-generation Mexican Americans

100.0

Average
Years of
Schooling
13.81
(0.28)
13.63
(0.46)
12.35
(1.02)
11.81
(0.56)
13.54
(0.22)
13.67
(0.37)
14.00
(0.42)
12.95
(0.38)
13.54
(0.22)

Sample
Size
93
40
8
14
155
51
48
56
155

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample includes men and women who could be identified as
3rd-generation Mexican Americans based on the countries of birth reported for each respondent, his parents, and his
grandparents; see text for further information. Mexican ancestry is said to be observed on the father’s side of the
family when at least one of the following two things is true: (1) the respondent has a paternal grandparent who was
born in Mexico, or (2) the respondent’s father subjectively identifies as Mexican American. Analogously, presence
of a Mexican-born maternal grandparent and/or the mother’s subjective identification as Mexican American
determine whether a respondent is observed to have Mexican ancestry on his mother’s side of the family. Sampling
weights were used in the calculations.

Table 7: Differences between 3rd- and 4th+-Generation Mexican Americans in
Geographic Roots and Parental Education
Immigrant Generation
3rd
4th+
A. Percent of generation with roots in:
California but not Texas
Texas but not California
Both California and Texas
Neither California nor Texas
Total for generation
Sample size for generation
B. Percent of generation with:
Any California roots
Any Texas roots
C. Average years of schooling:
Mother

Father

28.0

8.6

28.2

30.6

8.2

1.1

35.6

59.7

100.0

100.0

159

281

36.2

9.7

36.4

31.7

12.57
(0.21)
[149]

12.14
(0.14)
[261]

12.32
(0.24)
[143]

12.20
(0.19)
[220]

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: In panel C, standard errors are reported in parentheses and sample sizes with non-missing information on
parental schooling are shown in brackets. The samples include men and women who could be identified as 3rdgeneration or 4th+-generation Mexican Americans; see text for further information. In panels A and B, an individual
is defined as having California “roots” when at least one of the following things is observed: (1) the respondent was
born in California; or (2) the respondent resided in California in 1997 when the survey began; or (3) either (or both)
of the respondent’s parents was born in California. An analogous procedure determines whether an individual is
defined as having Texas roots. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

Table 8: Education Regressions for 3rd- and 4th+-Generation Mexican Americans
Regressor

(1)

(2)

-.76
(.31)

-.58
(.32)
.62
(.39)

(3)

(4)

-.50
(.27)

-.45
(.29)
.19
(.35)

.35
(.06)
.32
(.05)

.35
(.06)
.32
(.05)

3.25
(1.14)
3.27
(.76)
8.30
(1.05)

3.19
(1.15)
3.24
(.76)
8.25
(1.05)

Yes

Yes

.25

.25

Mexican American:
3rd generation (reference group)
4th+ generation
Any California roots
Parental years of schooling:
Mother
Father
Missing parental schooling data for:
Mother only
Father only
Both parents
Control variables included?
R2

Yes

Yes

.04

.04

Source: National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1997 data through round 17 (2015-2016).
Note: The reported figures are estimated coefficients from least squares regressions in which the dependent variable
is completed years of schooling. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. The sample
includes men and women who could be identified as 3rd-generation or 4th+-generation Mexican Americans; see text
for further information. The sample size is 431 for all regressions. An individual is defined as having California
“roots” when at least one of the following things is observed: (1) the respondent was born in California; or (2) the
respondent resided in California in 1997 when the survey began; or (3) either (or both) of the respondent’s parents
was born in California. The “control variables” included in all specifications are indicators for the respondent’s sex
and birth year. Sampling weights were used in the calculations.

