                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




CREDIT DEFAULT SWAPS, AGENCY PROBLEMS, AND MANAGEMENT INCENTIVES

                                          Jongsub Lee
                                           Junho Oh
                                         David Yermack

                                       Working Paper 24064
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24064


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




Part of this paper was written while David Yermack was serving as a Visiting Professor at
Erasmus University Rotterdam. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24064.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Jongsub Lee, Junho Oh, and David Yermack. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Credit Default Swaps, Agency Problems, and Management Incentives
Jongsub Lee, Junho Oh, and David Yermack
NBER Working Paper No. 24064
November 2017
JEL No. G30,G33,G34,J33,M52

                                         ABSTRACT

We show in a theoretical model that credit default swaps induce managerial agency problems
through two channels: reducing the opportunity for managers to transfer value to equityholders
from creditors via strategic default, and reducing the intensity of monitoring by creditors, which
leads to greater CEO diversion of assets as perquisites. We further show that boards can use
compensation awards that increase managerial performance incentives (delta) and risk-taking
incentives (vega) in order to mitigate these two agency problems, with increases in managerial
vega being particularly useful to alleviate the strategic default-related agency problem. We study
equity compensation awards to CEOs of S&P 1500 companies during 2001–2015 and find that
they occur in patterns consistent with these predictions.

Jongsub Lee                                     David Yermack
Warrington College of Business                  Stern School of Business
Department of Finance                           New York University
PO Box 117168, STZ 315E                         44 West Fourth Street, Suite 9-160
jongsub.lee@warrington.ufl.edu                  New York, NY 10012
                                                and NBER
Junho Oh                                        dyermack@stern.nyu.edu
Warrington College of Business
Bryan Hall 100
Gainesville, FL 32611-7150
junho.oh@warrington.ufl.edu
  Credit default swaps, agency problems, and
            management incentives

1.      Introduction

     Credit default swaps (CDS) are insurance contracts between two parties with contingent
payoffs referenced to future credit events of the underlying entity. Credit events that trigger
CDS payments are potentially endogenous, since they may occur as outcomes of unobserved
interactions between shareholders and creditors. Several studies recently demonstrate that
CDS, once issued, may affect bargaining between shareholders and creditors on an ongoing
basis. Since CDS provide creditors with a form of default insurance, they could strengthen
their bargaining power in debt negotiations, which in turn could generate significant feed-
back effects on corporate financial policies. Lenders who heavily hedge their debt exposure
with CDS become “empty creditors” (Hu and Black, 2008; Bolton and Oehmke, 2011), who
may frequently reject debt exchange offers from shareholders in order to avail themselves of
voting rights that may attach during bankruptcy (Danis and Gamba, 2017). Such feedback
effects of CDS on various corporate policies have been extensively documented, including in-
creasing corporate leverage (Saretto and Tookes, 2013), more frequent outright liquidations
(Subrahmanyam, Tang, and Wang, 2014), and precautionary corporate liquidity manage-
ment (Subrahmanyam, Tang, and Wang, 2017) following the onset of CDS trading for the
debt of a specific firm. Importantly, these studies rely on the inception of CDS trading as
an identification strategy, since the listing of a new CDS contract occurs as a result of deci-
sions taken by third-party market makers who typically have no connection with the firm’s
managers.
     Recent literature has focused on conflicts between shareholders and creditors in the pres-
ence of CDS, but these papers have generally overlooked potential agency problems arising
between shareholders and managers. This paper demonstrates that two types of managerial


                                               1
agency problems may occur as a result of CDS introduction. First, managers may engage
in less strategic debt default than optimal, since creditors will bargain harder due to the
presence of the CDS insurance contract. Second, creditors may tend to monitor managers
with reduced intensity, since they become less concerned about the consequences of non-
repayment once they have access to CDS insurance. We present a theoretical model of how
CDS affects the incentives for managers to divert assets in the form of perquisites, and we
show that agency problems tend to increase through both of these channels. We then use a
sample of S&P 1500 firms between 2001–15 to study whether boards change CEO compen-
sation awards after CDS are introduced.
   As our key measures for a CEO’s risk-taking and value enhancement incentives, we com-
pute the deltas and vegas for new stock and stock option compensation awards to CEOs
of our sample firms. In regression analysis we find that managerial vega increases by 133%
from its sample average following the inception of CDS trades. Moreover, we find that both
managerial option and share deltas significantly increase after CDS introduction, leading to
an increase in overall managerial delta. We find a $41,000 increase in the CEO’s wealth
from these newly granted incentive contracts when the underlying stock price increases by
one dollar.
   Increasing both the CEO’s effective ownership and risk-taking incentives helps to mitigate
the new agency problems between managers and shareholders. However, if we focus on the
agency problem arising from the extinguishment of the shareholders strategic default option,
those two contractual adjustments affect the manager differently. The agency cost induced
by strategic default is mainly driven by managerial actions that increase the probability of
default. Since greater effective ownership only motivates the manager in non-default states,
it has little impact on the manager’s motivation to threaten creditors with a default. In
contrast, greater risk-taking incentives are effective in this setting. Our empirical evidence
is consistent with this conjecture, as we find that for firms with valuable strategic default
options, stock option grants (which have nonzero vegas) increase significantly after CDS


                                              2
inception while restricted stock grants (which have zero vega) do not change significantly.
   We conduct a robustness test to alleviate concerns about sample selection bias and the
influence of confounding endogenous market forces. For example, one could argue that be-
cause CDS contracts are not created randomly, our results are driven by omitted firm-level
characteristics. We address these selection issues by using an instrumental variable approach
as found in studies such as Minton, Stulz, and Williamson (2009), Saretto and Tookes (2013),
and Subrahmanyam et al. (2014). We show that our results continue to hold after they are
re-estimated in an instrumental variables framework.
   Our paper, which is mainly focused on a theoretical model of agency problems related to
CDS, complements two recent empirical studies of the topic, Colonnello (2017) and Chen,
Leung, Song, and Avino (2017). These papers focus on the implications of reduced creditor
monitoring after the inception of CDS, which is one of the two agency problems that we
highlight in our model (the other agency problem, overlooked in these two papers, is related
to the reduced opportunity for strategic default). While these papers test similar hypotheses
about the need to increase managerial vegas to counteract the agency problems of CDS, they
reach opposite conclusions, with one paper estimating that managerial vegas increase after
the introduction of CDS, while the other paper estimates that vegas decrease.
   Our results emphasize the importance of managerial incentives and agency problems
when analyzing the real effects of CDS. In most of the published literature to date, the doc-
umented real effects of CDS occur in an environment that is assumed not to reflect agency
costs between managers and shareholders. We believe our results shed light an overlooked
and important aspect of CDS, namely how they create agency problems and how boards
adjust management compensation to mitigate these effects.
   The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces our hypotheses
with a simple model. Section 3 describes our data. Section 4 presents our empirical analysis.
Section 5 studies the robustness of our findings to adjustments for endogeneity concerns
associated with CDS trades. We provide our conclusions in Section 6.


                                             3
2.        Hypothesis development

2.1.      A simple model of CDS agency

       We develop a simple, intuitive model that illustrates how empty creditors whose debt
positions are over-insured by CDS could exacerbate managerial agency problems.1 Actors in
the model include a risk-neutral CEO (the agent), shareholders (principals), and creditors
of a firm. We consider equity of a firm as a call option on the underlying assets based
on Merton (1974), while strategic default is a viable option to shareholders (Anderson and
Sundaresan, 1996). We assume that firm value Vt follows the following geometric Brownian
motion: dVt = µVt dt + σVt dWt where µ = 0 for simplicity. The firm issues zero-coupon
debt with face value of K, but given the strategic debt renegotiation possibility between
shareholders and creditors, the effective default boundary of the firm is not necessarily set
at K. If successful, strategic debt renegotiation lowers the default threshold below K. The
risk-free rate and dividend yield are set to be zero for simplicity, without loss of generality.
       The model has two periods. At time 0, shareholders provide the CEO either shares or
options as an incentive contract, g(α, σ), to induce desirable actions from the CEO at time
1, with σ > 0 and 0 < α < 1, respectively, denoting the level of corporate risk and the CEO’s
ownership. The zero-coupon debt matures at time 1. At time 0 the CEO chooses project risk,
and at time 1 when the state is realized, (s)he can divert φV1 out of the firm as perquisites
with a detection technology of the diversion given by 2θ φ2 V1 , where 0 < φ < 1, and θ > 1
is the intensity of creditors’ monitoring over the CEO. The CEO’s incentive compensation
package is expressed as αE0 [S(V1 , K, α, φ, σ)], where S is the total equity value of the firm.2
   1
     Our model stylizes the creditors’ behavior when their debts are over-insured by CDS; CDS creditors
never permit successful private debt workouts. In other words, our model weighs the empty creditor cost of
CDS relatively more heavily, which may matter more when a firm’s value falls below the standard default
threshold implied by the absolute priority in default. It relatively underestimates the potential commitment
benefits of CDS that matter more when the firm’s value exceeds the default threshold (Bolton and Oehmke,
2011). See more details on this modeling feature in our Appendix B.
   2
     In the structural credit models, shares (options) are represented as a call option (compound call option)
on the underlying assets. Given that newly granted options are near at-the-money, both contracts have
a structural representation as a call option on the underlying firm value, yet, with different strike levels.
Specifically, the relation of firm value and a share can be expressed as S = [V − K]+ whereas an option is


                                                      4
   If the firm approaches default, the CEO could renegotiate the firm’s debt down to K(1−L)
from K with creditors, where 0 < L < 1 is the fractional cost of bankruptcy. The success
probability of strategic default is ξ ∈ [0, 1] , which is assumed to be uniformly distributed
over its support. As shown in Bolton and Oehmke (2011), the presence of CDS decreases ξ
toward zero. Without loss of generality, we assume ξCDS = 0. Shareholders want to minimize
the expected agency cost:


               min     E0 [φV1 ]
              g(α,σ)
                                                                           θ
              s.t.     φ, σ ∈ argmax αE0 [S(V1 , K, α, φ, σ)] + E0 [φV1 ] − E0 [φ2 V1 ]
                                                                           2
αS(V1 , K, α, φ, σ) is the CEO’s monetary compensation from the firm at time 1, which takes
the functional form of α [V1 (1 − φ) − K]+ if the absolute priority rule holds in bankruptcy.




2.1.1.   The CEO’s shirking decision at t = 1

   At time 1, the firm could be in one of the following three states: (i) solvent (V1 (1−φ) ≥ K)
, (ii) strategic default (K(1 − L) ≤ V1 (1 − φ) < K), and (iii) default (V1 (1 − φ) < K(1 − L)).
   If a firm is solvent at time 1, the first order condition of the CEO’s incentive problem
with respect to φ is

                                                                 
                             ∂                               θ 2
                                    α(V1 (1 − φ) − K) + φV1 − φ V1 = 0                               (1)
                            ∂φ                               2
                                                     1−α
                                              φ∗ =
                                                      θ

   If K(1 − L) ≤ V1 (1 − φ) < K, and the firm successfully renegotiates the debt K with the
creditors, K in the equation (1) is replaced with K(1 − L), and φ∗ =            1−α
                                                                                 θ
                                                                                    .
   If the firm fails in debt renegotiation, or is in the default state, the first order condition
O = [[V − K]+ − SE ]+ = [V − (K + SE )]+ where V is firm value, S is an underlying stock price, and SE is
the exercise price of the option. K is the face value of corporate debt.



                                                     5
of the CEO’s problem with respect to φ is

                                                            
                                              ∂         θ 2
                                                   φV1 − φ V1 = 0
                                             ∂φ         2

                                                               1
                                                        φ∗ =
                                                               θ

    Thus, the CEO’s optimal level of fractional perquisite at time 1, φ∗ , is given as:
                                              
                                                  1−α
                                                         if V1 ≥ V K(1−L)
                                              
                                              
                                         ∗         θ
                                        φ =
                                                  1
                                              
                                              
                                                  θ
                                                         if V1 < V K(1−L) ,

                        K(1−L)
where V K(1−L) =        1− 1−α
                               .
                            θ




2.1.2.       Expected agency cost at t = 0

                          K
    Define V K =        1− 1−α
                               .   The ex-ante expected agency cost to shareholders is given as:
                            θ




              Ω = E0 [φ∗ V1 ]

              = E0 φ ∗ V 1 V 1 ≥ V K · P r V 1 ≥ V K
                                                   


              + E0 φ∗ V1 V K(1−L) ≤ V1 < V K · P r V K(1−L) ≤ V1 < V K
                                                                     


              + E0 φ∗ V1 V1 < V K(1−L) · P r V1 < V K(1−L)
                                                         

                1−α                                                                                (2)
               =     V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K))
                 θ                   
                   1−α              1                                              
               + ξ      + (1 − ξ)       V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K))
                    θ               θ
                1                              
               + V0 1 − N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)))
                θ
                1     α                      ξα                                          
               = V0 − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K)) −       V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − N (d1 (φ1 , K)
                θ     θ                       θ

                                                                                 1−α
where N(·) is the c.d.f. of the standard normal distribution. φ1 =                θ
                                                                                       and d1 (φ, K) =
   V (1−φ)      2
ln( 0 K    )+ σ2
         σ
                    .
    The expected agency cost is the sum of the three agency costs, respectively, under the

                                                          6
solvent, strategic default, and default states. It should be noted that the second term in
the equation (2), ξ 1−α   + (1 − ξ) 1θ V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K)) , shows that
                                                                                
                       θ

the effective level of the CEO’s perquisite in the strategic default state is the probabilistic
                                                 1−α
weighted average of the CEO’s perquisite          θ
                                                       with probability of ξ (i.e., success in strategic
                      1
renegotiation) and    θ
                          with a probability of 1 − ξ (i.e., strategic renegotiation failure).



Proposition 1. [CDS and Agency] CDS induce the following two types of agency problems:
                                                                                         
a) An agency problem due to the foregone strategic default options to shareholders ∂Ω
                                                                                    ∂ξ
                                                                                       < 0 ,
and
                                                                                ∂Ω
                                                                                       
b) an agency problem due to reduced creditor monitoring intensity               ∂θ
                                                                                     <0 .

Proof. See Appendix A.

       After CDS are introduced, the absolute priority rule in bankruptcy is more likely (ξ ↓),
and the creditors’ monitoring gets weaker (θ ↓), due to the well-known empty creditors’ prob-
lem (Hu and Black, 2008; Bolton and Oehmke, 2011; Subrahmanyam et al., 2014). Those
changes induce two types of agency problems. First, a decrease in the probability of success-
ful debt renegotiation leads to more frequent liquidations, making the CEO have stronger
incentives to divert resources from the firm (i.e., ex post dilution of the CEO’s managerial
incentive). Second, the reduced monitoring intensity of creditors with CDS would also lead
                                                          3
to the increasing resource diversion by the CEO.



Proposition 2. [Managerial Compensation Adjustment] To lower the agency cost that rises
after CDS trades, shareholders are more likely to
   3
    As CDS reduce the strategic default threat by shareholders, the introduction of CDS could increase the
debt value. However, in our model where CDS also reduce creditors’ monitoring intensity, debt value could
decrease as the CEO could be over-shirking following the inception of CDS trades. This implies that simply
re-capitalizing the firm’s leverage ratio downward does not necessarily eliminate the CDS agency problems.
This intuition holds even in the multi-period setting when creditors’ potential gains from reduced strategic
default are outweighed by the cost of lax monitoring by creditors on the CEO. See Appendix B for the
detailed analytical illustration of this debt value analysis before and after the CDS introduction.


                                                     7
                                                          ∂Ω
                                                              
a) increase the effective ownership of the CEO             < 0 , and/or
                                                          ∂α
                                                                                   
                                                   ∂Ω
                                                        < 0 if σ 2 > 2ln VK(1−L)
                                                                          0 (1−φ1 )
                                                           
b) increase the CEO’s risk-taking incentive        ∂σ
                                                                                      .

Proof. See Appendix A.

   Proposition 2 states that regardless of the source of the CDS agency problem, an optimal
contract that brings the expected agency cost down to its pre-CDS level requires higher
managerial ownership ∂Ω
                                  
                          ∂α
                              < 0 and higher managerial risk-taking incentive for the CEO
  ∂Ω
        
  ∂σ
     < 0 . The latter risk-incentive approach is particularly useful for the relatively risky
                          
firms σ 2 > 2ln VK(1−L)
                  0 (1−φ1 )
                               . In our model, the level of perquisites φ∗ could be reduced by
the CEO’s ownership (α) mainly in the solvent states. As the CEO ownership increases, the
agency problem in those solvent states is mitigated due to the incentive alignment between
shareholders and the CEO. At the same time, a higher volatility of a firm (σ) reduces the
ex ante probability of default, thereby inducing the greater ex ante ownership of the CEO.
With this increasing ex ante skin-in-the-game of the CEO, the higher σ could mitigate the
CDS agency problem.


2.1.3.    Strategic default, CDS agency, and the relative efficacy of contractual remedies

   The net increase in the expected agency cost following the CDS trades, which constrain
                                                           ∂Ω
the shareholders’ strategic default (ξ ↓ ξCDS with         ∂ξ
                                                                < 0), can be expressed as

                                               Z   ξCDS
                                                          ∂Ω
                                        Ωξ =                 dξ,
                                               ξ          ∂ξ

         ∂Ω
where    ∂ξ
              is the instantaneous increase in the CDS agency problem due to the reduced strate-
gic default probability.
   Our Proposition 2 showed that the total agency cost (Ω) increases after the CDS incep-
tion, but the cost can be reduced by increasing managerial ownership and/or firm volatility.
Proposition 3 below identifies which of these two approaches is likely to be more effective.



                                                   8
Proposition 3. A particular type of the CDS agency problem that is associated with the
reduced intensity of strategic default (Ωξ ) can be effectively reduced by a contractual arrange-
                                                                    ∂2Ω                     ∂Ωξ
ment that increases the CEO’s risk-taking incentives, i.e.,         ∂σ∂ξ
                                                                           > 0, and thus,    ∂σ
                                                                                                  < 0. By
contrast, increase in α does not necessarily reduce Ωξ .

Proof. See Appendix A.

       The key intuition of Proposition 3 is that increasing firm risk (σ) makes the interval of
strategic default (N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K))) narrower, which, in turn, reduces the
effect of strategic default on total agency cost (Ω) — i.e., σ alleviates the incremental increase
in the default probability due to the foregone strategic default following CDS inception.
However, increasing managerial ownership (α) cannot effectively curb the CEO’s perquisites.
That is because CDS increase the probability of default, while α can reduce the CEO’s
perquisites mainly in the non-default states.
       Figure 1 graphically illustrates this point.4 The line segments on the cross-section lying
on the ξ − Ω plane represent the relations between the probability of strategic default (ξ)
and the total agency cost (Ω). The slope of each horizontal line segment corresponds to
∂Ω
∂ξ
   ,   which is the instantaneous increase in the agency problem due to the foregone strategic
default after CDS introduction. The first figure shows that as CEO’s ownership increases
                                                                                 2      
                                                                                 ∂ Ω
(α), the sensitivity of the agency problem to strategic default becomes stronger ∂α∂ξ < 0 .5
       In contrast, the bottom figure shows that the slope of the line segments on the cross-
section lying on the ξ − Ω plane becomes flatter when σ increases. This slope change implies
∂2Ω
∂σ∂ξ
        > 0 as in Proposition 3 — i.e., increasing firm volatility mitigates the CDS agency
problem that is associated with strategic default.
   4
    The relevant parameters are set as follows: V0 = 100, K = 40, L = 0.4, σ = 0.4, α = 0.1, and θ = 1.4.
   5
    It should be noted, however, that in the same graph, the increase in α effectively reduces the “total”
agency cost of CDS (i.e., ∂Ω
                          ∂α < 0). This is consistent with our statement in Proposition 2.




                                                    9
2.1.4.     Discussion: The nature of the firm volatility (σ)

       Increasing risk σ does not necessarily imply the usual risk-shifting by the managers that
may hurt firm value (Jensen and Meckling, 1976). In our model, we do not distinguish
the CEO’s systematic risk-taking (good risk) from idiosyncratic risk-taking (bad risk). In
line with our increasing corporate risk-taking after CDS introduction, Chang, Chen, Wang,
Zhang, and Zhang (2017) recently document that CDS induce risk-taking that generates
patents with greater economic values. However, as our model assumes risk neutrality for all
agents, we cannot identify the nature of the risk taken by the firm’s managers.




2.2.      Testable implications

       Proposition 1 shows that expected agency costs increase following CDS introduction. In
order to bring these costs down to the pre-CDS level, managerial compensation structure
can be adjusted to increase the CEO’s ownership and his/her incentive to take greater risk
(Proposition 2). These outcomes can be implemented by granting new options and/or shares
to the CEO, thereby increasing the CEO’s managerial delta and vega (Core and Guay, 2002;
Edmans, Gabaix, and Landier, 2009; Coles, Daniel, and Naveen, 2013).

H 1. The number of newly granted options and shares to the CEO will increase after the
CDS inception. These incentive contracts lead to an increase in managerial delta and vega.

       An option differs from a share in terms of the level of managerial risk-taking incentives.
Since the managerial vega of an option is higher than that of a share, an option is more
effective in increasing firm volatility.6
       Our Proposition 3 shows that among the managerial delta and vega approaches, the vega
   6
     Again, according to the Merton (1974)’s model, the relation of firm value and a share can be expressed
as S = [V − K]+ whereas that of firm value and an option is O = [[V − K]+ − SE ]+ = [V − (K + SE )]+ ,
where V is the firm value, S is the underlying stock price, SE is the exercise price of an option. K is the face
value of the firm’s discounted bond. For a solvent firm, ∂S     ∂O
                                                          ∂σ < ∂σ holds because the vega of an in-the-money
call option decreases as the option’s moneyness increases.


                                                      10
approach ( ∂Ω
           ∂σ
              ) is particularly effective to reduce agency problem associated with foregone
strategic default following CDS inception.

H 2. The CDS association with an increase in option grants will be stronger for firms with
valuable strategic default option prior to CDS inception. In contrast, the potential value of
strategic default will not imply an association between CDS introduction and an increase in
share grants.



3.      Data description

     Our sample consists of 28,707 firm-years from the ExecuComp database between 2001
and 2015. We identify new shares and/or options granted to the CEO each year, including
details such as expiration dates and strike prices. If the expiration date is missing, we assume
that the maturity is 10 years, unless other data for the firm indicate that it usually grants
options with a shorter length, in which case we use that length as the assumed option life.
We obtain firm financial data from Compustat, and we use Markit to determine the existence
of CDS trading availability for each firm-year. In order to calculate stock price volatility,
we merge our sample with CRSP. Finally, we obtain board of directors information from the
ISS Directors database.
     Our main variables of interest concern the value and slope of the CEO’s compensation
contract. The managerial delta equals the dollar change (in millions) of the CEO’s wealth
with respect to one dollar change in the company’s stock price, and we calculate it using the
derivative of the Black-Scholes formula (the delta of a restricted share equals 1). Similarly,
the managerial vega equals the dollar change (in millions) of the CEO’s wealth with respect
to a 0.01 change in the standard deviation of stock returns. We follow the assumptions of
Core and Guay (2002) and compute the deltas and vegas using the specification of Edmans
et al. (2009). In most of our models we look at how new compensation awards increase
the CEO’s delta or vega, since most of our hypothesis tests are predictions about how the


                                              11
board adjusts CEO incentives in response to the inception of CDS trading. Our approach
implicitly assumes that the CEO’s contract had been calibrated with optimal incentives prior
to the introduction of CDS, and that the arrival of CDS in the marketplace causes the board
to re-set these delta and vega incentives. More details of the variable definitions and their
construction procedures are provided in Appendix C.
       Table 1 reports summary statistics for our sample. Our main explanatory variable is an
indicator that equals one for firm-years with CDS trading observed in the Markit data, and
zero otherwise. We sort our sample into firms with and without CDS and compare their key
characteristics. On average, CDS firms are larger than non-CDS firms.7 The average book
leverage of CDS firms is higher than that of non-CDS firms. The market-to-book ratio and
R&D expenditures of CDS firms are lower on average than those of non-CDS firms, indicating
that non-CDS companies are more growth-oriented. Their lower leverage ratio than CDS
firms could, therefore, be explained by debt overhang that is particularly burdensome for a
growth firm. Table 1 also shows that the managerial deltas and vegas of new compensation
awards are higher for CDS firms than for non-CDS firms.
       Figure 2 gives an overview on the credit rating distribution of our sample firms in the year
prior to their CDS introduction, comparing the distribution to that observed in two years
after introduction. It illustrates that firms’ ratings tend to decrease after CDS inception,
consistent with Subrahmanyam et al. (2014).



4.        Empirical tests

       In this section we examine whether CEO’s incentive contracts change before and after
the inception of CDS trades. According to Hypothesis 1, managerial effective ownership
(α) and risk-taking incentives (σ) are likely to increase in order to counteract the agency
problems induced by CDS. We use the managerial delta and vega as proxies for a CEO’s
   7
    The size difference in our sample is larger than the one reported in Saretto and Tookes (2013). This is
expected as we consider a broader set of firms that include not only S&P 500 companies but also relatively
small, medium-sized companies that are also recorded in the ExecuComp database.

                                                    12
effective ownership and risk-taking incentives, respectively. We also consider the relation
between CEO incentive contracts and the CDS agency problem caused by forgone strategic
default options, as outlined in Hypothesis 2, which predicts that increases in managerial
vega should be closely related to this strategic default-related CDS agency problem. We test
these predictions and report our results in the following subsections.


4.1.    CEOs’ effective ownership and risk-taking incentives after CDS intro-

        duction

   Table 2 reports the effect of CDS introduction on a CEO’s managerial vega. We use the
following OLS and Tobit models for firm i in year t to estimate the CDS introduction effect:


   (i) OLS with fixed effects


                       Yit = a + b · CDSi,t−1 + c · (controls)i,t−1 + ISIC3 + δt + i,t


   (ii) Tobit with random effects


                            a + b · CDSi,t−1 + c · (controls)i,t−1 + Ri + i,t if Yit∗ > 0
                        
               Yit =
                            0                                                  Otherwise


   (iii) Tobit with fixed effects


                   Yit = a + b · CDSi,t−1 + c · (controls)i,t−1 + ISIC3 + δt + i,t if Yit∗ > 0
               
       Yit =
                   0                                                                  Otherwise


   Our outcome variable, Yit , is either the managerial vega or its log-transformed value
(ln(1 + managerial vega)). We construct this variable using only newly granted options
to the CEO of firm i in year t. If the CEO receives no new option in that year, we assign
zero to the CEO’s managerial vega. By definition, a new share’s vega is zero. Our main

                                                     13
explanatory variable is the CDS indicator, which would capture the cross-sectional difference
in our outcome variable Yit . As Yit is effectively the first difference in temporal dimension for
the CEO’s aggregate vega in two consecutive years, the point estimate of CDS will capture
the difference in differences effect of the CDS introduction. In the OLS with fixed effects
(specification (i)), ISIC denotes the vector of industry fixed effects defined at the three-digit
standard industrial classifications (SIC). Year fixed effects are denoted by δt in the linear
OLS regression.
       As our main variable, managerial vega, is left-censored and clustered at zero, we further
adopt the Tobit regression as follows:


                                                     Yit∗ if Yit∗ > 0
                                                 
                                         Yit =
                                                     0    Otherwise

where Yit is a latent variable. When this latent variable is strictly positive, our outcome
variable, Yit , is observed with a nonzero value. To control for potential cross-sectional con-
founding factors, we either estimate the random effects or fixed effects Tobit models. We
follow Mundlak (1978) and Yermack (1995) for the Tobit model with random effects (spec-
ification (ii)), where Ri denotes the firm-specific random disturbance. In the Tobit model
with fixed effects (specification (iii)), we control for the three-digit SIC industry and year
fixed effects.8
       As our baseline firm-level controls, we consider size (the natural logarithm of total assets),
market-to-book, book leverage, and three-year quarterly ROA volatility. In the OLS with
fixed effects (specification (i)) and the Tobit with fixed effects (specification (iii)), we cluster
the standard errors at the firm level. In the Tobit model with random effects (specification
(ii)), we report bootstrapped robust standard errors. Our Hypothesis 1 predicts b > 0.
       Results are reported in Table 2. In column (1), we show the effect of CDS introduction
on the managerial vega, while we simply control for industry and year fixed effects without
   8
     In this specification (iii), we are not subject to the incidental parameter problems as our number of fixed
effect dummies is fixed and does not grow in the number of firms in our data.


                                                         14
firm-level control variables. The point estimate of 0.040 for the CDS indicator implies that
for a firm with CDS trading, its CEO’s managerial vega increases by 133% from the sample
average (0.03). This result implies that the dollar change in the CEO’s wealth with the
newly granted incentive contracts for a 0.01 change in the standard deviation of the firm’s
stock return is $40,000 greater when CDS trade. This result is consistent with our prediction
from Hypothesis 1.
   In column (2), we include our full list of firm control variables, and we find similar results.
The estimated coefficient for the CDS indicator is 0.009, which is statistically significant at
the 1% level. After converting our dependent variable into the log-transformed value (column
(3)), we still obtain a statistically significant and positive point estimate of 0.008 for the CDS
indicator. In the remaining columns (4) to (7), we report estimates for models using alter-
native specifications. We estimate the random effects Tobit models in columns (4) and (5),
while we estimate the fixed effects Tobit models in columns (6) and (7). In all columns we
find largely consistent results with those reported earlier. In column (4), the point estimate
of 0.040 for CDS indicates that on average, the sensitivity of the CEO’s wealth with respect
to a 0.01 increase in the standard deviation of the firm’s stock return is larger by $40,000
for CDS firms compared to non-CDS firms. The estimated coefficient of 0.011 for CDS in
column (6) further confirms that CEOs of CDS firms are on average receiving $11,000 more
compensation than those of non-CDS firms, when the firm’s stock return volatility increases
by 0.01. These results continue to hold after controlling for industry and year fixed effects.
Our results are also robust to the use of log-transformed values of the managerial vega under
these various Tobit specifications (see columns (5) and (7)).
   In Table 3, we examine whether the CEO’s managerial delta increases following the intro-
duction of CDS. In column (1) of the table, the estimated coefficient for the CDS indicator,
0.031, indicates that the change in the CEO’s wealth from newly granted options with re-
spect to a one dollar change in the underlying stock price is $31,000 after the introduction
of CDS. When we focus on the managerial share delta rather than managerial option delta


                                               15
in column (3), we find similar patterns — the point estimate for the CDS indicator is 0.010,
statistically significant at the 1% level. When we combine the deltas for both option and
share grants, we find a $41,000 increase in the CEO’s wealth from these new equity incen-
tives when the firms stock price increases by one dollar (column (5)). Overall, our results
in Table 3 strongly support our Hypothesis 1. Log-transformation of the dependent variable
(managerial delta) does not change our conclusions (see columns (2), (4), and (6)).




4.2.   Incentive contracts and CDS: The relevance of strategic default by share-

       holders

   We test the extent to which our results are related to the strategic default options that
were valuable to shareholders prior to CDS inception. Bolton and Oehmke (2011) demon-
strate that CDS reduce strategic defaults by shareholders, because creditors whose debt
positions are hedged with CDS have stronger bargaining power against shareholders due to
their outside payoff opportunity. This logic implies that a firm’s shareholders who see their
strategic default opportunity diminish after introduction of CDS in the market are more
likely to increase their CEO’s managerial vega. This would motivate their CEOs to work
harder when facing significant incentive dilutions due to increasing default probability.
   Given this background, we empirically explore whether the relation between CDS and
managerial vega becomes stronger for firms with valuable strategic default options prior
to CDS introduction. Following Davydenko and Strebulaev (2007), we measure the value
of strategic default by non-fixed assets (one minus ratio of net PPE to total assets), the
market-to-book ratio, R&D expenditures, and a non-utility indicator (zero if a firm is in
utility industry and one otherwise). These proxies capture high liquidation costs (Alderson
and Betker, 1995). If non-fixed assets and/or R&D expenditures are higher, recovery rates
in post-default restructuring processes would be lower due to the lower fraction of tangi-
ble assets. This implies more valuable strategic default options for shareholders. Recovery

                                             16
rates also tend to be lower for growth firms (i.e., high market-to-book firms) and non-utility
firms with less valuable tangible assets (Acharya, Bharath, and Srinivasan, 2007). In addi-
tion to these recovery rate-related strategic default proxies, we further consider CEO tenure
and CEO duality as alternative proxies for the bargaining power of CEOs against creditors
(Davydenko and Strebulaev, 2007). These additional strategic default proxies also capture
the value of such options to shareholders before CDS are introduced.
   Table 4 reports the results of our analysis. We use the difference-in-difference-in-difference
specification (i.e., CDS × Strategic Default Proxy) using the OLS regression with industry
and year fixed effects. We find that the CEO’s managerial vega significantly increases fol-
lowing CDS introduction, particularly for firms with higher non-fixed asset, market-to-book,
non-utility, and the CEO duality indicator (column 1, 2, 4, and 6). Although the other
interactions between CDS with R&D expenditures and CEO tenure are not statistically sig-
nificant, their signs are consistently positive. Overall, these results in Table 4 are largely
consistent with our Hypothesis 2 — forgone strategic default to shareholders in the post-
CDS trading period is closely related to the option incentives provided to the CEO. When
we compute the marginal effect of the same triple difference term (CDS × Strategic Default
Proxy) using the Tobit with random effects (see the bottom row of Table 4), we still find that
the estimated marginal effects are all positive. Their estimates are statistically significant for
firms with higher non-fixed asset, higher market-to-book ratio, higher R&D expenditures,
and CEO tenure (columns (1), (2), (3), and (5)).
   Although not tabulated, we find contrasting and insignificant estimates for the relation
between the managerial delta and the strategic default options to shareholders. We find
overall negative point estimates for all specifications of the CDS × Strategic Default Proxy,
particularly for the share delta of the CEO rather than the option delta. These untabulated
results are also consistent with our predictions in Hypothesis 2.




                                               17
5.      Robustness tests

     The introduction of CDS is not random, meaning that our estimates may subject to
sample selection biases. To address this possibility, we estimate an instrumental variables
model. We adopt a firm’s main lenders’ foreign exchange derivatives usage as the instru-
ment for CDS. This instrument is widely used in the CDS and corporate finance literature
(Minton et al., 2009; Saretto and Tookes, 2013; Subrahmanyam et al., 2014); banks that
use foreign exchange derivatives tend to be the net buyers of credit protections (inclusions),
while the lenders who use foreign exchange derivatives for hedging purposes are unlikely to
be motivated by the reference entity’s characteristics (exclusions). To construct our instru-
ment, we first identify the lead arrangers of a syndicated loan for a firm of interest using the
DealScan syndicated loan database.9 We then search each lead arranger’s ultimate parent
company using the organizational structure information of banks in the CapitalIQ database.
We obtain the data for each parent bank’s foreign exchange derivatives usage from the call
report at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.10
     We define the Lender FX derivative as the amount of foreign exchange derivatives for non-
trading purposes of the ultimate lender parent. We normalize this amount by the lender’s
total assets over the past five years. If there are more than two ultimate parents for a lead
arranger of a firm, we take their average values. To avoid forbidden regressions, we follow
the three-step instrumental variables regression as done in Adams, Almeida, and Ferreira
(2009). We report our results in Table 5.
     In the first stage regression in column (1), the estimated sign for Lender FX derivative
on CDS is positive and statistically significant at the 1% level. This is consistent with the
results documented in existing studies (e.g., Subrahmanyam et al. (2014)). In our second
stage regression in column (2), we find a significantly positive point estimate of 0.024 for our
   9
     We link DealScan borrower information to Compustat firm identifiers using the linking file provided by
Chava and Roberts (2008).
  10
     https://www.chicagofed.org/banking/financial-institution-reports/commercial-bank-data. Since these
commercial bank data do not provide Compustat identifiers, we match the data with Compustat and
DealScan information through manual name matches.


                                                    18
CDS indicator, statistically significant at the 1% level.



6.      Conclusions

     We study how the introduction of credit default swaps may cause agency problems be-
tween a firm’s CEO and its shareholders, and we analyze whether managerial incentive
contracts can serve as a remedy for these agency problems.
     We model how the inception of CDS affects the CEO’s risk appetite and the incentive
alignment between the CEO and shareholders. We demonstrate that a significant increase
in creditors’ bargaining power due to the default insurance provided by CDS effectively un-
dermines shareholders’ strategic default threat. We find that boards revise CEOs’ incentive
contracts around the time of CDS introduction, largely consistent with the predictions from
our model. We find that the CEOs managerial vega significantly increases following the
introduction of CDS in both a statistical and an economic sense. We show that this forgone
strategic default option, which was valuable to the shareholders in the pre-CDS period, is
closely related to the motivation of a firm’s board granting increasingly more options to the
CEO after CDS introductions.
     Our study sheds light on the relative importance of managerial agency problems and
incentive contracts when one studies the impact of the empty creditor’s problem in the pres-
ence of CDS. While a number of theory papers have identified the potential costs of empty
creditors with CDS (Hu and Black, 2008; Bolton and Oehmke, 2011), this agency problem
has not been documented empirically. And while many studies find positive impacts of CDS
on corporate debt capacity and value (Saretto and Tookes, 2013; Danis and Gamba, 2017),
we posit that such net positive consequences of CDS could be driven by important omitted
factors, including action by a firm’s board that recognizes potential agency problems and
adjusts the CEO’s contract to counteract them. Our findings therefore help explain why
the empirical estimate of the cost of the empty creditors’ problem appears to be lower than



                                              19
theoretical predictions. Further work in this area would help set a useful micro-foundation
for understanding real effects of CDS.




                                            20
References

Acharya, V. V., Bharath, S. T., Srinivasan, A., 2007. Does industry-wide distress affect
  defaulted firms? Evidence from creditor recoveries. Journal of Financial Economics 85,
  787–821.

Adams, R., Almeida, H., Ferreira, D., 2009. Understanding the relationship between founder–
  ceos and firm performance. Journal of Empirical Finance 16, 136–150.

Alderson, M. J., Betker, B. L., 1995. Liquidation costs and capital structure. Journal of
  Financial Economics 39, 45–69.

Anderson, R. W., Sundaresan, S., 1996. Design and valuation of debt contracts. Review of
  Financial Studies 9, 37–68.

Bolton, P., Oehmke, M., 2011. Credit default swaps and the empty creditor problem. Review
  of Financial Studies 24, 2617–2655.

Chang, X. S., Chen, Y., Wang, S. Q., Zhang, K., Zhang, W., 2017. Does financial innovation
  affect technological innovation? Evidence from credit default swap trading. Unpublished
  Working Paper .

Chava, S., Roberts, M. R., 2008. How does financing impact investment? The role of debt
  covenants. The Journal of Finance 63, 2085–2121.

Chen, J., Leung, W. S., Song, W., Avino, D., 2017. Does CDS trading affect risk-taking
  incentives in managerial compensation? Unpublished Working Paper .

Coles, J. L., Daniel, N. D., Naveen, L., 2013. Calculation of compensation incentives and
  firm-related wealth using execucomp: Data, program, and explanation .

Colonnello, S., 2017. Internal governance and creditor governance: Evidence from credit
  default swaps. Second draft (No. 6/2017). Tech. rep., IWH Discussion Papers.


                                            21
Core, J., Guay, W., 2002. Estimating the value of employee stock option portfolios and their
  sensitivities to price and volatility. Journal of Accounting Research 40, 613–630.

Danis, A., Gamba, A., 2017. The real effects of credit default swaps. Journal of Financial
  Economics .

Davydenko, S. A., Strebulaev, I. A., 2007. Strategic actions and credit spreads: An empirical
  investigation. The Journal of Finance 62, 2633–2671.

Edmans, A., Gabaix, X., Landier, A., 2009. A multiplicative model of optimal CEO incen-
  tives in market equilibrium. Review of Financial Studies 22, 4881–4917.

Hu, H. T., Black, B., 2008. Debt, equity and hybrid decoupling: Governance and systemic
  risk implications. European Financial Management 14, 663–709.

Jensen, M. C., Meckling, W. H., 1976. Theory of the firm: Managerial behavior, agency
  costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial Economics 3, 305–360.

Merton, R. C., 1974. On the pricing of corporate debt: The risk structure of interest rates.
  The Journal of Finance 29, 449–470.

Minton, B. A., Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 2009. How much do banks use credit derivatives
  to hedge loans? Journal of Financial Services Research 35, 1–31.

Mundlak, Y., 1978. On the pooling of time series and cross section data. Econometrica:
  Journal of the Econometric Society pp. 69–85.

Saretto, A., Tookes, H. E., 2013. Corporate leverage, debt maturity, and credit supply: The
  role of credit default swaps. Review of Financial Studies 26, 1190–1247.

Subrahmanyam, M. G., Tang, D. Y., Wang, S. Q., 2014. Does the tail wag the dog?: The
  effect of credit default swaps on credit risk. Review of Financial Studies p. hhu038.




                                             22
Subrahmanyam, M. G., Tang, D. Y., Wang, S. Q., 2017. Credit default swaps, exacting
  creditors and corporate liquidity management. Journal of Financial Economics .

Yermack, D., 1995. Do corporations award CEO stock options effectively? Journal of Finan-
  cial Economics 39, 237–269.




                                           23
Appendix A.               Proofs

Proof of Proposition 1


From equation (2),

                   ∂Ω    α                                        
                      = − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − N (d1 (φ1 , K) < 0
                   ∂ξ    θ

because N (d1 (φ1 , K1 )) > N (d1 (φ1 , K2 )) for every 0 < K1 < K2 and d1 > 0 (non-distressed
firm at t = 0).



    ∂Ω      ∂
        =      (E0 [φ∗ V1 ])
    ∂θ      ∂θ
          1       α                     α                  ∂
    = − 2 V0 + 2 V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K)) − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K)) d1 (φ1 , K)
          θ      θ                       θ                ∂θ
       ξα
    + 2 V0 [N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K))]
       θ                                                                             
       ξα                            ∂                                     ∂
    −      V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − n(d1 (φ1 , K)) d1 (φ1 , K)
        θ                           ∂θ                                    ∂θ
          1                          α                     1−α
    = − 2 V0 1 − αN (d1 (φ1 , K)) − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K))
          θ                            θ                σθ(θ + α − 1)
       ξα
    + 2 V0 [N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K))]
       θ                                                                          
       ξα                               1−α                            1−α
    −      V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)))               − n(d1 (φ1 , K))
        θ                           σθ(θ + α − 1)                  σθ(θ + α − 1)
                                               
          1                             ξα
    = − 2 V0 1 − αN (d1 (φ1 , K)) +          − 1 V0 [N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 , K))]
          θ                               θ2
                                                 
       ξα                               1−α           ξα − α                       1−α
    −      V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)))                 +        V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K))
        θ                           σθ(θ + α − 1)        θ                     σθ(θ + α − 1)
     <0


because n(d1 (φ1 , K1 )) < n(d1 (φ1 , K2 )) for every 0 < K1 < K2 and d1 > 0.




                                               24
Proof of Proposition 2


From equation (2),

       ∂Ω
       ∂α
             1                    α                 ∂
        = − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K)) − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K)) d1 (φ1 , K)
             θ                    θ                ∂α
          ξ                                        
        − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − N (d1 (φ1 , K)
          θ                                                                           
          ξα                            ∂                                    ∂
        −     V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − n(d1 (φ1 , K)) d1 (φ1 , K)
           θ                           ∂α                                   ∂α
             1                    α                     1
        = − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K)) − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K))
             θ                    θ                σ(θ + α − 1)
          ξ                                        
        − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − N (d1 (φ1 , K)
          θ                                                                      
          ξα                                1                             1
        −     V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)))              − n(d1 (φ1 , K))
           θ                           σ(θ + α − 1)                  σ(θ + α − 1)
        <0


     ∂Ω
     ∂σ
           α                 ∂
      = − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K) d1 (φ1 , K)
           θ               ∂σ                                                      
        ξα                           ∂                                   ∂
      −     V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − n(d1 (φ1 , K)) d1 (φ1 , K) < 0
         θ                          ∂σ                                  ∂σ
                                                ∂                       ∂
for n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) < n(d1 (φ1 , K)), ∂σ    d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) < ∂σ d1 (φ1 , K) for d1 > 0 (non-
                                               
distressed firms) and σ 2 > 2 · ln VK(1−L)
                                      0 (1−φ1 )
                                                  (firms with relatively higher volatility).




                                                 25
Proof of Proposition 3


From equation (2),

                    ∂ 2Ω
                    ∂σ∂ξ
                                                                              
                         α                             1       V0 (1 − φ1 )     1
                    = − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L))) − 2 ln                       +
                         θ                            σ        K(1 − L)         2
                                                              
                                       1      V0 (1 − φ1 )     1
                    − n(d1 (φ1 , K)) − 2 ln                  +       >0
                                      σ            K           2

                                                 
                    2                V0 (1−φ1 )
for d1 > 0 and σ > 2 · ln            K(1−L)
                                                      (firms with relatively higher volatility as conditioned in
Proposition 2).
   By contrast,

              ∂ 2Ω
             ∂α∂ξ
                   1                                     
             = − V0 N (d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)) − N (d1 (φ1 , K)
                   θ                                                                 
                 α                           1                                1
             − V0 n(d1 (φ1 , K(1 − L)))                 − n(d1 (φ1 , K))
                 θ                      σ(θ + α − 1)                     σ(θ + α − 1)

is generally indefinite. However, the equation above is negative when σ is sufficiently high,
               α
i.e., σ    (θ+α−1)
                    .


            ∂2Ω          ∂2Ω
   Since    ∂α∂ξ
                   and   ∂σ∂ξ
                                are independent of ξ,

                                                 ξCDS
                                                         ∂ 2Ω       ∂ 2Ω
                                         Z
                                ∂Ωξ
                                    =                         dξ =       (ξCDS − ξ) > 0
                                ∂α         ξ            ∂α∂ξ       ∂α∂ξ

                                                 ξCDS
                                                        ∂ 2Ω      ∂ 2Ω
                                         Z
                                ∂Ωξ
                                    =                        dξ =      (ξCDS − ξ) < 0
                                ∂σ           ξ          ∂σ∂ξ      ∂σ∂ξ

where ξ > ξCDS = 0 by assumption.




                                                               26
Appendix B.              Analytical derivation of the debt value

                         change after CDS introduction

   Our model highlights the cost of the empty creditors’ problem, which is driven by man-
agerial perquisite consumption following CDS introduction. As the managerial perquisites
are motivated by α < 1 and a limited detection technology θ, our setting differs from Bolton
and Oehmke (2011), who assume α = 1 and a sufficiently high θ  1. Our model features
over-shirking of the CEO in anticipation of excessive default following CDS inception. In
our model, CDS also reduce the creditors’ monitoring intensity, which leads to further CEO
over-consumption of perquisites. These two changes around the CDS introduction together
imply a reduction in firm value after CDS introduction. As debt holders could anticipate
these changes and adjust their debt prices accordingly, any reduction in firm value would
be borne by shareholders. Debt values, however, could increase or decrease, depending on
whether the increasing payoff to the creditors due to the foregone strategic default option
of shareholders outweighs the decreasing payoff to the creditors due to the managerial over-
shirking. This tradeoff depends on the parameter values. Our model might overestimate the
CDS agency problem because CDS could enhance the expected wealth of the debtholders.
However, so long as the expected debt value does not increase dramatically following CDS
introduction, our models intuition would carry through. As our model aims to capture the
agency features that are not modeled in the existing studies (Bolton and Oehmke, 2011), its
prediction for debt price changes may not fully conform to the existing studies’ predictions.
However, this discrepancy doesn’t necessarily imply that our model is in conflict with other
models. Our model consistently predicts increasing leverage ratio following CDS introduc-
tion, and when creditors’ monitoring intensity reduction is ignored, our model consistently
predicts increasing debt capacity following the CDS introduction. To share all these intu-
itions, let us calculate the change in debt price after the CDS introduction.
   First, assume that creditor monitoring intensity (θ) does not change after CDS introduc-


                                             27
tion. Following CDS introduction, the expected value of debt increases:



                                                            
                V1                                                                               
ξE0        V1 −          − K(1 − L) V K(1−L) (θ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ) · P r V K(1−L) (θ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ) > 0
                2θ
                                                                                             (A1)
                V1
                     
where V1 −      2θ
                         > K(1 − L) if V K(1−L) (θ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ).
   Intuitively, Equation (A1) indicates that the creditors benefit from CDS introduction
                                                              1
                                                                
because they can be paid by the remaining firm value V0 1 − 2θ    which is greater than the
debt level K(1 − L) when strategic debt renegotiation option was available to the sharehold-
ers before CDS introduction.
     Now consider that creditor monitoring becomes weaker from θ1 to θ2 after CDS intro-
duction (θ1 > θ2 > 1). An increase in the expected value of debt after CDS introduction
is
        
      1
  1−       V0 [N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K))]
     2θ2
 − ξK(1 − L) [N (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))]
                  
                1
 − (1 − ξ) 1 −       V0 [N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))]
               2θ1
 + K [N (d2 (φ1 (θ2 ), K)) − N (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))]
                                                          
         1                                                1
 + 1−         V0 [1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K(1 − L)))] − 1 −       V0 [1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L)))]
        2θ2                                              2θ1
                                                                                             (A2)

                     1−α
where φ1 (θ) =        θ
                         .
     The terms in the first three rows of Equation (A2) correspond to Equation (A1) after con-
sidering the reduced monitoring intensity by creditors. They focus on the debt price changes
in the strategic default state (K(1 − L) ≤ V1 (1 − φ) < K). The term in the fourth row of
Equation (A2) implies the change in debt value in solvent state (V1 (1 − φ) ≥ K) because of




                                                     28
weaker monitoring intensity. This term is always negative.11 The last row of (A2) indicates
the change in debt value in default state (V1 (1 − φ) < K(1 − L)), whose sign is indeterminate
                                                                            
because weaker monitoring intensity reduces debt value 1 − 2θ12 < 1 − 2θ11 , while it in-
creases the probability of default ([1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K(1 − L)))] > [1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L)))]).
       In sum, CDS introduction could enhance debt value because creditors would receive the
remaining firm value instead of the lowered face value of the renegotiated debt. However,
the decreased monitoring intensity of creditors with CDS hurts the debt value after CDS
introduction, because managers have an incentive to over-shirk, especially for the solvent
states.




Derivation of equation (A1)


       Expected value of debt before the CDS introduction is

                                         
  E0 K V1 ≥ V K (θ1 ) · P r V1 ≥ V K (θ1 )
                                                                                     
  + ξE0 K(1 − L) V K(1−L) (θ1 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ1 ) · P r V K(1−L) (θ1 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ1 )
                                                       
                    V1                                                                        
  + (1 − ξ)E0 V1 −       V K(1−L) (θ1 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ1 ) · P r V K(1−L) (θ1 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ1 )
                    2θ1
                                   
             V1                                                
  + E0 V 1 −     V1 < V K(1−L) (θ1 ) · P r V1 < V K(1−L) (θ1 )
             2θ1
   = KN (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))

   + ξK(1 − L) [N (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))]
                       
                     1
   + (1 − ξ) 1 −          V0 [N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K))]
                    2θ1
            
          1
    1−         V0 [1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ1 ), K(1 − L)))]
         2θ1
                                                                                              (A3)
  11
       d2 (φ1 (θ2 ), K) < d2 (φ1 (θ1 ), K) if θ1 > θ2 > 1.




                                                             29
   Expected value of debt after the CDS introduction is

                                         
   E0 K V1 ≥ V K (θ2 ) · P r V1 ≥ V K (θ2 )
                                                
              V1                                                                       
   + E0 V 1 −     V K(1−L) (θ2 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ2 ) · P r V K(1−L) (θ2 ) ≤ V1 < V K (θ2 )
              2θ2
                                    
              V1                                               
   + E0 V 1 −     V1 < V K(1−L) (θ2 ) · P r V1 < V K(1−L) (θ2 )
              2θ2
                                                                                                (A4)
   = KN (d2 (φ1 (θ2 ), K))
             
           1
   + 1−          V0 [N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K(1 − L))) − N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K))]
          2θ2
          
        1
    1−        V0 [1 − N (d1 (φ1 (θ2 ), K(1 − L)))]
       2θ2

                                                             2
                                                      
                                               V (1−φ)
                                           ln 0 K        + σ2
                    K
where V K (θ) =   1− 1−α
                         ,   d1 (φ, K) =           σ
                                                                 , d2 (φ, K) = d1 (φ, K) − σ.
                      θ

   We obtain Equation (A2) by (A4) – (A3).
   If we set θ1 = θ2 = θ in Equation (A3) and (A4), then we obtain (A1) by (A4) – (A3).




                                                         30
Appendix C.         Variable definitions


Variable      Description                                               Data source
              The dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s
              wealth from newly granted options with respect to a
              0.01 change in the stock return volatility.
                                                    2
                                                            √
                                    P                
                                    ln( X )+ r−d+ σ2 T
                      ν = e−dT N 0           √
                                            σ T
                                                          P   T×
                      (T he number of new options) × 0.01

              We assume that the vega of a share is equal to zero.

              P : The grant date stock price of an underlying stock.
              Before 2006, it is obtained from Stock Option Grants –
              1992 Format in the ExecuComp. After 2006, we retrieve
              the grant date of a stock option from Plan Based Awards
              and the corresponding stock price from CRSP.
                                                                       ExecuComp
 Managerial   X: The strike price of new options. If missing, we re- CRSP/Compustat
 vega         place it with the underlying stock price because most of FRED
              the options are issued at-the-money.

              r: N-year Treasury Constant Maturity rate, which cor-
              responds to the maturity of an option. The data source
              is FRED Economic Data.

              d: The average dividend yield (=DVPSX F/PRCC F)
              over the previous 3 years obtained from Compustat. If
              missing, we replace it with the median yield across all
              firms for that year.

              σ: The monthly standard deviation of the stock return
              over the past 60 months, obtained from CRSP. If miss-
              ing, we replace it with the median volatility for that
              year.




                                        31
Variable     Description                                                    Data source
             T : The time to maturity of the new option, which is the
             difference between the grant date and the maturity of a
             stock option in years. Before 2006, we assume the grant
             date of an option as July 1st of the fiscal year, follow-
             ing the convention of the ExecuComp. We obtain the
             expiration date of an option from Stock Option Grants
             – 1992 Format. After 2006, we match Outstanding Eq-
             uity Awards and Plan Based Awards by CO PER ROL,
             year, and exercise price. During the period, the grant
             date is obtained from Plan Based Awards. If missing,
             we replace it with the stock price on July 1st of the fiscal
             year. The maturity date of an option is retrieved from
             Outstanding Equity Awards. If we cannot calculate the
             times to maturity from the process above, we set the
             value equal to 10.

             T he number of new options: : The number of new
             options granted to a CEO. Before 2006, it is equal to
             numnewop in Stock Option Grants-1992 Format. After
             2006, it is obtained from Plan Based Awards.

             The dollar change (in million) in the current CEOs
             wealth from newly granted options, with respect to a
             0.01 change in the stock price, multiplied by one hun-
Managerial   dred for scaling.                                      ExecuComp
option                               P              2
                                                                  CRSP/Compustat
delta                                 ln( X )+ r−d+ σ2 T            FRED
                       ∆O = e−dT N             √
                                              σ T
                                                            ×
                          (T he number of new options)




                                         32
Variable      Description                                                Data source
              The dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s
              wealth from newly granted shares, with respect to a 0.01
              change in the stock price, multiplied by one hundred for
              scaling.

                     ∆S = 1 × (T he number of new shares)

              We assume that the delta of a share is equal to one.
                                                                          ExecuComp
Managerial
share delta   T he number of new shares: The number of new shares CRSP/Compustat
              granted to a CEO. Before 2006, it is RSTKGRNT di- FRED
              vided by the strike price of newly granted options be-
              cause options and shares are usually granted on a same
              date and most of the options are issued at-the-money. If
              the strike price is missing, we replace it with the average
              stock price at the beginning and end of the fiscal year.
              After 2006, it is the number of new shares granted to a
              CEO, reported in Plan Based Awards.

              The dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s
              wealth from both newly granted options and shares with
Managerial    respect to a 0.01 change in the stock price, multiplied ExecuComp
              by one hundred for scaling.                             CRSP/Compustat
total delta
                                                                      FRED
                                  ∆T = ∆O + ∆S

              An indicator equal to one if a firm has traded a credit
CDS                                                                   Markit
              default swap during the period of 2001 to 2015.


                                      ln(AT )                            Compustat
Size
                                                                         DATA6
              The natural logarithm of total assets.


                        (M KV ALT + DLC + DLT T )/AT
                                                                    Compustat
Market to
book          The sum of market capitalization, debt in current li- DATA5, 6, 9,
              abilities and long term debt divided by total assets. 25, 199
              If M KV ALT is missing, we replace it with CSHO ×
              P RCC F .




                                        33
Variable      Description                                             Data source


Book                          (DLC + DLT T )/AT                       Compustat
leverage                                                              DATA5, 6, 9
              The sum of debt in current liabilities and long term debt
              divided by total assets.
              The quarterly standard deviation of operating income
ROA                                                                     Compustat
              before depreciation (OIBDP Q) divided by total assets
volatility                                                              Quarterly
              (AT Q) over the past three years.

Non-fixed                          1−   P P EN T                      Compustat
                                           AT
asset                                                                 DATA6, 8
              where P P EN T is net property, plant, and equipment.

                                      XRD                             Compustat
R&D                                   SALE
                                                                      DATA12, 46
              where XRD is research and development expense.
              An indicator equal to zero if the SIC code of a firm is
Non-utility                                                            CRSP
              from 4000 to 4999 and one otherwise.
              The number of years since a CEO is assigned to a firm.
              The date on which a CEO is assigned is identified by ei-
              ther BECAM ECEO or the beginning date of the fiscal
CEO           year in which a CEO is firstly identified by CEOAN N .
                                                                       ExecuComp
tenure        In some cases, the year in which a CEO firstly
              appears (identified by CEOAN N ) is earlier than
              BECAM ECEO. Then we compare them and use an
              earlier date.
CEO           An indicator equal to one if a CEO is the chairman of
                                                                       ISS
duality       the board.




                                        34
Figure 1. Managerial ownership and firm volatility as remedies of agency prob-
lem: The relevance of strategic default
This figure illustrates the relation of CEO’s ownership α (or firm volatility σ), the probability of strategic default ξ,
and agency cost Ω.




                                                          35
Figure 2. Rating distribution after CDS inception
This figure reports rating distribution for firms one year before CDS introduction (pre-CDS inception in the figure)
and two years after CDS introduction(post-CDS inception in the figure). Our sample consists of 675 firms during the
period from 2001 to 2015.




                                                        36
                                                                 Table 1: Summary statistics

     This table reports summary statistics for key variables in our sample. The sample consists of 28,707 firm-years in the intersection of the ExecuComp and
     Compustat databases from 2001 to 2015. CDS trading availability of each firm is identified using the Markit CDS data. Actual sample size in each regression
     could vary, depending on the joint availability of other control variables. CDS is an indicator equal to one if a firm has traded a credit default swap during
     the period of 2001 to 2015. Size is the logarithm of total assets. Market to book is the sum of market capitalization, debt in current liabilities and long term
     debt divided by total assets. Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities and long term debt divided by total assets. ROA volatility is the quarterly
     standard deviation of operating income before depreciation divided by total assets over the past three years. Non-fixed asset is one minus the ratio of the net
     property, plant, and equipment to total assets. R&D is research and development expenditures divided by sales. If R&D is missing, we set the value equal to
     zero. Non-utility is an indicator equal to zero if the SIC code of a firm is from 4000 to 4999 and one otherwise. CEO tenure is the number of years since a CEO
     is assigned to a firm. CEO duality is an indicator equal to one if a CEO is the chairman of the board. If the value is missing, we replace the value with zero.
     Managerial option delta is defined as the dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s wealth from newly granted options, with respect to 0.01 change in the
     stock price, multiplied by one hundred for scaling. Managerial share delta is defined as the dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s wealth from newly
     granted shares, with respect to 0.01 change in the stock price, multiplied by one hundred for scaling. Managerial total delta is the sum of option delta and share
     delta. Managerial vega is defined as the dollar change (in million) in the current CEO’s wealth with respect to 0.01 change in the stock return volatility. We
     assume that the vega of a share is equal to zero.




37
                                            Panel A: All firms                           Panel B: CDS firms                         Panel C: non-CDS firms
                                   N        Mean       Median       Std         N         Mean      Median        Std         N        Mean       Median       Std
      CDS                        28707       0.36        0.00       0.48      10231       1.00        1.00       0.00       18476       0.00        0.00       0.00
      Size                       28656       7.71        7.62       1.82      10221       9.18        9.04       1.46       18435       6.89        6.82       1.45
      Market to book             28026       1.51        1.15       1.63      10028       1.29        1.05       0.97       17998       1.64        1.23       1.90
      Book leverage              28544       0.25        0.20       0.91      10206       0.31        0.28       0.21       18338       0.21        0.14       1.12
      ROA volatility             27138       0.03        0.02       0.08       9576       0.02        0.01       0.03       17562       0.03        0.02       0.10
      Non-fixed asset            27427       0.76        0.84       0.23       9694       0.70        0.77       0.25       17733       0.79        0.86       0.22
      R&D                        28579       0.14        0.00       4.75      10211       0.02        0.00       0.07       18368       0.21        0.00       5.93
      Non-utility                28707       0.90        1.00       0.30      10231       0.85        1.00       0.36       18476       0.94        1.00       0.25
      CEO tenure                 28707       7.94        6.00       7.01      10231       7.08        5.00       6.18       18476       8.41        6.00       7.39
      CEO duality                28707       0.45        0.00       0.50      10231       0.56        1.00       0.50       18476       0.39        0.00       0.49
      Managerial option delta    28707       0.11        0.02       0.65      10231       0.17        0.06       1.04       18476       0.07        0.01       0.25
      Managerial share delta     28707       0.06        0.00       4.67      10231       0.13        0.00       7.83       18476       0.03        0.00       0.13
      Managerial total delta     28707       0.17        0.05       4.72      10231       0.30        0.10       7.90       18476       0.10        0.04       0.29
      Managerial vega            28707       0.03        0.00       0.07      10231       0.05        0.02       0.11       18476       0.01        0.00       0.04
                                    Table 2: Managerial vega and CDS

This table reports the CDS effect on CEO’s managerial vega. Our sample consists of 28,707 firm-years in the
intersection of the ExecuComp and Compustat databases from 2001 to 2015. CDS trading availability of each firm
is identified using the Markit CDS data. Managerial vega is defined as the dollar change(in million) in the current
CEO’s wealth with respect to 0.01 change in stock return volatility. We assume that vega of a share is equal to zero.
CDS is an indicator equal to one if a firm has traded a credit default swap during the period of 2001 to 2015. Size
is the logarithm of total assets. Market to book is the sum of market capitalization, debt in current liabilities and
long term debt divided by total assets. Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities and long term debt
divided by total assets. ROA volatility is the quarterly standard deviation of operating income before depreciation
divided by total assets over the past three years. Log Transform indicates that the dependent variable is replaced
with the natural logarithm of 1 plus managerial vega. Industry group is defined by the first three digits of the
SIC code. For OLS and Tobit with fixed effect, firm clustered standard errors are in parenthesis. For Tobit with
random effect, bootstrapping robust standard errors are in parenthesis. AIC and BIC indicate Akaike information
criterion and Bayesian information criterion, respectively. *, **, and *** denote significance levels of 10%, 5%, and
1%, respectively.

                                                   Dependent variables: Managerial vega
                                                      Log                        Log                        Log
                                                   transform                  transform                  transform
                           (1)            (2)         (3)           (4)          (5)           (6)          (7)
 CDS                     0.040***      0.009***    0.008***      0.040***     0.035***      0.011***      0.009***
                          (0.003)       (0.002)     (0.002)       (0.004)      (0.004)       (0.004)       (0.003)

 Size                                  0.016***    0.014***      0.010***     0.008***      0.025***      0.022***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.002)       (0.001)

 Market to book                        0.008***    0.007***      0.010***     0.009***      0.011***      0.009***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.002)      (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)

 Book leverage                         -0.008***   -0.007***     -0.019***    -0.017***     -0.027***    -0.022***
                                        (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.006)      (0.005)

 ROA volatility                         0.020*      0.016*         -0.008       -0.006        -0.001       -0.002
                                        (0.011)     (0.009)       (0.031)      (0.020)       (0.014)      (0.012)

 Constant                0.014***      -0.116***   -0.102***     -0.110***    -0.090***     -0.172***    -0.141***
                          (0.002)       (0.011)     (0.008)       (0.013)      (0.010)       (0.030)      (0.023)

 Model                     OLS           OLS          OLS         Tobit         Tobit        Tobit         Tobit
 Random effect              N             N            N            Y             Y            N             N
 Industry fixed effect      Y             Y            Y            N             N            Y             Y
 Year fixed effect          Y             Y            Y            N             N            Y             Y
 N                        25773         23903        23903        23946         23946        23903         23903
 Adjusted R-square        0.118         0.194        0.238
 AIC                                                             -18100.55    -24180.14     -14328.72    -20403.75
 BIC                                                             -18035.88    -24115.47     -12364.85    -18439.89




                                                            38
                  Table 3: Managerial option, share, total delta, and CDS

This table reports the CDS effect on CEO’s option delta, share delta, and total delta. Our sample consists of
28,707 firm-years in the intersection of the ExecuComp and Compustat databases from 2001 to 2015. CDS trading
availability of each firm is identified using the Markit CDS data. Managerial option delta is defined as the dollar
change (in million) in the current CEO’s wealth from newly granted options, with respect to 0.01 change in the stock
price, multiplied by one hundred for scaling. Managerial share delta is defined as the dollar change (in million) in
the current CEO’s wealth from newly granted shares, with respect to 0.01 change in the stock price, multiplied by
one hundred for scaling. Managerial total delta is the sum of option delta and share delta. CDS is an indicator
equal to one if a firm has traded a credit default swap during the period of 2001 to 2015. Size is the logarithm
of total assets. Market to book is the sum of market capitalization, debt in current liabilities and long term debt
divided by total assets. Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities and long term debt divided by total
assets. ROA volatility is the quarterly standard deviation of operating income before depreciation divided by total
assets over the past three years. Log Transform indicates that the dependent variable is replaced with the natural
logarithm of 1 plus the corresponding managerial delta. Industry group is defined by the first three digits of the SIC
code. Firm clustered standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** denote significance levels of 10%, 5%, and
1%, respectively.

                          Managerial option delta          Managerial share delta          Managerial total delta
 Dependent variable                         Log                             Log                             Log
                                         transform                       transform                       transform
                            (1)             (2)               (3)           (4)             (5)              (6)
 CDS                      0.031**        0.020***        0.010***         0.009***       0.041***         0.026***
                          (0.013)         (0.005)         (0.004)          (0.003)        (0.014)          (0.006)

 Size                    0.037***        0.023***        0.005***         0.005***       0.042***         0.027***
                          (0.006)         (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.001)        (0.006)          (0.002)

 Market to book            0.003          0.003*         -0.006***       -0.005***         -0.004           -0.001
                          (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.004)          (0.002)

 Book leverage             -0.004          -0.002        0.009***         0.007***         0.005            0.004
                          (0.004)         (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.005)          (0.004)

 ROA volatility            0.347          0.131*           0.055           0.034          0.402*           0.156*
                          (0.216)         (0.068)         (0.035)         (0.021)         (0.239)          (0.082)

 Constant                -0.263***       -0.158***         0.003           0.002         -0.260***       -0.147***
                          (0.047)         (0.020)         (0.011)         (0.007)         (0.049)         (0.021)

 Industry fixed effect       Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 Year fixed effect           Y               Y               Y               Y               Y               Y
 N                         23903           23903           23903           23903           23903           23903
 Adjusted R-square         0.017           0.151           0.027           0.060           0.023           0.155




                                                         39
                    Table 4: Managerial vega, CDS, and strategic default

This table reports the CDS effect on managerial vega with strategic default proxies. Our sample consists of 28,707
firm-years in the intersection of the ExecuComp and Compustat databases from 2001 to 2015. CDS trading availability
of each firm is identified using the Markit CDS data. The regression specifications are OLS with fixed effects. The
dependent variable is managerial vega, which is defined as the dollar change(in million) in the current CEO’s wealth
with respect to 0.01 change in stock return volatility. We assume that vega of a share is equal to zero. CDS is
an indicator equal to one if a firm has traded a credit default swap during the period of 2001 to 2015. Size is the
logarithm of total assets. Market to book is the sum of market capitalization, debt in current liabilities and long term
debt divided by total assets. Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities and long term debt divided by
total assets. ROA volatility is the quarterly standard deviation of operating income before depreciation divided by
total assets over the past three years. Strategic default proxy indicates variables such as non-fixed asset, market to
book, R&D, Non-utility, CEO tenure, and CEO duality, represented in the top row of each column. Non-fixed asset
is one minus the ratio of the net property, plant, and equipment to total assets. R&D is research and development
expense divided by sales. If R&D is missing, we set the value equal to zero. Non-utility is an indicator equal to
zero if the SIC code of a firm is from 4000 to 4999 and one otherwise. CEO Tenure is the number of years since a
CEO is assigned to a firm. CEO duality is an indicator equal to one if a CEO is the chairman of the board. DiD
marginal effect of RE Tobit indicates the marginal effect of difference-in-difference estimates of the interaction term
(CDS)X(High strategic default proxy) in random effect Tobit model, where (High strategic default proxy) is defined
as an indicator equal to one if the strategic default proxy is above median in our sample. Industry group is defined by
the first three digits of the SIC code. For OLS with fixed effect, firm clustered standard errors are in parenthesis. For
Tobit with random effect, bootstrapping robust standard errors are in parenthesis. *, **, and *** denote significance
levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                          Dependent variables: Managerial vega
 Strategic default proxies:          Non-fixed     Market to        R&D          Non-utility     CEO           CEO
                                       asset        book                                        tenure        duality
                                        (1)           (2)            (3)             (4)          (5)           (6)
 CDS                                   -0.010        -0.007       0.007***          -0.004       -0.000        0.002
                                      (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.002)         (0.005)      (0.007)       (0.003)

 (CDS)×(Strategic default proxy)     0.027***       0.011***        0.040         0.014**        0.001       0.012***
                                      (0.011)        (0.003)       (0.036)        (0.005)       (0.001)       (0.004)

 Strategic default proxy               0.009                       0.000**        -0.023*        -0.000        -0.000
                                      (0.005)                      (0.000)        (0.012)       (0.000)       (0.001)

 Size                                0.016***       0.016***      0.016***        0.016***     0.016***      0.016***
                                      (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)

 Market to book                      0.008***       0.006***      0.008***        0.008***     0.008***      0.008***
                                      (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.001)

 Book leverage                       -0.008***     -0.006***      -0.008***      -0.008***     -0.008***     -0.008***
                                      (0.001)       (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)       (0.001)

 ROA volatility                       0.019*        0.022**        0.019*          0.021*       0.020*        0.020*
                                      (0.010)       (0.011)        (0.010)         (0.011)      (0.011)       (0.011)

 Constant                            -0.120***     -0.112***      -0.118***      -0.095***     -0.116***     -0.113***
                                      (0.011)       (0.011)        (0.011)        (0.016)       (0.011)       (0.012)

 Industry fixed effect                   Y             Y             Y               Y            Y              Y
 Year fixed effect                       Y             Y             Y               Y            Y              Y
 N                                     23606         23903         23848           23903        23903          23903
 Adjusted R-square                     0.198         0.201         0.195           0.195        0.198          0.196


 DiD marginal effect of RE Tobit     0.011***       0.012***      0.016***          0.007       0.004*         0.004
                                      (0.003)        (0.003)       (0.006)         (0.006)      (0.002)       (0.004)




                                                            40
                             Table 5: Causal regression: IV approach

This table reports instrumental variables regression with an instrument as lenders’ bank foreign exchange derivative
for hedging purpose(Lender FX derivative). Our sample consists of 28,707 firm-years in the intersection of the
ExecuComp and Compustat databases from 2001 to 2015. CDS trading availability of each firm is identified using
the Markit CDS data. Lender FX Derivative is defined as the average of foreign exchange derivative for non-trading
purpose across all ultimate parents of a firm’s lenders that have served as a lead arranger over the past five years.
Column (1) is the first stage logit regressions of CDS on Lender FX derivative. Column (2) is the second stage OLS
regression of managerial vega on fitted CDS in the first stage regression. Managerial vega is defined as the dollar
change(in million) in the current CEO’s wealth with respect to 0.01 change in stock return volatility. We assume that
vega of a share is equal to zero. CDS is an indicator equal to one if a firm has traded a credit default swap during the
period of 2001 to 2015. Size is the logarithm of total assets. Market to book is the sum of market capitalization, debt
in current liabilities and long term debt divided by total assets. Book leverage is the sum of debt in current liabilities
and long term debt divided by total assets. ROA volatility is the quarterly standard deviation of operating income
before depreciation divided by total assets over the past three years. Industry and year fixed effect are controlled.
Industry group is defined by the first three digits of the SIC code. Firm clustered standard errors are in parenthesis.
*, **, and *** denote significance levels of 10%, 5%, and 1%, respectively.

                                           1st Stage                                        2nd stage
 Dependent variable                           CDS                                        Managerial vega
                                              (1)                                               (2)
 CDS                                                                                         0.024***
                                                                                              (0.005)

 Lender FX derivative                      22.445***
                                            (3.260)

 Size                                       1.934***                                         0.013***
                                             (0.099)                                          (0.002)

 Market to book                             -0.125*                                          0.008***
                                            (0.068)                                           (0.001)

 Book leverage                              0.353***                                        -0.009***
                                             (0.093)                                         (0.001)

 ROA volatility                              -2.393                                            0.012
                                            (2.392)                                           (0.009)

 Constant                                  -11.687***                                       -0.087***
                                             (1.152)                                         (0.012)

 Industry fixed effect                         Y                                                Y
 Year fixed effect                             Y                                                Y
 N                                           22029                                            19661
 Pseudo R square                             0.579
 Adjusted R square                                                                            0.202
 F statistics                                                                                 25.896




                                                           41
