NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ECONOMIC INCENTIVES
AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS:
SPENDING AND VOTING
IN SCHOOL BUDGET REFERENDA

Thomas Romer
Howard Rosenthal

Vincent Munley

Working Paper No. 2406

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

Support from the Ford Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. This project was
partially funded by the National Science Foundation. An earlier version of the
paper was presented at the NBER Conference on State and Local Government Finance
in December 1986. We thank conference participants for their comments, and are
particularly grateful to Dennis Epple for his usual insightful response to a
previous draft. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research project
on State and Local Finance. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2406
October 1987

Economic Incentives and Political Institutions:
Spending and Voting in School Budget Referenda

ABSTRACT

Allocation of resources in the local public sector involves economic and
political forces. Spending for elementary and secondary education is a major
area of public expenditure. In many states, the bulk of this spending is
subject to referendum. In addition, grants-in-aid from state governments to
local school districts form an important component of the district revenues.
This paper has two main features. One is the characterization of local
spending when the state aid structure is of the closed-end matching grant
type. Under this structure, local tax price is endogenous, since the amount
of state subsidy depends on the district's spending choice. The other main
feature is the linking of spending proposals to referendum outcomes. In this
way, our model makes use of voting data to shed light on the extent to which
referenda constrain spending. The empirical setting is public school budget
referenda in 544 New York school districts for the 1975-76 school year. Our
econometric results and simulations based on them reveal considerable
sensitivity of spending to the form of the grant structure, as well as to the
referendum requirement. In addition, large school districts appear to behave
more like "budget-maximizers" than do small districts, where proposals appear
to be more in line with "median voter" demands.

Thomas Romer

Howard Rosenthal

GS IA

GS IA

Carnegie—Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Carnegie—Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213

Vincent G. Munley
Department of Economics
Lehigh University
Bethlehem, PA 18015

ECONOMIC INCENTIVES AND POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS:
SPENDING AND VOTING IN SCHOOL BUDGET REFERENDA

Thomas Romer, Howard Rosenthal, and

1.

Vincent Munley

Introduction
While public spending faces many of the same

resource

allocation

tradeoffs that affect the market equilibrium for private goods, the decision

as to how much to spend is not decentralized among a multitude of invisible
hands but is made through a political process that directly aggregates
individual preferences. In many American localities, referenda are a key
aspect of the budgetary process. The major type of expenditure decision made
this way is spending for elementary and secondary education by local public

school districts. Public school spending is therefore a useful vehicle for
the study of local public goods provision processes - -

and

is a

quantitatively important area of resource allocation in its own right.
A large empirical literature has examined various aspects of the

determinants of school spending. For the most part, this literature has
focused on specifying an expenditure equation, without linking observed
spending proposals to referendum outcomes. One might well think, however,
that the vote outcomes contain information, for they may reveal the extent to

which public school officials view the referendum process as a constraint on
spending.

Resources to school districts flow not only from the locality but also
from higher level governments, especially the state. As state aid accounts
for a substantial component of public school spending throughout the U.S., it
clearly plays an important role in the determination of local expenditures. A
frequently used form of state aid for education is the closed-end matching

1

grant. Such grants provide aid that subsidizes local spending up to some
predetermined level, beyond which the subsidy stops. The local "tax price" of

public spending is therefore less at low levels of spending than at high
ones. A choice of spending level by the school district is therefore also a
choice of tax price. This endogeneity needs to be captured in an econometric
specification of spending in the presence of closed-end matching grants.

The structure of constraints and incentives thus combines political and
economic elements. In this paper, we estimate a model that allows for
simultaneous determination of two key outcomes of budget referenda: an
economic outcome, as captured by per-student spending levels; and a political

outcome, the vote results of the budget referenda. The empirical setting is
544 non-city school districts in New York State in the 1975-76 school year.

All noncity districts were required to have at least one referendum on school
spending and received closed-end matching aid from the state for basic
operating expenditures.1

Our model combines a spending equation and a vote equation. This
specification allows us to ask questions about the responsiveness of public
spending to local characteristics (income, property wealth), as in
conventional studies. It also provides evidence on the link between local
spending and referendum voting. In addition, it allows us to study the
effects of possible changes in state aid structure (e.g., replacing
closed-end matchitig grants by lump-sum block grants). We can also look at the

expected impact of changing referendum rules (e.g., requiring supramajorities
for passage).

To develop the model, we begin in Section 2 by specifying a spending

equation that captures underlying demand effects. While whose demand is
effective is determined politically, an explicit discussion of the political

2

process is deferred to later in the paper.
Our spending equation keys--within a conventional log-linear

structure- -on the effects of tax price and income. The estimation of these
effects has to pay particular attention to the endogeneity of tax price.
Other investigators have noted that this endogeneity makes OLS

inappropriate. Their approach to dealing with the problem typically has been
to use instrumental variables in a fairly ad hoc way. We use a
full-information maximum likelihood method presented by Moffitt (1984, 1986)
to obtain consistent estimates of income and price elasticities. Our

estimates, particularly of price elasticity, are quite different from those
obtained by OLS, and lead to quite different conclusions about the
responsiveness of spending to the incentives posed by the matching program.

Our spending equation allows for an error structure in which one of the
error components can be interpreted as a "shift" in expenditures relative to
some average demand at given tax price and income. This shift may be thought
of as coming from discretionary actions of agents (formally, the school

board) that we characterize as the agenda "setter." A positive value of the
"setter shift" corresponds to high spending, relative to a "typical1' district

with similar economic characteristics.
In Section 3, we construct a voting equation and link it to the

expenditure equation. What should enter the voting equation? Unlike
spending, where, at a minimum, demand is characterized in terms of income and
price effects, there is no clear indication that any exogenous variables are

relevant to voting. Consider a stylized example. Assume that all districts
are characterized by setters aiming to maximize the budget (Romer and

Rosenthal, 1979). Then, for reasons on which we elaborate in Section 4, the
vote outcome should be close to 50 per cent Yes. No exogenous variables

3

should enter the vote equation because the setter will have taken these

variables into account in setting spending. To clarify presentation through
a simple model, we follow the spirit of this setter model in section 3 and
estimate a voting equation without exogenous variables.

The spending and voting equations are linked by an error components
model. Ceteris paribus, high operating budget requests should get fewer votes
than low ones. More precisely, errors in the spending equation should covary
negatively with those in the voting equation. A "setter shift" common to both
equations permits testing for the expected negative covariance: a high
spending shift should tend to be accompanied by a low vote.

In section 4, we seek to move toward a better specification of the
political process. In studying the political process, one would like to have

knowledge of the preferences of the setter. Is the setter seeking an
extremely high budget, or are ambitions more modest? We hypothesize that
bureaucrats looking for large budgets (per student) are more likely to be
found in large school districts. Therefore, we use size, measured as

enrollment, as a proxy for the ambitions of setters. On the other hand, size
may also proxy for demand effects and for the heterogeneity of voter

preferences. We also consider further elaborations of the basic model. In
addition to capturing aspects of the political process, we have a narrower
concern with sociodemographic variables that might proxy for effects on

demand that are not captured by income and price variables. If such
variables are capturing purely demand effects they, like income and price,
should have no effect on vote outcome, though they may have spending effects.

In Section 5, we present a variety of "what if" analyses based on our
empirical results. These explore how school spending might be affected by
changes in the grant-in-aid formula or by instituting supramajorities in

4

referenda. The conclusion is in Section 6.

2. Expenditure Estimation with Closed-End Matching Grants
With the local tax structure given by a proportional property tax, a
school district's budget constraint is:

NS =

tK

+ NA,

where N is number of students, S is per-student spending, K is total market
value of taxable property, t is the effective tax rate, and A is the amount
of grants-in-aid per student.

Under a closed-end matching grant, the state government subsidizes local
spending at rate in, but above a combined state-local spending limit of Sk per

student the subsidy stops, so that districts spending above 5k (including
state aid) receive, in effect, a lump-sum grant totaling NmSk. The district
budget constraint under this kind of grant is:

NS —

tK

+ N min(mS, mSk),

(1)

and the local tax rate can be written as:
(1 - m)S
-

if S —
<

K/N

t

k
(2)

S-mSk

ifS>Sk

K/N

Consider an individual voter with utility function U(C,S), where C is
consumption of a numeraire good. Let Y be this voter's income and H the value

of his taxable property. Using (2), this voter's budget constraint can be
written as:

C = Y

i.e.,

C

-

tH

1- P1S
I

ifSSk

Y + P2mSk -

5

if S > Sk

(3)

where

— (1

-

m)H

4

K/N

1.

and
(5)

H/(K/N)

P2

The voter is faced with a budget constraint that has a kink at S

Sk.

(See Figure 1.) To the left of Sk, the effective tax price is P, and to the
right it is P2. Spending above Sk is not matched, but the second segment of
the budget constraint incorporates the "income equivalent't of the luxnp-swn

grant of mSk per student, so that "effective income" along this segment is
equal to Y + P2mSk. Because 1 > m >

0,

the budget constraint is convex.

Maximizing TJ(C,S) subject to (3) yields a "most-preferred" level of S for

the voter. The political process may be viewed as aggregating the basic
individual preferences into an expenditure decision. In this section, we
largely put the political process aside and simply postulate desired spending

Sd in a school district is given by
Sd

(6)

g(P,M; d)

The function g() is an underlying demand function, with P being tax
price and M denoting "effective income". In a standard median-voter model it
would be interpreted as the median of desired spending levels. In previous
work (Romer and Rosenthal, 1979, 1982a), two of us have argued that (a) the
median voter is not necessarily the "representative" voter in referenda, and
(b) estimates of price and income elasticities probably should not be
interpreted as corresponding to "median" demand even when "median" variables
(tax-price, income) are used as regressors.2

For our empirical work, we specialize (6) to the log-linear form, so that
Sd

where

(7)

= f(P,M) +
ln Sd

6

and

f(P,M) —

+

1ln P

+ /321n M

In this specification, we choose to interpret f(P,M) as the demand, given

income and price, of the "representative" voter in an "average" district. In
this context, the random error term Ed captures variations across districts
in the representative voter's most-preferred spending level. This variation
may be due to cross-district heterogeneity of two types. First, it may
indicate unobserved differences in underlying demand. Second, it may be due

to differences in the extent to which setters in different districts reflect
the preferences of relatively high-demand voters; i.e., variation across
districts in the political process that establishes the characteristics of
the "representative" voter.

In the presence of matching grants, a choice of Sd is also simultaneously
a choice of tax price, since choosing a level of spending also selects a
particular segment of the budget constraint (or a location at the kink). Let

M1-Y
and

M2

Let

in Sk. Then the desired segment location can be written as:

Sk

Sd —

Y + P2mSk

f(P1,M1) + Ed

if f(P1,M1) ÷ d

Sk

if f(P1,M1) +

f(P2,M2) + Ed

if

Observed

> Sç

f(P2,M2) + Ed

(8)

f(P2,M2) ÷ Ed >

spending need not correspond to desired spending. The two may

differ due to random measurement or specification errors, so that actual
expenditures S are related to desired spending as follows:

S_Sd+€r

(9)

where S in S. We want to estimate (9), with Sd as specified in (8).
One approach to estimation would use the observed values of P and M (as

7

determined by whether observed spending is above or below Sk) to estimate

S =

f(P,M)

+

(where

6

is

a random error) by ordinary least squares. Because

of the endogeneity of tax-price (and of "effective income" M), this approach
will yield inconsistent coefficients. For example, large values of

may lead

to high S. But an observation with high S will be assigned the tax-price P2.

will

Similarly, low values of

be correlated with assigning the value P1. In

other words, the error term and the variables P and M will be correlated.

To obtain consistent estimates, we use a maximum-likelihood approach

described by Moffitt (1984, l986). This approach does not ascribe a
particular segment to a given observation. Rather, given an observation, we
compute the probability associated with being on each segment (or at the
kink). Thus, the probability of observing S is given by:
Pr(S)

S

Pr(€ + r
+ Pr(Er = S

÷ Pr(€ +

-

f(P1,M1),

-

5ç

—

S

-

-

-

6d

f(P1,M1))

f(P1,M1) <

f(P2,M),

-

6d > s

f(P2,M2))

(10)

f(P2,M2))

With assumptions about the error distributions, the above probabilities
can be used to derive the likelihood function. We assume that 6d and 6r

independent, with 6d — N(0 °d) and r

— N(0

,

clr). The

are

likelihood function is

given in Appendix 1.

We estimated this specification using data for the 544 school districts.
The spending variable is per-student approved operating expenditure for the

school year 1975-76. In the definition of effective income (M), Y is
measured as median household income. The "unmatched" tax-price P2 is median
housing value divided by the district's full property valuation per student.
The matching rate m varies across districts, from a high of about 0.9 for a
district with very low tax base (measured in the 1973-74 school year) to 0.3

for high-wealth districts. Matching stops when approved operating

8

expenditures reach $1200 per student (i.e., Sk

1200), so wealthy districts

with high spending do not receive more than $360 in operating aid. (Appendix
2 has details of variable definition and data

sources.)

Column 1 of Table 1 presents the MLE results. Our estimates of price and
income elasticities are within the ranges of those for a variety of states in
a number of studies reported in Black et al. (1979, Table 2) and Welch (1981)

and for Oregon in Filimon et al. (1982). The estimated income elasticity is
somewhat higher than those reported in most analyses of school spending.4

The estimate of o, the setter shift variance, is five times that of ,

the variance of the random observation or
measurement error. This suggests
that differences in "desired spending"

across districts (given tax price and

income) are more important than random errors in

translating desired spending

into actual expenditures. The magnitude of a relative to o reflects the
clustering of observations about the kink point Sk due to the incentive

effects of the closed-end matching

grant program.5

It is instructive to compare the maximum likelihood results with OLS

estimates that ignore the endogeneity of tax-price and "effective income".
Column 2 of Table 1 shows these estimates when all observations are included.

The results are strikingly different. The price elasticity is estimated to be

nearly zero.6 Because OLS does not take into account the

process whereby

districts select the segment of the budget constraint on which they would

prefer to locate, the responsiveness of spending to tax-price is
underestimated. Indeed, a naive interpretation of the OLS results might lead
one to believe that matching grants were fairly ineffective, since spending

appears quite insensitive to price at the margin! The OLS results also
provide lower income elasticity estimates than does MLE.

For observations near the kink (S

Sk), it is not clear what is the

9

"appropriate't tax-price to use in the OLS estimation. We reran the OLS

estimates, omitting observations with per-pupil

Sk (1150

S

spending within 50 dollars of

1250). Because of the clustering of expenditures toward the

kink, this reduces the number of observations from 544 to 449. For this new
set of observations, the OLS price elasticity

previous estimate --

but

estimate is greater than the

still quite close to zero, and much lower than the

maximum likelihood estimate. (See Column 3 of Table 1.)
These differences in the results suggest that estimation as well as
modeling considerations point to using the full error components
specification of the spending equation when we link spending and voting. We
turn to this in the next section.

3. Spending and Voting in Budget Referend
Every non-city school district in New York is required to have at least
one referendum on the proposed budget.

Of the 544 districts in our sample,

142 failed to pass their budget on the first try.

Even among those that

passed, there was considerable variation in the percentage voting in favor of
the proposal.

The variable we use to analyze voting in more detail is the logit of the
vote outcome on the first election. This is defined as
(11)

V in (Yes votes! No votes)
and allows V to range over the interval (-,+co).

(In

our sample we have no

unanimous votes.) A district with 50% Yes vote would have V = 0.
If one were simply interested in analyzing the effects of a variety of
(putatively) exogenous variables on the vote outcome, one might specify an

equation of the form

(12)

v=Z÷
10

In such a specification, Z would be a function of variables that are thought
to affect the vote and e., is a random error term. Z might include demographic

variables or even proposed spending. Equation (12) would then be estimated by
itself.

We take a different tack here. Instead of estimating a voting equation
separately, we recognize the link between spending and voting by considering
the relationship between desired spending and vote outcome.

Suppose that, in a given district, the setter is "aiming" at the voter
whose desired spending level is given by f(P,M), as developed in the previous

section. With no uncertainty about turnout, this level of spending, if put
to the voters, would receive a Yes vote from some fraction of the electorate;

let the vote logit corresponding to this be a. In this section, we assume

that setters "aim" in such a way that a is invariant across districts. If
the vote were uncertain due to random effects (e.g., such factors as turnout
affected by weather or purely probabilistic voting), then V would be given by

V — a +
where

is a random variable with mean zero.

Now suppose that the setter considers the pivotal voter to be someone
with 3d

f(P,M) + Ed and makes his budget proposal accordingly. If Ed > 0,

this will be someone with ideal point greater than f(P,M). So one would
expect a smaller fraction of voters to favor this proposal than a proposal

with Ed — 0. That is, in the absence of uncertainty about turnout, we would
have V < a. Similarly, if En < 0, the expected Yes vote would be higher (at
least as long as the proposal is for an amount greater than what could be
spent without holding a referendum). In this case, we would have V > a in the
absence of turnout effects.

These arguments suggest that there should be a negative relationship

11

from the spending equation. The

between the vote logit and the error Ed

simplest way to capture this is to suppose that the shift in votes is

proportional to 6d so that given Ed leads to a shift of y6d in V. We make
two additional strong assumptions: that the negative relationship is
constant across districts; and that in eyery district, the expected Yes vote
is the same when Ed — 0. We can then write the vote equation as:

V a ÷ 16d +

(13)

If the negative relationship between spending and voting holds, then we
should find -y < 0.

Estimating the Two-Equation System
The combined spending-voting system now consists of two equations (9) and

(13). Maximum likelihood estimation of the combined system is similar to
that of the spending equation alone. To allow the model to include other
variables Xk in the expenditure equation, we define:

(14)

f() +
For economy of notation, we will refer to h(P,M), but note that other

variables may be included. Similarly, the expression Z in the vote equation
may include more than just the constant a.

Now, for a given district, we are concerned with the joint probability
of observing expenditure S and vote logit V:

Pr(S,V) —

Pr(ed ÷

S -

+ Pr(Er= S - Sk, Yd +
+ Pr(Ed + Er

=S

+E

h(P1,M1), Yd

-

= V

h(P2,M2),

-

V

Z,

-

6d

Sk

Z, Sk - h(P1,M1) < Ed
V

d + E

12

-

Z,

Ed

-

h(P1,M1))

Sk - h(P2,M2))

> Sk - h(P2,M2)}

(15)

In (15), we have again taken S

in S and 5k

in Sk.

To complete the model, we now specify the error structure. We assume that
the errors Ed, Er, and e,1 are independent, and that 6d —

N(O,Ur), and e1 —

N(O,o).

N(O,a), r

As the disturbances d and r relate to a

decision made by a single agenda setter (or a small committee) in each

district, they are taken to be homoskedastjc. In contrast,

is the

disturbance associated with the logit of an aggregate proportion. Its
variance would therefore depend on the number of individuals

making voting

decisions. An appropriate heteroskedasticity correction would need to

consider turnout factors. In the absence of data on registration, we have
taken the variance of e to be proportional to the number of actual voters;
i.e.,

(a)2/W, where W is the number of actual voters and a? is

constant across observations. The variance-covarjance structure is thus
determined by the estimated parameters -y, 0d' a, and o, and the observed

values of W. The likelihood function is given in Appendix 1.

Results for the Basic Two- Equation Model

The estimated coefflecients of the Thare-bones" model developed in this
section appear in the first column of Table 2. The chief results include:

1. The hypothesized negative relationship between setter errors in
spending levels and voting is supported by our estimates. (This finding

parallels Oregon results reported for a different specification in Romer and

Rosenthal, l982b.) The estimated y coefficient is negative. Its magnitude is
eleven times the estimated standard error.
2. Price and income effects are similar to those in the single-equation
model.

3. The estimated effect of a setter shift is substantial.

13

If the sample

0),

mean spending level were the target (

an 11 percent upward "shift" in

spending leads to a vote loss such that an expected victory (a

0.138

corresponds to a vote of 53.4%) is turned into an expected defeat (a -

ye

=

-0.006 corresponds to a vote of 49.8%). Obviously, given that 142 of 544
first referenda failed, shifts of 11 percent and above were not uncommon.
Indeed if Ed

takes

on a value equal to ad,

the

standard deviation of its

distribution, the upward shift at the mean is approximately 15 percent.

4. The setter shift appears to be a major source of variation in

spending. The size of ad the disturbance term

parameter

corresponding to

the setter shift, is estimated to be over twice the size of the "random"
error parameter, ar.

4.

The Political Process and

Size Effects

The Political Process: Preliminary Theoand Observations
The negative covariance between spending and voting in the "bare bones"

model suggests that a link does indeed exist between a school district's

finances and its politics. We therefore turn to a more detailed analysis of
how politics can affect expenditure in the context of referendum institutions.
Beginning with Barr and Davis(1966), politics was introduced into

economic analysis by modelling the spending equation as capturing the median

of voters' demands. The median in this model corresponds to a special type
of competitive political equilibrium maintained primarily through competitive

elections of those responsible for budgeting. A sharp alternative to the
median voter hypothesis is the bureaucratic budget-maximization model of
Niskanen (1971). This model posits that the agenda for the decision process
in a given area of public spending is controlled by those who have high
demand for the expenditure. With reference to school spending, one would

14

argue that the agenda is controlled by a coalition including the providers of
education services and some high-demand consumers such as relatively affluent
families with several children attending public schools. Corollary to the
Niskanen-type hypothesis is the proposition that popular election of school
board members is an inadequate mechanism for curbing agenda control powers.
In budget referenda, school boards have agenda control powers necessary
for a Niskanen "monopoly" outcome to prevail over a "competitive" one. Only
school boards can put a budget on the ballot. The board's power depends

critically on the implicit or explicit alternative to the proposal they
formulate. In a school district where failure to approve the proposal forces

closing of the schools, the latitude afforded the agenda setter is
considerably greater than in a district where the schools can continue to
operate normally even if the proposed budget fails.
Earlier research using data from Oregon referenda (Filimon et al. 1982,

Romer and Rosenthal, 1982a, l982b) was largely motivated by the widespread
cross-sectional variation in these alternative or reversIon levels in that
state. In many Oregon localities, reversions are so low that voter failure to
approve the proposal can and does result in the closing of the school system.
In others, particularly the city of Portland, the reversion is so high that

the school board typically elects not to hold a referendum and to operate
with the reversion. Several results from this research on Oregon supported
the budget-maximization model. These included:

(1) As a group, districts that failed to hold a referendum spent over 99
per cent of their reversion levels.

15

(2) Districts whose reversions were so low that a school closing was

threatened were estimated to spend about 15 per cent more per student
than districts with reversions just large enough to avoid the threat
of a closing.

It is quite possible that modification of the reversion rules might so
change the agenda that there would be little difference between a median
voter model and a budget-maximization model. Indeed, New York's institutional
structure for referenda differs from Oregon's in the way the reversion is
specified. In New York, a non-city school district must hold one referendum
each year. If the referendum fails, the district may impose a "contingency"
budget. The definition of a "contingency" budget is rather flexible, and
allows for the operation of schools, though certain "nonessential" activities
such as interscholastic sports may have to be curtailed.7

These relatively high reversions imply that districts that go on
contingency will not always have, ceteris paribus on the demand side, lower
spending than those that do not. Consider the simple case where all voters

have school spending preferences that are single-peaked about the ideal
point represented by the "most-preferred" level.

Suppose that voters are

fully informed and are certain to vote. Now consider two districts, one in
which the reversion is somewhat above the median voter's ideal point, another

in which the reversion is somewhat below. Both districts have
budget-maximizing agenda setters. In the first district, the setter will not
be able to pass a budget higher than the reversion. Consequently, he will
adopt a contingency budget --

the reversion. In the second district, the

setter will be able to pass a budget above the median. But this budget will
be close to the firs.t district's contingency budget. Thus, when reversions
vary more or less symmetrically about medians, one would not expect strong

16

differences in the spending patterns of contingency and non-contingency
districts.

In exploring the ew York data, we indeed did not observe important
differences in the spending patterns of districts that did and did not go on
contingency.8 While this preliminary exploration of the spending data did not
disclose any impact of the political process, the relevance of the referendum

institution is strongly evident in the referendum outcomes. Several key
facts are worth noting.

First, the political process is not pro forma. As we noted earlier, 142
districts failed to pass the budget on the first try. Of 120 districts that
tried twice, only 65 passed. Even on the third try, eight of twenty-four
proposals were rejected. One district took four tries before the budget was
approved. Sixty districts chose after one or more tries to go on

contingency. Approval is far from automatic.
Second, districts do try to avoid going on contingency. There is
obviously no general tendency to make a first proposal so high that the

voters automatically reject the budget. Even when the first try fails, only
22 of the failing districts opt for contingency. This suggests that the
agenda setters regard contingency as costly, possibly resulting in a. lower

expenditure level than a passed budget.
Third, there is widespread variation in the percentage voting Yes on the
first try. Though the average share of the Yes vote in all 544 districts is

63 percent, some districts pass with near-unanimity, while many others lose.
Fourth, there appears to be considerable variation in referendum results
when districts are grouped by size (as measured by enrollment), as in Table
3. On the first try, small districts tend to pass by overwhelming margins. In
the larger districts, however, the average percent Yes is close to 50.

17

What are

the sources of these variations? Three factors are relevant.

First, districts may exhibit variation in their reversion levels. Second,
districts may differ in the degree of heterogeneity of voters' spending

preferences. Third, there may be variation across districts in the extent to
which agenda setters pursue budget-maximizing strategies. We briefly take up
each of these possibilities.

To see the possible impact of differences in reversions, suppose that
each voter has spending preferences that are symmetric as well as

single-peaked. Consider a district whose cumulative distribution of voter
ideal points is given by F(S), with median ideal point 50 (See Figure 2.)
Suppose the reversion (contingency spending) is R1 < S°, and S0 is proposed.
Then, abstracting from turnout considerations, voters with ideal points
greater than S1

(R1 + S°)/2 will vote in favor of the proposal, while those

with lower ideal points will, prefer the reversion. The median ideal point

would pass with a fraction 1 - F(S1) voting Yes. As the reversion moved
closer to 0 (but remained below S°), the fraction voting Yes would decline.
If, however, the reversion is R2 > S°, then those with ideal point less than
S2

(R + So)/2 will prefer 0 to R2, and the median ideal point will pass

with a fraction F(S2) voting Yes. Again, moving the reversion closer to 0
(this time from above) reduces the Yes vote.

Now consider a second district with the same median ideal point S0 and
the same reversion, but with ideal points distributed according to C(S). If

this second district is more heterogeneous, in the sense that C(S) {} F(S)

for S {}

S,

then when the median ideal point is proposed against other R1

or R2, the more homogeneous district will have a higher Yes vote.

Because we cannot measure reversions for districts that do not go on

18

contingency, we cannot disentangle the effects of voter heterogeneity and
variations in reversions. We will use "within-district heterogeneity" as a
short-hand to summarize both of these two factors.

In our example, the agenda setter strove to enact the median ideal point.

This may not be the setter's goal in every district. Referring again to
Figure 2, suppose two districts had ideal point distributions given by F(S)
and reversions R1. Suppose that in one district, the proposal is the median;

in the other, the largest proposal that will defeat the contingency. In the
second, budget-maximizing district, the proposal (2S° - R1) would be chosen

so as to just get the approval of a majority of voters. The "representative"
voter whose ideal point corresponds to the enacted budget is no longer the
median voter but is someone with preference for spending in excess of the
median. Obviously, the Yes percentage is greater in the district where the
median was proposed.

To summarize the implications illustrated by our example, we contrast

budget-maximizing setters with median-voter-seeking setters. Districts with
budget-maximizers should show relatively little variation in referendum

results. Their vote outcomes should be independent of within-district
heterogeneity and be close to 50 percent favorable. Their spending will be
strongly influenced by the reversion. In contrast, median-voter-seekers
should have spending independent of the reversion but vote outcomes highly
related to within-district heterogeneity.

One might well expect to see both more heterogeneity of voter preferences
and, due to information and free-riding problems, more budget-maximizing
behavior in large districts. The closeness of election results in large
districts suggests that these districts are more likely to have

budget-maximizing agenda setters aiming at relatively higher-than-median

19

expenditures. The actual Yes percentage in such districts may vary about 50
as a result of misinformation about voter preferences and random variation in

turnout.9 To explain that the average is around 50% by a median voter model,
one would have to posit both much more voter heterogeneity in large districts
than in small districts and reversion levels very close to the median ideal
point.

Another suggestive piece of evidence comes from what happens when there
is a second referendum in a district whose voters rejected the initial budget

proposal. There, regardless of district size, the average percent Yes hovers
around 50, exactly as a budget-maximizing model would suggest. By this
model, a district failing a first election would be likely to be one in which
the agenda setter had decided to play "hardball" with the voters.

Budget-maximizing districts would get an outcome close to 50-50 on all
tries.10

When a district holds more than one referendum, there is almost no
correlation in the vote results an successive tries. The correlation between
first- and second-election Yes percentage is only 0.21. The second-to-third

election correlation is actually negative at -0.05. These results indicate
that in "hardball" districts the variation about 50% Yes largely reflects
elements, such as turnout variations, not fully subject to the setter's

control. The observed variation about the 50-50 point is puzzling if viewed
from the median voter perspective. Setters aiming to enact median voter
preferences who had misjudged voter preferences on a first try might be
expected to make a second proposal that would be widely supported.

20

The Effect of Community Size
These preliminary observations on voting suggested that we make a
systematic effort to ascertain whether the variations in the Yes percentage
reflect differences in within-district heterogeneity or indeed differences in
expenditure levels sought by agenda setters.
The specification of Section 3 assunied a great deal of homogeneity across

school districts. Except for tax price and income, only stochastic effects
differentiate school districts in both their approved spending and their

voting. Our districts, however, vary greatly in size, ranging from an
enrollment of just under 500 students to one of over 21,000. This variation
in size may have at least three important influences on voting and spending.

First, as just noted, large districts may tend to have budget setters more
keyed to budget-maximization, producing both larger budgets and smaller

approval margins. Second, large districts may be more heterogeneous than
smaller ones. Increasing within-district heterogeneity, ceteris paribus,
should lower the approval margin. Third, district size may be associated
with economies or diseconomies of scale in the production of educational

output. Thus, district size may need to be incorporated in the demand
function, h(). We now indicate how each of these three •effects can be
included in our econometric model.

A. Community Size as an Indicator of Budget-Maximizers
In developing the spending model, we have focused on how political agenda
setters may shift spending relative to the demand expressed by some "average"

pivotal voter. So far, this shift was captured entirely by a disturbance

term. We now allow the shift to depend upon district size. We therefore

21

redefine the "setter shift" as consisting of both this term and a random

disturbance term. Our only available measure of size for 1975-76 is
enrollment N. We take:
setter shift

where

N + Ed,

is a coefficient to be estimated. We would expect

0.

This

reformulation of the spending equation then leads to a modified voting
equation:
Z

a + -yçln N

For -y<O, the "target" vote logit moves down with the observable portion of

the setter shift. The restriction on the coefficient of in N in the vote
equation captures the notion that as spending goes up approval goes down.

B. Community Size as an Indicator of Homogeneity of Voter Preferences.
In addition to being related to the effects of agenda setting strategies
on vote outcomes, district size may also proxy for voter heterogeneity. To
capture this effect, together with the budget-maximizing effect, we modify Z
to:11

Z

a ÷ -yçln N + Sin N

Because small districts are presumably more homogenous than large ones, we

expect S < 0.

C. Community Size as a Determinant of Demand.
Community size may be related to economies or diseconomies of scale that

affect the "representative" voter's demand for spending directly. Such
effects can best be thought of as belonging in the demand function, rather
than in the setter shift. As such, they will not affect the "target" level of
voting. To model these effects, we redefine h(S) in the spending equation as

22

follows:
h(S)

I3 + 1ln P

+ /321n M

$31n N.

The vote equation is unaffected by this change.

Summary of the Voting-Spending Models

Incorporating all three size-related effects yields a spending equation

of the form

S —

+ 11n P + 2ln M + fl3ln N + cm N + Ed +

(16)

and a vote equation

V — + 6ln N +

N + 7d +

The parameters gC3p 6, and

(17)

cannot be simultaneously estimated. For

example, a model that assumes no within-district heterogeneity effects but
the presence of size effects on setter shIfts and demands (5

0,

0,

0) will fit the data exactly as well as a model that assumes no "average"
voter demand effects but the presence of setter and within-district
heterogeneity effects C83

0, & '

0,

0). The parameter y is identified

through the error structure.

These considerations, together with our discussion of size effects,
suggest an interest in estimating four models:

1. Enrollment in spending but not in voting (ç — S —

0).

In this model,

size is unrelated to setter shift or within-district heterogeneity but does
relate to scale economies.

2. Enrollment in voting but not in spending ( —
effect of size relates solely to within-district

3. Size effects limited to setter shift (83 — 6

—0). In this model, the

heterogeneity.
—

0).

4. Enrollment in both equations, separate coefficients in both equations.
This model allows for all three effects, heterogeneity, scale economies, and

23

budget-maximization. The estimates of the unconstrained coefficients on in N
in the two equations correspond to an interpretation that size has no effect
on setter shift (ç

0). The estimated coefficients can also be used to

solve for estimates corresponding to the other two "extreme" interpretations

(5 —0 or j9 —0).

Estimation Results for the Size Models

Estimation of the various size equations gave results for parameters
other than size that were all quite similar to those reported in Section 3.
Consequently, we focus the discussion on the size effects.

1. When added to the basic model, demand effects of size appear to be

inconsequential. With

— 5 —

0, the log-likelihood improves only marginally

over the model with no size effects. (Compare rows 1 and 2 in Table 4.)
Using the standard likelihood ratio (asymptotic chi-square) test, size, as a

pure demand effect is not significant at the .05 level.
2. In contrast, both the models of pure heterogeneity effects (compare
Table 4, rows 1 and 3) or of solely setter effects (compare rows 1 and 4)
represent highly significant additions to the model with no size effects.
These two models are not nested; thus, no direct tests are made between them.

4. In Table 5, we interpret the unconstrained estimates from the second
column of Table 2 to show the implied values for

5, and 3 when one of the

three parameters is assumed to be zero. As can be seen in the table, the
estimated magnitude of 6, the heterogeneity parameter, is relatively
insensitive as to which of the other two parameters is dropped from the

model. On the other hand, the magnitudes of the demand and setter
coefficients vary widely under alternative assumptions. This result, coupled
with the slightly lower log-likelihood for the pure within-district

24

heterogeneity model as against the pure setter model, leads us to conclude
that the major effect of size is that of controlling for variations in the
heterogeneity of voter preferences.'2

5. Notwithstanding the importance of heterogeneity, a model that allows
for all three size effects (setter, heterogeneity, and demand) is a highly
significant improvement over any of the models that allow for only one effect.
Size has a statistically significant if modest role in the spending

equation. A district with enrollment of 10,000 would be expected to have per
student expenditures 9.6% higher than a district with enrollment of 1000
students, ceteris paribus.

6. The total effect of size on the proportion approving the budget is

very pronounced. If

and Ed

were zero, for example, the percentage

approving the budget Would be only 43.7% in a district with 20,000 students
but reach 50% in a district with 6873 students, 54.6% at the sample mean of
3179 students, and 65% in a district with 500 students.

Results for Extensions of the Basic Specification
The parameter estimates we have presented so far might exaggerate the
effects of policy variables, such as the matching rate whose effect depends

on price and income elasticities, because the model was based on a simplified
description of the district, characterized solely by price, income, and

size. In particular, we omitted common socio-demographic descriptions of
demand that other studies often include on an ad hoc basis.

The socio-demographic variables we examined included %BLACK, %Enrolled in
PRIVATE Schools, %OLD (65 and over),'3 a dummy for whether the district was
in an SMSA, and ln(KIDS), with KIDS defined as total enrollment l975-76/total
households 1970.

25

When added to the voting equation, these variables (and M2 and P2) made
only negligible improvements in the log-likelihood.

This is what we would

expect from the stylized model of a budget-maximizing setter whose proposed
budget "takes out" the effects of these variables.
In the spending, equation, ln(KIDS) or being located in an SMSA had no

impact. The other three variables had only marginal (albeit statistically

significant) effects in some specifications. Column (3) of Table 2 shows a
representative run with demographic variables in the expenditure equation.

Our qualitative results, including the key cross-equation linkage
represented by the setter shift, were unaffected by adding these auxiliary

variables. With the estimates of column (3) of Table 2, the size effect on
spending (e.g., as noted in result 5 of the previous subsection) is slightly

attenuated. The calculations in result 6 are virtually unchanged. As the
bottom half of Table 5 shows, the alternative interpertations of size models

are barely affected. Note, however, that the estimated magnitudes and the
t-statistics of all non-disturbance coefficients fall moderately, mosy likely

because of collinearity among our earlier variables and these auxiliary
variables.

5. Impact of Aid Formulas and Referendum Rules

To get a sense of the importance of state aid and referendum rules for
school spending, we examined a variety of possible policy options. For each
district the probability of being on a particular segment of the budget
constraint (or at the kink) is endogenous, as is desired location along a
given segment. Consequently, to compute the effect of changes in exogenous
variables, we must calculate these endogenous probabilities and desired
locations for each observation, to get expected spending under the new

26

regime.

State Aid Effects

With the closed end matching grant structure, expected spending is given
by:14
E(S)

S - h(P1,M1))
+ Pr(d > S - h(P2,M2))
Prted

+ Pr(Sk

-

[h(P1,M1) +

E(edl6d

[h(P,M2) + E(€d lEd

h(P1,M1) <

-

h(P2,M2))

Sk

h(P1,M1)]

> Sk h(P2,M2)J

S

(18)

This expectation can be computed for each district by using the estimated

error variances and parameters of h() together with the values of exogenous
variables.

The model is useful for a wide variety of policy simulations. An obvious
one is to examine the effect of changing Sk, the cutoff point for matching
grants, while leaving the matching rates unchanged. Figure 3 shows variations
in expected statewide spending per pupil as well as expected spending in the
lowest-spending district, as the cutoff is varied. In this, as in all

simulations, we used the estimates reported in column (3) of Table 2. For low
values of Sk, the simulated spending changes are negligible, as all districts
spend significantly above the cutoff, so that changes in the cutoff work only
through their relatively weak effects on M2 (— Y + P2mSk). As the cutoff is
increased, some districts are likely to be spending close to the cutoff point
(near the kink in the budget constraint). For such districts, increases in Sk

cause increases in expected spending far in excess of what would be predicted
from simple income effect computations alone - -

so

the impact of changing the

cutoff is magnified. This is the case for the minimum district as the cutoff
is varied from about $800 to about $1450 per student. Past this point, the
minimum district is almost surely spending less than the cutoff, so increases

27

in Sk will have little or no further effect on its spending. Of course, at
higher Sk higher-spending districts begin to exhibit the amplified response
associated with spending near the cutoff, so the statewide average continues
to rise.

As an alternative to the matching grant system, we simulated the effects
of a block grant structure. We assumed that each district would receive a
lump-sum grant equal to mSk per student. (This is what a district would
receive under the matching grant system if it spent at or above the cutoff.)

Such grants are usually nonfungible, in the sense that a district cannot
spend less than the amount of the grant on education. This nonfungibility
makes even the block grant budget constraint kinked, with the kink occurring
at a level of spending equal to mSk per student. The expression for expected
spending becomes:

E(S) — Pr(ed

B - h(P2,M2))

+ Pr{€d > B - h(P2,M2))
where Bk

B
.

[(p2,)

+ E(ed Id

>Bk-

h(P2,M2)J

in (mSk).

Not surprisingly, for low values of Sk the spending effect of this aid
policy is identical to that of the matching grant system. At higher values of
Sk, the block grant is less stimulative than the matching grant, since the

subsidized tax-price effects are absent. (Note that the identity of the
minimum district changes as 5k increases above $1100.)

Finally, Figure 3 also displays what might be called the "revenue
sharing" system. In this system, each district gets mSk per student - -

exactly

what it would get under the block grant formula. The difference is

that now districts are allowed to rebate some (or all) of the grant dollars
to individuals, so that the funds are fully fungible. The entire effect of
the grant is an income effect. Except at low values of Sk, the effect on

28

education spending is much smaller than under the other structures.15'16

Supraniajorities in Referenda

For an expenditure proposal to pass in a referendum, a simple majority in
favor is required. What if this requirement were raised to something in
excess of a simple majority (as, for example, is the case for capital levy
referenda in some states)? A definitive answer to this question is beyond the
scope of this paper, since such a change may involve fundamental
readiustinents in behavior by both voters and setters. Our model does allow at

least a preliminary look at how spending may be affected as the required

majorities are changed. In the discussion that follows, we assume that the
actual closed-end matching grant state aid structure remains in place.

The presumption behind our vote equation is that, given that a simple
majority is required, setters in each district currently aim for a vote
(logit) outcome given by Z +

This corresponds to an environment in which

passage requires that V > 0. Suppose instead that a supramajority were

required, so that for passage a setter needed V > V0, where V0 is some
positive constant. For example, a 60% majority would imply V0 = 0.405, and a
2/3 majority corresponds to V0

0.693. As a first approximation, suppose

that this led setters in each district to aim for a vote greater by V0 than

they were currently getting. For districts currently obtaining large
majorities or those failing with large majorities voting No, this implies a
smaller change in the setter's vote goal than for setters aiming at close to

50%. [If the current aim is 80% Yes (logit =

1.386),

moving to a 60%

requirement raises the goal to 86% Yes. A district with a 25% Yes goal (logit

— -1.099) would move to 33% Yes. A district currently aiming at 51% would
move to 61%.]

29

Of course, we do not observe vote goals; we observe V and can compute Z
using parameter estimates and exogenous variables. For a given value of V0

we can calculate the expected spending in each district, conditional on the
error in the vote equation being equal to V + V0 - Z instead of V - Z:
E(S)

Pr(Ed

S - h(P1,M1),

'Ted +

• [h(P1,M1) ÷ E(Ed kd

— V + V0 - Z)
— V + V0 - Z)]

Sk- h(P1,M1), -y +

+ Pr{ed > S - h(P2,M2), 76d + Eu

V + V0 - Z}

• [h(P2,M2) + E(Ed kd > Sk h(P2,M2), 76d ÷ u

+ Pr(Sk - h(P1,M1) < E

Sk - h(P2,M2), 7Ed + Eu

v+

Z)]

V0 -

V + V0 - Z)

•

Sk

(19)

Appendix 1 provides further details of the computation of (19).

Roughly speaking, changing the vote goal affects expected spending in two
ways, both of them tending to decrease spending as V0 is increased. First,

since y < 0, V is decreasing in the setter shift €. Thus the value of Ed

consistent

with a supramajority is smaller, ceteris paribus, than when simple

majority is the rule. This in turn implies that, along each segment of the
budget constraint, desired spending Sd is lower for a given district with
supramajority than simple majority. Second, the probability of being on the
segment with spending below the closed-end cutoff is increased.

Table 6 presents computations of expected spending as V0 varies. (The
first row of the table corresponds to the simple majority case.) The second
column of the table gives the implied value of %Yes for a district whose

current goal is 50%. {These values are given by lOO/(l+e°).] The third
column shows the expected statewide spending per pupil. The last two columns

give, respectively, the smallest and largest expected changes in per-pupil
spending in the sample of 544 districts. Statewide per-pupil expenditures

30

drop by about 5% as the passage requirement moves from 50% Yes to 60% Yes,

and by about 9% if two-thirds majority is required. This apparently small
overall effect is due, in part, to the fact that there are many relatively

small districts where referenda currently pass with comfortable majorities.
In such districts, the effect of instituting suparaniajorities is expected to
be small. (The smallest change --

less

than 50 cents per pupil! --

corresponds.. to a district that was actually passing its budget with a
whopping 94% majority.) Nonetheless, there are districts for which

changing

the vote requirement does have considerable spending impact. These are, as

anticipated, districts that currently obtain close to 50% majorities; the
district for which the simulated effect is greatest (shown in the last column

of Table 6) is a large district whose actual vote was 45%. This district's
proposed spending is reduced by 17% as the passage requirement moves from 50%
to 60% Yes, and by 28% if 2/3 majority is required.

6. Conclusion
Our simulations and the preceding analysis recognized that legislated
policies of state governments have two potential avenues for changing the
incentives that influence spending by local governments. First, the state

can modify the incentives posed by grants-in-aid. Until recently, empirical
analysis has largely ignored the endogeneity problem posed by closed-end

matching grants. Our estimates, based on a model that addresses

endogeneity

directly, lead to price and income elasticity estimates similar to those

found in studies of states where lump-sum grants have been used. Thus, in
contrast to some of the previous literature, we find that the closed-end
grants are effective vehicles for both stimulating local spending and
reducing the variance in spending across school districts.

31

Second, the state

can alter the political process that local districts use to make spending

decisions. Although the political process is ignored (or encapsulated in
median voters) in empirical analyses that contain only a spending equation,
we have pointed to an important linkage between economic outcomes and
political ones- higher than "normal" spending receives lower than normal
support from the voters.

We want to stress that our results should be taken as suggestive, and
should be interpreted in light of the necessarily rudimentary structure of

the model. For tractability, we have relied on what is pretty much a "bare

bones" specification. Except for the particular care taken with the role of
state aid, our spending equation has at its heart a formulation that follows
the by now almost canonical representation of Bergstrom and Goodman

(1973).17 In the voting equation, we have abstracted from a variety of
considerations that may be important, especially those relating to endogenous
voter turnout or strategic setter (and, perhaps, voter) behavior in light of

the possibility for more than one referendum.'8 More refined modelling,
together with more detailed data, will be needed for further progress on the

linkage between spending and voting. Our results point to the importance of
the linkage, and to the potentially broad range of responses to changes in
aid or referendum policies.

32

FOOTNOTES

1.

Our sample consists of all non-city New York school districts that had
1975-76 enrollment (measured as weighted average daily attendance) over
484, a total of 549 districts. Of these we eliminated one district with

data errors and four districts that passed referenda unanimously. The
unanimous districts were deleted in order to keep the dependent variable

in our voting equation (see Section 3) finite. Aid under the matching
formula represented 42% of total basic (so-called "approved") operating
expenses of the schools in our sample.

2. In settings of incomplete information, there is no compelling reason to
focus on the median even if one argues for the competitive model in which
school budgets would represent the convergent equilibrium platforms of

two candidates in a majority rule election. Hinich (1977) showed that
there would rarely be convergence to the median in a model where voting
occurred probabilistically but the probabilities were specified in an ad

hoc way. Ledyard (1984) obtains the same result with fully rational,
non-probabilistic voting in the case of a game of incomplete

information. Using preferences that are quadratic about the ideal point,

he provides an example of convergence to the mean. As the informational
assumptions in Ledyard's work are clearly more compelling than those in
the original 1-lotelling (1929) - Bowen (1943) model, it is fair to say

that the competitive theory of elections places few, if any, restrictions
on the observations economists can make on public spending outcomes.

3. Welch (1981) has an extended discussion of the consistency problem in the
context of closed-end matching grants. He uses a two-step estimation
technique based on Heckman's (1976) approach to the censored sample

problem. As Moffitt (1984) points out, the maximum likelihood estimation

33

we use is preferable, particularly with the error structure as we specify
it. Our specification of the spending equation is formally equivalent to
the model discussed by Moffitt.

4. The Oregon results are based on a sample from an institutional setting in
which state aid was all in the form of block grants, so the elasticity
estimates are not subject to the econometric problems raised with
closed-end matching grants. For the other studies cited, except possibly

Welch (1981), comparisons with our New York results are suspect, since
matching grants may not have been adequately accounted for. A number of
studies include a district wealth as well as an income variable, further
confounding direct comparisons.

5. In our data, 95 of the 544 observations are within $50 of Sk (=$l200).

For discussion of the relationship between the relative magnitudes of d

and o and clustering of data around budget constraint kink points, see
Moffitt (1984).

6. Using a Pennsylvania sample, Welch (1981) reports similar results when
comparing his two-stage estimates with OLS estimates. Megdal (1984)
reports OLS price elasticities of -0.08 to -0.14 for New Jersey school
districts operating in a setting of closed-end matching grants.

7. A district operating under a contingency budget is permitted to levy
taxes to cover administrative and teachers' salaries, as well as other
"ordinary" expenses. Indeed, a document reviewing the system of education
finance in New York noted: "One of the reasons for allowing districts to
operate under 'contingency' or austerity budgets has been to prevent the
type of school closings which have occurred in other states following
defeats on local tax and referenda votes. ...

Administrative

and legal

interpretations of a 'contingent' expense made over the years permit a

34

district to increase its expenditures and/or total property tax levies
while operating on a contingency basis after its budget has been
disapproved by the voters of the district." New York State (1979, p.
127). Munley (1984) found that districts that

in 1975-76 but had passed referenda the

adopted contingency budgets

prior year had, on average,

slightly lower spending for 1975-76 than in the previous year, in real
terms.

8. We looked at the relationship between amounts proposed to voters and the
district's ex post

budget.

This relationship was no different for

districts on contingency than for those not on contingency. Nor was there

any significant systematic difference in actual expenditures between
contingency and non-contingency districts when a variety of
demand-related variables were controlled for. These preliminary data

analyses simply treated being on a contingency budget as a dichotomous
variable. Because we cannot measure the reversion for those districts
that did not go on contingency, we cannot directly investigate whether
variations in reversions were related to variations in spending.

9. Given the availability of multiple referenda to the agenda setter,
failure might well be expected on the first try (Romer and Rosenthal,
1979).

10. The slight increase above 50% Yes on the third try is consistent with
some theoretical results. Budget-maximizing setters confronted with
uncertainty would aim for a higher expected Yes percentage on successive
tries, with the largest increase coming on the last try (Romer and

Rosenthal, 1979). In turn, it appears that most districts in New York
regard three as the practical limit on attempts.

35

11. We do not have data (e.g., on income distributions) that capture
within-district heterogeneity more directly. This makes it necessary to
rely on size as a proxy.

12. Munley (1982) analyzes factors that influence

the degree of dispersion in

the distribution of voter ideal points for spending by New York State

school districts. That analysis is based on a model with somewhat
restrictive data requirements and assumptions about referendum voting

patterns, conditions satisfied by only 54 of the 544 districts considered

here. The results of that analysis suggest that the degree of dispersion
in voter ideal points does increase with community size.
13. Denzau and Grier (1984) performed a vast number of specification searches

using 1970-71 New York school expenditure data. Their results suggest

that of the additional conditioning variables most frequently used in
spending equations, % of population nonwhite, % enrolled in private

school, and % of population below the poverty line have non-negligible
effects on estimated spending (in a simple linear model).

14. With this formulation, we have not explicitly conditioned spending on a

particular vote outcome. We have taken the expected vote outcome in each
district to be equal to the vote outcome predicted by the vote equation;
i.e., E(V) — Z.

By contrast, in (19) below, expected spending is

conditioned on yc ÷
15. The effect of changes in state aid on the highest-spending district is
negligible throughout the range of all our simulations. Its expected (and
actual) spending is around $3350 per student, and changes only
marginally, through the effects of aid on M2.

16. Grant impacts would be greater if there were "flypaper effects", so that,
even under revenue sharing grants, the response of spending from grants

36

exceeded the response due to income effects alone. We tested for the
presence of flypaper by allowing for separate coefficients on aid in the
spending equation. Our results generally rejected the flypaper

hypothesis, though in some of these specifications, our highly nonlinear
model ran into convergence difficulties.
17, Oates (1986) has an illuminating discussion of some controversies related
to empirical work on local public goods spending.

18. Romer et al. (1984) estimate a model in which spending and voting
linkages are explored in the context of a sequence of referenda. Their
spending model does not deal with the complexities introduced by the

closedend matching grant structure. Iriman (1978) presents a
specification of a spending equation that attempts to capture voter
turnout effects.

37

REFERENCES

Barr,

James, and Otto Davis (1966) "An Elementary Political and Economic
Theory of Expenditures of Local Governments," Southern Economic Journal
33: 149-165.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., and Robert P. Goodman (1973) "Private Demands for
Public Goods," American Economic Review 63: 280-296.
Black, David E., Kenneth A. Lewis, and Charles R. Link (1979.) "Wealth
Neutrality and the Demand for Education," National Tax Journal 32: 157
164.

Bowen, Howard R. (1943) "The Interpretation of Voting in the Allocation of
Economic Resources," Quarterly Journal of Economics 58: 27-48.
Denzau, Arthur, and Kevin Grier (1984) "Determinants of Local School
Spending: Some Consistent Estimates," Public Choice 44: 375-383.
Filimon, Radu, Thomas Romer, and Howard Rosenthal (1982) "Asymmetric
Information and Agenda Control: The Bases of Monopoly Power in Public
Spending," Journal of Public Economics 17: 51-70.

Heckman, James J. (1976) "The Common Structure of Statistical Models of
Truncation and Limited Dependent Variables and a Simple Estimator for
Such Models," Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5: 475-492.

Hinich, Melvin (1977) "Equilibrium in Spatial Voting: The Median Voter
Result is an Artifact," Journal of Economic Theory 16: 208-219.
Hotelling, Harold (1929) "Stability in Competition," Economic Journal 39:
41-57.
Inman, Robert P. (1978) "Testing Political Economy's 'As If' Proposition: Is
the Median Income Voter Really Decisive?" Public Choice 33: 45-65.
Ledyard, John (1984) "The Pure Theory of Large Two-Candidate Elections,"
Public Choice 44: 7-41.

Maddala, G. S. (1977) Econometrics, New York: McGraw-Hill
Megdal, Sharon B. (1984) "A Model of Local Demand for Education," Journal of
Urban Economics 16: 13-30.
Moffitt, Robert A. (1984) "The Effects of Grants-in-Aid on State and Local
Expenditure: The Case of AFDC," Journal of Public Economics 23: 279-305.
Moffitt, Robert A. (1986), "The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget
Constraints," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4: 317-327.

38

Munley, Vincent (1982) "An Alternate Test of the Tiebout Model," Public
Choice 38: 2ll-218

Munley, Vincent (1984). "Has the Median Voter Found a Ballot Box that He Can
Control?" Economic Inquiry, 22: 323-336.
New York State (1979). Division of the Budget, Education Study Unit, "Current
Components of New York State's Educational Finance System: A Review"
Albany, N.Y.
Niskanen, William (1971) Bureaucracy and
Aldine.

Representative

Government, Chicago:

Oates, Wallace E. (1986) "The Estimation of Demand Functions for Local Public
Goods: Issues in Specification and Interpretation," University of
Maryland working paper.

Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal (1979) "Bureaucrats vs. Voters: On the
Political Economy of Resource Allocation by Direct Democracy," Quarterly
Journal of Economics 93: 563-587.
Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal (l982a) "Median Voters or Budget
Maximizers: Evidence from School Expenditure Referenda," Economic
Inquiry 20:556-78.
Romer, Thomas, and Howard Rosenthal (l982b) "An Exploration in the Politics
and Economics of Local Public Services," Zeitschri.ft fur
Nationalokonomie/Journal of Economics, Supplement 2.
Romer, Thomas, Howard Rosenthal, and Krishna Ladha (1984), "If at First you
Don't Succeed: Budgeting by a Sequence of Referenda," in H. Hanusch
(ed.), Public Finance and the Quest for Efficiency, Detroit: Wayne State
University Press.
Welch, W. P. (1981) "Estimating School District Expenditure Functions under
Conditions of Closed-End Matching Aid," Journal of Urban Economics 10:
61-75.

39

Table 1.
Expenditure Estimates

(Dependent Variable —

Parameter

Constant

Ln price
•

Ln income
$2

(2)

OLS,
All Obs.

OLS, omit
1l50<S<1250

-2.864
(0.370)

-0.061
(0.323)

-0.230
(0.348)

-0.271
(0.012)

-0.034
(0.012)

-0.074
(0.015)

1.035
(0:037)

0.761
(0.033)

0.778
(0.035)

0.161

0.159

0.537

0.546

544

449

0.143
(0.0067)

"Random" error

0.064
(0.0057)

SEE

No. of obs.

(3)

(1)

Maximum
Likelihood

"Setter shifttt

-2 in Likelihood

in S)

-732.08

544

Estimated standard errors in parentheses
S

Approved operating expenditure per student, 1975/76

"Income" is adjusted for formula aid for districts with S > 1200

40

Table 2.
Estimated Coefficients of the Two-Equation Model
(1)

(2)

(3)

Spending
Constant

Ln P
681

Ln M

-2.334

-2.314

-1.291

(0.346)

(0.351)

(0.403)

-0.266
(0,012)

-0.274
(0.012)

-0.240
(0.012)

0.980
(0.035)

0.946
(0.038)

0.849
(0.043)

0.040

0.033
(0.011)

Ln N in spending

+
%

Black

%

Private

(0.011)

0.0066
(0.0011)
0.0025
(0.0010)
-0.0029

fl

%

Old
686

(0.0017)

Vote

Vote

Intercept

a

Setter shift
-y

0.138
(0.026)

2.094
(0.195)

-1,385

-1.169
(0.131)

-1.143
(0.144)

-0.237
(0.023)

-0.228
(0.023)

0.141
(0.0067)

0.131
(0.0072)

(0.126)

Ln N in vote
6 +

2.019
'

(0.197)

Disturbances
Setter shift

Expend. Error
ar

Vote Error

-2 in Likelihood

0.140
(0.0070)
0.069

0.067

0.067

(0.0067)

(0.0062)

(0.0064)

16.949
(0.540)

16.189
(0.472)

16.340
(0.483)

411.84

339.77

304.97

Note: These estimates employ a heteroskedasticity correction for the Vote
Error. For a given observation,
where W is the total number of
votes cast in the referendum.

a

,

Estimated standard errors in parentheses.

41

Summary

of

Table 3.
Referendum Outcomes

District Size
Tinder 3000

First Referenda
Number
Mean % Yes
Std. Dev. of % Yes
Number Failing
To Contingency
Second Referenda
Number
Mean % Yes
Std. Dev. of % Yes
Number Failing
To Contingency
Third Referenda
Number
Mean % Yes
Std. Dev. of % Yes
Number Failing
To Contingency

362
63.9
15.8
75

3000-6000

Over 6000

111
55.0
11.1
34

71
49.9
10.3
33

5

14

61
51.4
9.6
25
12

29

30

50.8
8.2
14

48.1

9

5

13

52.7
8.5

54.8
9.6

1
1

5
5

42

3

8.0
16
10

6

55.3
11.0
2
1

Table 4.
Likelihoods of Estimated Size Models

-2 in Likelihood
in N omitted

411 84

/3

in

N in Exp. only

410 29

in N in Vote only

351 39

83ç=0
in N as setter effect
6
0

ib.L.öU

,83

in N

in Exp. and Vote

uncons trained

33977

Table 5.

Alternative

Interpretations of the

Models

Estimated Coefficient
6

/33

Column (2), Tabie 2

No Setter Size Effects

0

No Heterogeneity Effects

0.203

No Demand Effects

0.040

-0.237
0

-0.190

0.040
-0.163
0

Co iunin (3), Table 2
No Setter Size Effects

0

No Heterogeneity Effects

0.199

No Demand Effects

0.033

43

-0.228

0
-0.190

0.033
-0.166

0

Table 6
Spending Effects of ianging Vote Requirements

V0

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0

Note:

Statewide Expected
Spending per Pupil

Max L

Mm

50.0
52.5
55.0
57.4
59.9
62.2
64.6

1659.68
1638.36
1617.56
1597.27
1577.50
1558.25
1539.54

-0.04
-0.08
-0.11
-0.15
-0.19
-0.22

-137.34
-268.41
-393.48
-512.84
-626.74
-735.43

66 .

iDLi.

-u • hO

69.0

1503.75

-0.30

-938.15

71,1
73.1

1486.69
1470.18

-0.33
-0.37

-1032.61
-1122.76

100/(l+eV0)

. if

n me

n')A

is the change in expected spending per pupil, relative to V0

Simulations are based on estimates reported in colunin (3) of Table 2.

44

1

0.0

APPENDIX 1

Derivation of Likelihood Functions

A. Expenditure Equation
For a given observation, (l0,)

provides the probability density

of a particular value of S. We assume that d and

are distributed

6r

independently, with d — N(O,ad) and r — N(0,c7r).
Let
IE d

+

1

Edi

2

r 'd21

and
I

Ua

ad

Then UA — N2(O,2A). Using results on the relationships between marginals and
conditionals of multivariate normal variables (see, for example, Maddala
(1977), pp. 454-455) gives the following for the first of the three terms in
(10):

S -

Pr{Ed +

where ()
2

is
2

s1 — [S

4(s )'(t1)
(Al)

the standard normal pdf, '() is the standard normal cdf, and

+

2

-

— (au1
u1 — [Sk

f(P1,M1); 6d Sk - f(P1,M1))

-

- c7dsl)/cr

f(Pl,Ml)]/ad

The third term in (10) has a form similar to (Al). The middle term in
(10) is simply the product of the independent probabilities associated with
Ed and Er• The full expression for the likelihood of an observation is:

45

(s) (t1)
where, for i

-

+

Sk)/ar] [(u) -

(2)

+

[1 -

(t2)]

1,2,

s [S - f(P1,M)]/o

t (au - dsi)/ar
u —

[Sk

-

f(P,Mj)]/cJd

We assume that errors across observations are independent. The log
likelihood for the entire sample is then the sum of in 2 over all the
observations.

B. The Two-Equation System

We now have the additional disturbance term E from the vote equation. We
assume that the distributions of 6d and 6r

and that Ed, Er and

are

as before, that €, —

are independent. Let
2

2

d lad

ad

2
-

Ed + 6r
and

Yd +

,
2

where a — crj + a and s4 =

+ a. Then UB —

2

2

N3 (0 ,O). The derivation

of the likelihood corresponding to (15) is similar to the derivation in the
single-equation case - -

complicated,

of course, by the presence of the

additional disturbance term.
The likelihood corresponding to (15) is:

46

IS -

-q1/z()

IV

Zi

J1 C. J[(Yz)

1.

+

Ski

-

÷
where, for i

qj

(A2)

1,2

— (1/o)2

[

ci[S

-

h(P,M)J2

- h(P,M1)]

-

-

2-ya[S

-

h(P,M1)](V

oci[S - h(P,M)]
Cr

-

-

ao(V

Z) +

o(V -

Z)2

Z)

°u 0s

- h(P,M)] - 'ya(V - Z)
____________________________
yi —
Cd Cu

and
2

22
22
— UrCV
+ CdCu

The first term in (A2) is derived as follows. Let

+

2

2

C lad

2

and

Cd

—

2

Note that U1 —
N(c22j'U1,

-

N2(O,c21)

f'2).

[Cf.

and

the distribution of EdIU1 is

Maddala (1977, p. 455).] The first term of

(A2) follows from this and the relationship Pr{Ul,Ed) —

Pr(Ul).Pr(.edJUl).

Other terms in (A2) can be derived similarly.

Again the log likelihood for the sample is the sum of ln 2 over all the
observations.

47

]

A technical matter should be noted. For Sd to have the properties of a
demand function for arbitrary values of Ed, the paramters of h(S) must be

h(P2,M2). In estimation, however, it may be the case

such that h(P1,M1)

that for some parameters, one or more of the probabilities given in (15) is
computed to be negative. We dealt with this possibility by recognizing that

h(P2,M2), then an observation has zero probability of being at

if h(P1,M)

the kink, and the likelihood for such an observation is computed according to
the following expression:

Pr(S,V) —

Pr(Ed + r
+ Pr(Ed + Er

—

76d + Eu

VZ

h(P2,M2), ld + u

V-Z,

s

- h(P1,M1),

S

-

- h(P2,M2))
Ed

- h(P2,M2fl

Sk

(A corresponding expression applies to the one-equation model.) At
convergence for the results we report in the Tables, the condition h(P1,M1)
h(P2,M2) is satisfied for all observations.

C. Vote Simulations

To evaluate (19), note that the conditional distribution of

1Ed ÷ E

is
22

2

N

(V-i-V0-Z),

2

2

and
-

where

—
h(P1,M1), yd + E — V+V0-Z}

is the N(O,l) cdf
-

h(P1,M1)]

-

-yo(V+V0-Z)

v

and

r1—

Similarly,

Pr(Ed > Sk - h(P2,M2), YEd +

d au

48

— V+V0-Z) — 1

-

given

where

2

-

r2

h(P2,M2)}

E(Edkd < S - h(P1,M1),
p -

Similarly,

ECEd lCd

(r1)[h(P1,M1)

+ p -

V + V0 -

Z)

where qS is the N(O,l) pdf,

and a =

S - h(P2,M2),

p + o(r2)/[1 So E(S) =

led + Eu

o(r1)/(r1),

p = -yo (V-s-V0 -Z)/o

2

-

led

UdJU/C7v.

+ Eu

V + V0 -

Z)

(r2)]
o-(r1)/'(r1)]

+ Sk[(r2) -

+ [1

(r2)j[h(P2,N2) +

49

p + o(r2)/[l

-

(r2)}]

APPENDIX 2

Data

S : Approved operating expenditures

1975-76 school year, divided by

weighted average daily attendance, 1975-76.
N :

Weighted average daily attendance, 1975-76.

K :

Full valuation of real property, 1975-76.

The above data, as well as vote results, were obtained from the New York
State Department of Education.

To derive "effective income", M, and tax price P, we proceeded as

follows. For district i (i —

1,...

,544), located in county k (k —

l,...,57),

— ' (i75 /'k70 )
,m

75 70

— '± (Ik /'k )
,!D

where Y' is district median income from the 1970 Census, and H' is district
median house value from the 1970 Census. I and

are, respectively, New

York State estimates of 1975 and 1970 per capita income in county k, as
published in New York State Statistical Yearbook, 1979-80.

District i's matching rate m is determined by a formula that depends on
the district's full valuation of real property, as measured in the year

preceding the school year in which referenda are held. So for the 1975-76
school year, the 1973-74 full valuations are used (since the first referenda
for 1975-76 budgets are held during the 1974-75 school year.
matching rate formula has the following form:

50

In essence, the

(1200 (461 -

.015K1)/1200

.001K)/l2QO

0.3

52785

if

if 52785 <

K 101000
> 101000

if

where K is 1973-74 full valuation of real property divided by 1974-75
enrollment. *

Tax prices P1 and P2 were calculated for each district using the above
definitions of H and m. Note that in the definition of tax price the
current (i.e., 1975-76) value of Ki is used,
Sample Descriptive Statistics

Variable

Me an

1541.70

%

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

412.55

1023.94

Maximum
3347.27

P1

0.223

0.116

0. 0057

0.712

P2

0.634

0.238

0.020

1.441

15667.0

4329.7

9321.9

45064.7

M2

16159.4

4312.2

9779.6

45440.6

N

3179.3

3178.2

484

21030

%BLACK

2.01

4.98

0.0

72.31

PRIVATE

8.96

8.02

0.0

39 .00

18.92

4.10

6.82

36.43

0.489

0.781

-1.297

4.205

0.603

0.153

0.215

0.985

%OLD
V

YES/ (YES÷NO)

*

*Thjs equals l/(1+e) for each observation.
* The
actual aid formula is subject to a variety of adjustments, including
flholdharmlesstt provisions that prevent districts from losing aid if their
property value per student changes rapidly, and ttmaxing out" provisions to
prevent large increases in aid. These adjustments were relatively unimportant
for 1975-76. By 1978, however, so many districts were in the "hold-harmless"
or "maxing out" categories that there were strong pressures to change the

formula. See New York State (1979).

51

41

10

F(S

G(S)
F2

0.5
G1
F1

0

5

I

I

U

I

R1 S1S°S2R2

FIGURE 1

S

C

Y+P2mSk

1
V

slope = -P2

0

S
Sk

FIGURE 2

m

V

$1

4O

V

14d

4,

V

1

.4,

0.8

0.9

1.0

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

2.0

Note:

0.5

Systems

1.1

(Thousands)

1.3

1.5
Closed End Cutoff (1 per Student)

0.9

Closed End

1.7

1.9

Block

Revenue Shaxin&

Simulations are based on the estimates reported in column (3) of Table 2.

0.7

District Expenditure

M

Statewide Mean Expenditure

For Alternative

Simulated State Aid Programs
Grant—In—Aid

FIGURE 3

