                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             TRANSACTIONS COSTS AND
                             INTERNAL LABOR MARKETS




                                 Sherwin Rosen




                             Working Paper No. 2407




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1987




Presented  at the Conference Celebrating the 50th Anniversary of "The Nature of
the Firm," Yale School of Organization and Management, May 14-16, 1987, forthcoming
in The Journal of Law, Economics and Organization. The research reported here
is part of the NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
                                                 NBER Working Paper #2407
                                                 October 1987




                Transaction Costs and Internal Labor Markets




                                  ABSTRACT




The concept of transactions costs used by Coase in "The Nature of the Firm"

is applied to the internal labor market of an organization. Under joint

production it is shown that the number of transaction—specific prices neces-

sary to decentralize labor allocations rises geometrically with the size of

the work force. Complexity of calculation and costs of implementation

constrains the possibilities •for internal decentralization through a price

mechanism and substitutes a more authoritarian system of allocation instead.

These same issues of complexity and implementation costs limit the useful-

ness of agency theory as a conceptual framework for this problem. The

analysis suggests that an internal labor market must be viewed in a more

comprehensive framework of a personnel management system.




                                                 Sherwin Rosen
                                                 Department of Economics
                                                 University of Chicago
                                                 1126 East 59th Street
                                                 Chicago, IL 60637
                                                                 Revised
                                                                 October 10, 1987




                    TRANSACTIONS COSTS AND LABOR MARKETS

                              Sherwin Rosen*

                          University of Chicago



I. INTRODUCTION

        Coase's first lecture reveals a surprising aversion toward mathe-

matics. Curious, coming from one of the few economists who has a THEOREM

named after him. In fact an easy case can be made that Ronald is respon-

sible for two theorems, a lemma, and, according to some, an identity. THE

Coase Theorem is at this point well beyond further discussion. The Second

Theorem is the remarkable one on the time—consistent, subgame perfect equi-

librium for a durable goods monopolist—-the poor soul who is forced to

either destroy some property or else act as a perfect competitor because it

is impossible to commit now to actions that are not credible in the future

except when monopoly power remains unexploited (Coase [1972]). The Lemma is

not as well known, but should be. It is stated in some remarkable work with

Fowler in 1935, the first known attempt to fit an intertemporal arbitrage

condition, an Euler equation, to real data. Coase and Fowler [1935] were

dubious about the rationality of Cobweb theory as an explanation for the pig

cycle. Raising pigs happens to be a very specialized business. Breeders

sell young pigs to feeders, who in turn sell them in the slaughter market

after they have grown to the proper size. Coase and Fowler reasoned

that easy money could be made in the first—stage transactions unless the



I am indebted to Bengt Holmstrom, Edward Lazear, Oliver Williamson and the
referee for comments and criticism of an initial draft and to the National
Science Foundation for research support.
                                      2



average market prices paid for young pigs reflected expectations about the

price of pork some nine months later, the period in the 1930s (now it is six

months) over which animals were held prior to slaughter, and they verified

the hypothesis empirically in British data. The work is instantly reoognized

today as a version of the rational expectations hypothesis and acknowledged

as such by Muth in his important paper on the subject.

         Though many economists would sell their souls for a theorem, if not

an inequality attached to their name, I suspect that Ronald would rather be

identified with a LAW. This is not the place to speculate on why Laws in

economics are so few, but they seem conspicuous by their scarcity. The law

of demand is now a theorem about the Slutsky matrix, and most of the laws

that are associated with specific name haven't fared well. Stigler's law

was replaced, for a time, by Laffer's curve, the growth of Los Angeles

annihilated Zipf's law, and the takeover and Japanese competition have not

been kind to Gibrat's law. Walras and Engel have done better, but then only

one of them concerns an empirical phenomenon.   I hope Coase claims his law

from his renewed interest in the subject at hand.

         Many studies have calculated a four year average half-life of cita-

tions of articles in economics. Citations to the "The Nature of the Firm"

show not only remarkable longevity but also an exceedingly rare decreasing

hazard of mortality with age. No doubt this is due to the fundamental

questions posed by the work and to the various meanings that can be attached

to it.   In reading it again I was struck by parallels with the literature of

that time on the role of the price system in "spontaneously coordinating"

economic activities, to use Hayek's felicitous expression, as compared to

the heavy and inefficient hand of coordination through central planning.

Coase takes the invisible hand as his point of departure and inquires into
                                     3


the limits of market transactions as a coordinating mechanism. If markets

are ideal coordinators, why should we ever observe any nonsporitarteous,

nonrnarket coordination, as we appear to do within firms?

        Coase argues that firms exist because some transactions internal to

firms are less costly than similar transactions carried out in markets. The

limits of the firm depend on cost comparisons at these margins.

        Ultimately, these limits are determined by market competition among

firms, including the market for corporate control. "Central planning"

within firms is disciplined by competition them, so long as resources are

free to move to their highest valued uses. As Alchian (1950) argued, firms

making superior decisions gain control of more resources at the expense of

the less efficient. It is the central role of competition and concern with

more aggregate questions of supply and demand that probably accounts f or why

much of economic theory dispenses with the notion of the firm altogether;

for example, general equilibrium theory uses only a very abstract notion of

technology.

        In what follows, I apply the theme of "The Nature of the Firm" to

labor markets. Relation—specific exchange embodies the empirical content of

transactions cost in modern industrial organization. Firm—specific human

capital is a closely related concept. Section II reviews recent research

showing that the costs of matching workers to firms and of assembling a team

of workers are major components of these investments. Section III analyzes

the nature of a decentralized market mechanism under these circumstances and

shows that efficient allocations require a large number of transaction-

specific prices, the costs and complexity of calculation and implementation

make market decentralization impractical. The theme of complexity and a

plethora of prices is pursued in section IV, in the context of principal and
                                     LI




agent theory. The emphasis here is on incentive rather than selection and

allocation problems. Nonetheless, the main results so far share the same

conceptual difficulty of excessive complexity and implementation costs. A

broader approach which combines incentive, selection and allocation problems

is stated in section V, within the context of the firm's personnel manage-

ment policy of its internal labor market. Here changing selection and

assignments of workers to positions over the work—life cycle interacts with

performance incentives and worker capabilities. Conclusions appear in

section Vi.



II. TRANSACTIONS COSTS AND SPECIFIC CAPITAL

        Coase did not define the empirical content of transactions costs in

"The Nature of the Firm," nor tell us how to recognize them when we see

them.   Much progress has been made since then, especially by Becker [196LI]

and Williamson [1975], in identifying transactions costs with firm specific

human and nonhuman capital. Shared investment costs requires sharing later

returns and can lead to ex—post contract enforcement problems due to ineffi-

cient, opportunistic behavior. Several empirical observations in the labor

market are consistent with the idea of specific human capital, especially

the long—term attachments between workers and firms. The longest job of a

typical white male worker persists for twenty—five years (Hall [1982]). Top

level executives in major U.S. corporations are mostly "home grown," having

spent thirty years or more with their firms in lesser positions before

breaking into the top echelons (Murphy £19824]).   Is is also otherwise dif-

ficult to understand the patterns of layoffs and employment variability

among workers. Workers who have higher wages and greater job and firm-

specific skills are less likely to be laid off.
                                     5



        So far, however, the magnitude of firm—specific human capital has

eluded precise econometric measurement. The latest investigations of this

problem by Altonji and Shakatko [19814]; Abraham and Farber [1987], Marshall

and Zarkin [1985], and Topel [1987] suggest that most of the observed ef-

fects of firm—specific experience on earnings are due to selection. Highly

paid employees have greater tenure with their firms but were also highly

paid when first hired. These workers remain with their firms longer and

exhibit greater firmspecific experience because their earnings were larger

there to begin with. They were better matched to their jobs in the first

instance. Workers who were not matched so well earned less and left their

firm in search of greener pastures, thus exhibiting less firm—specific

experience. When these selection effects are controlled statistically, it

is found that the "true" firm specific experience effect on earnings is

about the same as the general labor market experience effect, that is, the

same as the general tendency for earnings to rise with age. Now match—

specific effects certainly are a type of firm—specific capital, hut of a

slightly different nature than in the literature that derives inspiration

from "The Nature of the Firm."

       The measurement of physical capital-asset-specificity is perhaps

easier, especially as it pertains to vertical integration. Joskow's [1987]

recent study of the contractual relationships between electric utilities and

coal suppliers is a good case in point. Nonetheless, there are ambiguities

in defining the limits of the firm when asset specificities and transport

cost—based rents are regulated by long—term contracts. Are these to be

classified as market transactions, transactions internal to the extended

family of the firm or what? Klein, Crawford and Alchian [1981] analyze many
                                     6



examples where asset specificities are internalized by ownership. My favor-

ite was the Hawaiian resort that purchased the adjacent golf course to avoid

ex post bargaining costs and opportunism. However, that kind of reasoning

won't go very far in accounting for why Yale University is vertically in-

tegrated with a splendid golf course (perhaps it is meant as an extra bar-

rier for making tenure among golfers).

        As pointed out by Shavell [1979], asset ownership dominates rental

when the user's actions can substantially affect its resale or transfer

value. Ownership internalizes conflicts of interest over maintenance and

reckless use of equipment, and surely is the most important reason why most

capital goods are owned outright by the firms that employ them. Some of the

remaining cases of capital leasing can be 'understood on tax grounds (Scholes

and Wolfson [1986]), but several defy analysis. Rentals of capital services

are common in commercial real estate transactions, and greater tax advan-

tages to wealthy individuals compared to businesses probably account for

some of this, at least historically. Yet no such consideration applies to

the separate ownership of sites and structures. Consider that the World

Trade Center sits on rented land. Since those buildings are securely an-

chored to the bed rock below that part of Manhattan, it is difficult to

conceive of more asset specificity than this. There is even more asset

specificity in this than in Coase's observations on the contractual rela-

tions between GM and A.O. Smith in his third lecture. True, the lease on

the land is very long term, running to 99 years. Still, the potential

difficulties of renegotiation several years before the lease expires are

well illustrated by what has happened in Hong Kong in recent times. These

are more than rent-splitting and pure distribution problems, because the

building owner can take actions, such as lack of maintenance, that directly
                                     7



affects the value of the site. Common ownership of both site and structure

would eliminate this problem. Why isn't it always observed?



III. LIMITS OF LABOR MARKET DECENTRALIZATION

        Contractual difficulties arising from shared ownership of assets is

an important case of a more general problem of devising decentralized pric-

ing mechanisms under joint production. If there were no scale economies,

transport costs nor economies of joint production, it is difficult to im-

agine why complete decentralization of labor markets would fail to achieve

efficient allocations. Most workers would be, in some sense, self—employed.

Coase provides a good example by reference to Stigler's [1951] discussion of

British gun manufacture in the 18th century. Specialization and division of

labor in allied trades was virtually complete when guns were manufactured on

a small scale in a skilled craft system. Craftsmen were specialized by

function: barrels, trigger mechanisms, stocks, sights, and so on. Others

specialized in assembly, purchasing inputs from these specialists, producing

the finished product and distributing it to customers. Most of these spe-

cialized transactions were carried out by market contracts, all within

shouting distance of each other in a small area of Birmingham. Alfred

Marshall [1930] analyzed this kind of system in his theory of external

economies and locational concentration of specialized industries. Whitney's

attempt to manufacture standardized guns on a large scale was unsuccessful,

but his effort to achieve standardization and interchangeable parts altered

gun manufacture forever. Gun—making was thereafter vertically integrated

arid many of the transactions that had previously been organized through the

marketplace were coordinated by more authoritarian methods within firms.
                                    8


        Imagine how markets would have to be organized under these circum-

stances. A worker would own (or rent) a place in the assembly line, having

purchased the rights from its previous owner. Its economic value would

reside in the residual rights of contract, the profit gotten from purchas-

ing intermediate products from adjacent upstream sellers and reselling the

value—added units to adjacent downstream buyers. A decentralized contract-

ing system confined to single quarters would be very difficult to manage

because of the team aspects of the situation and the complicated intercon-

nections of property rights they imply. Downstream workers, obliged to buy

from an adjacent seller due to proximity and smaller transport costs, become

very interested in the identity of that seller, because the volume and

quality of work at each point affects the value of property rights of all

others to whom it connects.

        An exceedingly complicated contractual system, usually requiring

side—payments among participants in the organization, is necessary to

achieve efficiency in these circumstances. The number of prices necessary

to manage it can be very large indeed. However, a simpler mechanism may be

available: one person retains all residual rights, assembles the appropriate

team of workers on a contractual basis, assigns them to their most produc-

tive positions in the firm, and monitors their work. The terms of these

contracts must specify standards for the quality and quantity of work, as

well as employment conditions regarding working hours and regularity of

employment, these nonprice dimensions of contracts being necessary to inter-

nalize technological dependencies among workers. Financial terms of con-

tracts are constrained by competition for workers in the labor market.

Concentrating control in this way and establishing a wage system may be a

less complicated way of achieving efficiency than designing and monitoring
                                           9



an elaborate accounting system and calculating the individualized prices

required by a decentralized internal transfer—pricing mechanism.

        To illustrate the nature of the calculations needed, consider an

organization where joint production entails complementarities of time spent

with co—workers. Let x1 represent the output of worker i and let               t denote
the time that i spends with j (the time that i spends alone is t1•). There

are n worker and the output of worker i is



(1)                 x. =
                            F'(t.1,t.2,...,t.)          for I =   1,2,...,n.

The problem is to find an allocation of time (t1} that maximizes total

output in the organization, the sum of the x1's, subject to two kinds of

constraints. First, the time allocation of each worker must exhaust total

time worked. Ignoring choice of total hours worked and normalizing it to

1.0 for each worker, there are n constraints of the form



(2)                 1 =
                          t. t2+       +        + trl   for I     1,2,...,n



In addition, the time that worker i desires to spend with worker j must

equal the time that worker         desires to spend with worker 1: there are (n2-

n)/2 constraints of the form



(3)                 t.. =
                             ti.,     for i *   j.

        First—order conditions for the efficient time allocation take the

following form:

        For t.. we require
             1].
                                              10



()                     F(t.1,t.2,...,t.)                A.,       for i =



where A. is the multiplier on constraint (2) for worker 1. The equality is

binding when t.. > 0,                has the interpretation of the shadow price of

-i's   time. For t. . and t.. we need:



(5)                    F(t.1,t.2,...,t.)
                                                       A. +      .. for         =




                       F(t.  t. ,...,t.. )
                        1 31,32        jn
                                                       A.
                                                       j
                                                             +   ..
                                                                 31
                                                                      for   I =
                                                                            —




with strict equality whenever t > 0. Here                         is the multiplier asso-

ciated with constraint (3) and .            = -8,j.         Since A1 is the marginal product

of own time, () and (5) together imply that if it is efficient for i and j

to work together Ct. .=    t..   > 0) then



(6)                F'/t.   .

                          13
                               + F3/t..
                                     31
                                             = A.+
                                                   1
                                                       A. F1/t. 11
                                                        3
                                                                .+
                                                                                    33



Equation (6) resembles the condition for efficient joint production of a

"public good." The right hand side is the marginal cost of joint production

for the pair of workers, the output foregone if both had spent their time

alone rather than together. The left hand side is the marginal value of

joint production, the sum of the incremental products of working together.

          Conditions (4) —     (6)    have an important implication, that the decen-

tralized price system that implements the efficient program is very compli-

cated. The fact that (5) and (6) refer to pairs of .iorkers means that the

marginal product of a given worker"s time is not equated across all workers

to whom he is assigned. The time-price worker i spends with another worker
                                                 11



k is        + 8   and 8    * B.    unless workers j and k are in some sense identi—
        1

cal   to each other. Hence a pricing system would have to use different

prices for time charged in each possible pairing. This point is related to

the problem of establishing prices in network systems such as landing rights

at airports and other assignment problems (Koopmans and Beckmann [1957]).

            Let w.. be the unit price that worker i charges worker                per unit

time, with w. = —w.., so w.. is the unit price j must pay to I if w.                    is

positive (or the price that j charges I per unit time if w is negative)

Taking output as numeraire, the decentralized solution is achieved by let—

ting each worker act as a residual income recipient, selling own output to

the owner of the firm at price 1.0 and charging each co—worker                  w per unit
of time spent with each. Worker i chooses {t} to maximize



(7)                F'(tiit2j••tni) +
                                                 1*3



subject     to (2). The first order condition is



(8)                —aF1/at. .,+
                           11
                                  aF1/at.
                                        13
                                             +   w.
                                                   13
                                                      .   0,   for I *   j.
This results in the efficient solution so long as              8 =            that is, so

long as the proper price of time (possibly so large that I and                    do not work

together) is found for each pair. Since there are (n2— n)/2 independent

shadow values of time, the number of prices necessary to achieve efficiency

increases with the square of the number of workers. It would increase even

more if triples and higher orders of joint production were considered.

Moreover, to calculate and implement this solution requires full knowledge
                                     12


of the underlying technology and productivity of team members in the first

place.

         If that knowledge is possessed by a specialist, an authoritarian

system whereby the specialist—manager allocates workers to each other and

monitors their activities may be less expensive to implement than an inter-

nal price system. Errors in prices can be more costly than errors in quan-

titles (Weitzman [19714]). For example, complernentarities may be so large

that the optimal ta's are easy to calculate, whereas small errors in set-

ting the prices w..'s could lead to serious misallocations of time among

individual workers. Furthermore, agreeing on a price can be time-consuming

and divert time and energy away from production even when it is clear that

trade should take place. For if exact valuations are private information

then traders have incentives to argue over the distribution of gains from

trade. Of course elements of these very same problems arise in interfirm as

well as intrafirm transactions. Nevertheless, direct team interactions are

far less important in interfirm transactions and they are more easily regu-

lated by contractural arrangements, the monitoring of output quality, and by

market competition among alternative sources of supply. The close—quarter

interactions of workers and the transport cost savings they imply limit the

degree of substitution and competition from outside alternatives. External

labor market competition disciplines a firm's internal labor market with

respect to overall wages and working conditions, but leaves some slack at

the micro—transactions level of precise worker interactions.

         Such a system is observed in our own backyard, in the organization

of the education industry. In modern educational systems, the price mechan

ism is used largely to allocate students and teachers among schools, and

even then it is incompletely used for this purpose: nonprice considerations
                                     13



play an important role in these allocations. It is used hardly at all to

allocate students to courses and to teachers within schools. Gaining admis-

sion and paying tuition entitles a student to fish among a broad range of

courses. Committees and other collective bodies determine requirements,

course sequencing, class size and other matters of internal allocations.

Transfer prices are seldom used.

        It was not always so. The original universities were collections of

individual teacher—entrepreneurs, and fees were determined by bargaining and

haggling with individual students (Rashdall [1895]). As universities emer-

ged out of these crude beginnings, two-part pricing schemes were adopted.

Students paid lump-sum tuition charges to enter and a marginal payment to

specific teachers in courses of their choice. This is the system that Adam

Smith advocated, on incentive and agency grounds. But as far as one can

tell, all teachers in the same university charged the same unit prices,

whereas efficient allocations of students to teachers almost certainly

require different prices for different teachers, as well as price differen-

tials among students within each course. Two—part pricing was entirely

abandoned in the twentieth century and replaced with one-part salary and

tuition pricing, probably because the bundling and information aspects of

modern formal education made it cost effective to ration by queues, prereq-

uisites and requirements rather than by individually tailored prices (see

Rosen [1987] for further elaboration).



IV. DECENTRALIZATION AND AGENCY

        If the number of prices necessary to decentralize a complex interac-

tive organization increases multiplicatively with size, then the amount and

cost of monitoring required to achieve efficiency also must grow with size.
                                       114




Information   becomes garbled as it passes through longer chains, and inforrna—

tion channels become congested as chains-of-command lengthen (Williamson

[1967]). It is the balancing of joint—production and scale economies

against increasing costs of control associated with nonmarket transactions

costs that determines Organization size in traditional theory.

        The avoidance of monitoring cost preoccupies the modern literature

on agency theory. The main question posed is:     Can penalty and reward

systems be found that result in self—enforcing contracts? If so then inter-

nal decentralization may be efficient and the size of firms could be very

large indeed. A fundamental result proves that multipart pricing is neces-

sary to induce an agent to behave in the interests of the principal. This

is the bonding scheme analyzed by Becker and Stigler [19714]. The idea is

straightforward and rests on the proposition that an agent behaves honestly

if confronted by a scheme that makes such behavior consistent with self

interest. Evidently the scheme must either reward good behavior or punish

bad behavior (malfeasance).

        Considerations of labor market equilibrium dictate the penalty mode

rather than the reward mode. For if the agent is given extra monetary

rewards for good behavior, the expected utility from holding the job exceeds

that available from alternatives and the supply of job applicants exceeds

the number of available positions. On the other hand, if a worker posts

bond money "up front" and the bond can be seized by the firm if malfeasance

occurs., honest behavior is elicited by paying a market wage premium equiv-

alent to interest on the bond, with the bond itself returned at the end of

the contract. This bond—interest—principle scheme equalizes workers' ex-

pected returns among jobs and achieves job-market clearing. An important

modification of the argument allows workers to post bond by investing in the
                                     15



firm; by working at a wage less than marginal product in the early years of

a career, and receiving the return at older ages in the form of wage pay-

ments in excess of productivity (Lazear [1979]). Another modification with

risk aversion (Mirrlees [19714]) also favors the penalty mode because poten-

tial monetary losses reduce utility by more than equal monetary gains in-

crease utility.

        Potential penalties must increase with the agent's perceived returns

to malfeasance to elicit honest behavior in bonding schemes. The temptation

toward malfeasance is decreasing in the extent of monitoring and detection

activity by the firm as well as in the size of the bond to be lost if mal-

feasance is detected. It follows that monitoring and the size of the bond

are inversely related in bonding schemes. But since monitoring uses real

resources (monitors must be hired and taken •out of some other productive use

of labor), whereas bonds do not, 1nonitoring resources can be driven to zero

as the bond increases without limit. The scheme is completely self-enforc-

ing in the limit. For example, penalizing double—parking offenses by execu-

tion would reduce the incidence of double—parking to miniscule proportions

and very little police time would have to be spent in ticketing offenders.

Even apart from the time—inconsistent (incredible) nature of this extreme

example, these limiting results are mainly of academic interest. For as the

bond grows in size the principal is more likely to find malfeasant behavior

when it isn't there. This type—Il error is itself a manifestation of mal-

feasance of another kind for large bonds increase the propensity for the

firm to find the employee "guilty" and seize the bond. Hence it is not

feasible to eliminate monitoring, and the optimum scheme must involve both

penalties and monitoring.
                                       16



           Possibilities for malfeasance by multiple agents in joint production

require mutual monitoring and "double" bonding by all participants. This

problem has not been completely analyzed, though some interesting work has

appeared on the role of reputations in serving as bonds; and agency con-

siderations have been introduced into the analysis of trade unionism, where

the union serves as a worker's agent in dealing with the firm. An earlier

approach derives from Marshall's critique of sharecropping, where rewards

are stipulated as shares of gross revenue rather than of net profit. incen

tives by sharecroppers and landlords are misaligned because both receive

only a fraction of their social marginal product in deciding how much labor

and effort to supply to the venture. Marginal private return falls short of

marginal social return and effort is too small (Johnson [1951], Cheung

[1969]).

           In a multiple sharing arrangement, the socially efficient production

outcome occurs only if the marginal share is unity for each party: each

receives full marginal product in equilibrium (Groves [1973]). Various

mechanisms have been studied to implement the efficient solution; including

"budget breaking" (Holmstrom [1982]), double—bonds (Kennan [1979]), and

trigger—strategies in repeated games (Radner [1981]), though little empiri-

cal research has studied the frequency with which any of them are observed

in practice. Since simple sharecropping systems have been historically

important in the organization of agriculture and similar institutions are

commonly observed in contingent fees for lawyers, the division of reward

among doctors (Gaynor and Pauly [1987]) and lawyers (Gilson and Mnookin

[1985]) in group practice, book royalty arrangements, rewards to actors,

musicians and so forth, the survivor principle suggests that the efficiency

losses from these schemes must have been kept at tolerable proportions. The
                                     17


simplest hypothesis is that joint monitoring and the adverse effects of

shirking on reputations and future business dealings play important roles in

resolving these conflicts of interest.

        Another approach to the principal—agent problem generalizes decen-

tralized output—reward systems to include considerations of risk sharing

(Holrnstrom [1979]). The problem is set up to investigate the consequences

of hidden actions of the agent. The principal cannot observe the agent's

action, but can observe the output that is the result of these actions.

There cannot be a one—to—one correspondence between output and action or

else the principal could infer actions perfectly and the problem is trivial.

So output is a mixture of random effects and unobserved actions. If output

is large, the principal cannot tell if the agent worked very hard or was

very lucky. Similarly, a small output could have been due to bad luck

rather than shirking. The worker is risk averse and prefers certaii income

to risky income, but observability constraints make it impossible to sepa-

rate insurance from incentives. Paying a strict linear piece rate gives the

agent proper incentives to expend effort because the agent realizes the full

social product of effort, but at the cost of exposure to excessive risk.

Paying a guaranteed wage provides full insurance, but does not provide any

incentive to work.

        The solution is a compromise between these two opposing forces. The

earliest treatments (Stiglitz [1975]) analyzed two—part tariff solutions,

where the principal guarantees the agent a minimum compensation for in-

surance reasons and a percentage of revenues to provide incentives to work

hard. The proportion of pay in each part depends in an obvious way on the

extent of risk, the elasticity of output with respect to effort, and the

degree of risk aversion. However, when the problem is generalized to allow
                                     18



the form of the payment schedule to be endogeneously determined, the solu-

tion is extremely complicated: payment need not even be everywhere increas-

ing in output (Grossman and Hart 11983]).

        The complicated payment schedules predicted by theory is an embar-

rassment of riches and another manifestation of "too many prices:" the

schemes we observe, such as salesperson's commissions and contingency fees

in legal practice, have very few parameters. These problems would imply

complete decentralization and simple linear transfer prices were it not for

the presence of risk aversion, so there is a sense in which risk aversion

and insurance elements lead the theory astray. One can be properly skepti-

cal that risk aversion and the precise form of preferences are such an

important part of the problem. After all, a great virtue of a price system

is that it works when utility and production functions are completely pri-

vate information. Could it be that such simple schemes are observed because

they are robust to varieties of preferences? Holmstrom and Milgrom 11987]

have recently introduced intertemporal arbitrage considerations to enforce

linearity onto the optimal scheme. This is an interesting idea, but the

results still depend on special assumptions about risk aversion. None of

this theory extends in any obvious way to problems involving joint produc

tion among several agents. Furthermore, the analysis assumes that princi-

pals possess complete information about preferences of others, and is hardly

decentralized in that sense.



V. INTERNAL LABOR MARKETS

        Ihave followed Coase [1937] and Aichian and Demsetz [1972] in

arguing that the expense of implementing quasi—market decentralization
                                       19


within firms forces analysis on the role of performance monitoring in under-

standing organizational structure. The interactions of personnel within

organizations are too complicated to be completely decentralized through a

price mechanism. Indeed, if this were not the case then Coase's argument

implies that the firm should not exist. This theme is consistent with

Williamson's [1975,1985] criticism of the textbook association of firms as

production functions and his idea of a governance structure. The firm's

observed production and cost functions are the outcomes of the interaction

between production technology, personnel policy,     rner.t,   nd stitu-
tional   rule5 and design.

          Considerations of the long term goals and survival of the organiza-

tion lend additional credence to this view. Since there is substantial

earnings growth over the life cycle and since most job turnover occurs early

in the working life—cycle, a large fraction of a person's life-cycle earn-

ings is generated over the course of a career with one firm. Organizational

complexity arises from the interternporal aspects of personnel management

systems. Organization dynamics cannot be separated from internal job mobil-

ity among overlapping generations of workers and management. All organiza-

tions require specialization and division of labor among their members, but

,job assignments systematically change over a person's tenure with the firm.

Institutional memory, specific knowledge, skills and responsibilities are

constantly being transferred from old to young.

         The flow and throughput of personnel through positions in the firm

can be thought of as an "internal labor market." A very good example is

provided by the officer corps in the military, where all participants begin

at a the lowest rank and either move up to higher positions of authority and

command or leave for alternative employments outside the military.    Most
                                     20



organizations are more complicated than this because lateral entry and exit

accur at many points, not simply at one point. Still, most follow a hierar-

chical design in which ultimate control is concentrated at the top and

diffused through the ranks by horizontal and vertical linkages to middle and

lower level management and to production. In large organizations, it is

especially important to assign the most capable and energetic people to top

level positions because top—level decisions percolate through the organiza-

tion and have much larger effects on organizational productivity than lower

level decisions do.

        Top level decisions have multiplicative effects on productivity in

management technologies where authority is limited by a span of control and

where monitoring resources are partially economized through lengthy chains—

of—command. These multiplicative effects imply that more capable top—level

decision—making can have enormous effects on the organization and imply that

the socially efficient assignment of personnel to positions is hierarchical

in ability. The most capable people should control the most resources and

direct the largest organizations. Less capable and less energetic people

assigned to lower level positions in large firms or higher level positions

in smaller firms. The interaction of talent and scale can support extremely

large salaries for top level managers of large firms on marginal produc-

tivity grounds alone (Rosen [1982]), consistent with empirical findings that

top executive compensation is systematically increasing with firm size

(Murphy [198k], Kostiuk [1985]) as well as with profitability.

        Monitoring, testing, and performance evaluation take on special

significance under these circumstances. Resources must be continually

devoted to designing career tracks and to grading, sorting and assigning

workers to their proper positions in the organization. Employees are not
                                     21



passive by—standers in this process because their incomes and status depend

on how they are graded. The economics of this combined design and incentive

process has begun to be analyzed in the literature on tournaments (Lazear

and Rosen [1981], in which the firm optimizes its testing, selection proce-

dures and wage structure against the competitive efforts of workers to

affect their scores, elevate their classifications and achieve higher rank-

ing positions. The ordinal quality of this kind of competition follows from

the inherent ordering properties of tests and peer comparison when direct

output measures are difficult to devise. Ordered or relative performance

evaluation also has certain optimality properties in the presence of risk

aversion: it eliminates extraneous variance due to measurement error that

is common to all participants (Holmstrom [1982], Green and Stokey [1983],

Nalebuff and Stiglitz [1983]).

        Sequential statistical decisions that rank and order contestants are

inherent in the intergenerational dynamics of organizations and lead to a

theory of promotions through the ranks as an important motivator of the

organization's members. Performance incentives are provided by the wage

differentials between hierarchical ranks. Top ranking prizes (wages) take

on special significance in this kind of competition, for they must rise more

than in proportion with rank to maintain performance incentives among those

competing for the highest level positions (Rosen [1986]). At early stages

of a career a person's performance incentives are propelled by a kind of

"option" value, the possibility of achieving not only the next highest

position, but all possible positions higher than that. As a successful

contestant progresses through the hierarchy and climbs higher in rank and

authority, there are fewer places left to attain. The option value falls
                                     22


with rank because there is less distance to travel. Increasing the dif-

ference in wages among the top—most ranking positions maintains incentives

by substituting for the option value that propelled performance incentives

at lower ranks. In this sense wage structures among top executive positions

reflect both the productivity of top level managers and the productivity

induced by the attempts of lower ranking employees to climb higher.

        A problem inherent in performance evaluation and ability testing has

received increasing attention in the literature. Since grading, evaluation

and promotion decisions are made by higher level committees and supervisors,

contestants have incentives to increase their scores by exerting unproduc-

tive "influence" on the examiners (Milgrom [1987]). For example, in rela-

tive performance evaluations, there may be gains from unproductive activi-

ties that degrade the ranking of competitors and make a contestant look

better than others (Lazear [1986]). These adverse "gaming" incentives by

contestants apply to any evaluation system (Baker [1987], Breton and

Wintrobe [1986]) and help to understand some of the bureaucratic procedures

adopted by organizations to control them. These bureaucratic costs are

properly considered as transactions costs of nonmarket allocations within

firms and may ultimately help define the limits of the firm.



VI. CONCLUSION

        I have argued that the competitive price mechanism necessary to

decentralize a complex interacting organization with indivisibilities and

joint production is very complicated. So much information and preknowledge

is required that more authoritarian "planning" mechanisms are likely to

economize on transactions costs within firms. With respect to labor re—
                                     23


sources, these allocation and contracting problems certainly involve firm—

specific human capital. However, much of this appears to arise in the

context of assembling a coherent work force and productive team within the

firm, collecting and processing information on team members' talents and

assigning them to their proper niche in the organization, and transferring

productive knowledge between older and younger members of the organization.

        Incentives, testing, career assignments and rewards must be analyzed

in the context of a dynamic personnel system. Incentives and reward struc-

tures cannot be disassociated from testing, personnel assignment and labor

turnover questions in such a system. In combining all of these functions,

personnel policies are likely to be inefficient at some margins separately,

though they may achieve reasonably good compromises among all goals con-

sidered together. Looking at these systems or internal-labor-market aspects

of personnel management helps to understand some of the bureaucratic ten-

dencies in organizations as controls on members' attempts to unproductively

manipulate the system to personal advantage. Obviously much work remains to

be done in this area, but if successful it will improve our understanding of

the limits of firms and the limits of markets.
                                            214




                                        REFERENCES

Abraham, Katharine G. and Farber, Henry S. "Match Quality, Seniority arid
Earnings," American Economic Review 77 (June 1987): 278—97.
Aichian, Armen A. "Uncertainty, Evolution and Economic Theory," J.P.E. 58
(June, 1950): 211-221.

________ and Demsetz, Harold. "Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization," Amer.Econ.Rev. 62 (Dec., 1972): 777—795.

Altonji, Joe and Shakotko, Robert. "Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?"
Columbia University, July, 19814.

Baker, George P.  "Monitoring Costs and Compensation Structure," Harvard
Business School, May, 1987.

Becker, Gary S.  The Theory of Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical
Analysis. New York: Columbia Univ. Press, 19614.

_______ and Stigler, George J. "Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and Compen-
sation of Enforcers," J.of Legal Stud. 3          (Jan.,   197'4): 1—18.

Breton, Albert and Wintrobe, Ronald "The Bureaucracy of Murder Revisited,"
J.P.E. 914 (Oct., 1986): 905—926.

Cheung, Steven N. The Theory of Share Tenancy. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1969.

Coase, Ronald. "The Nature of the Firm," Economica (1937, no. 14): 386—1405.

_______      "Durability    and Monopoly," J. Law and Econ. 15 (April 1972):
1143—149.
________ and Fowler, R.H. "Bacon Production and the Pig Cycle in Great
Britain," Economica (1935): 1142—67.

Gaynor, Martin and Pauly, Mark. "Alternative Compensation Arrangements and
Productive Efficiency in Partnerships: Evidence from Medical Group Prac-
tice," NBER, Feb., 1987.

Gilson, Ronald J. and Mnookin, Robert H. "Sharing Among the Human Capital-
ists: An Economic Inquiry into the Corporate Law Firm and How Partners Split
Profits," Stanford Law Review 37 (January 1985): 313-97.

Green, Jerry and Stokey, Nancy. "A Comparison of Tournaments and Con-
tracts," J.P.E. 91 (June, 1983): 3149-65.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Hart, Oliver. "An Analysis of the Principal—Agent
Problem," Econometrica 51 (Jan., 1983): 7—145.

Groves, Theodore. "Incentives in Teams," Econometrica 141 (July, 1973):
617—32.
                                            25


  Hall, Robert E. "The Importance
                                   of Lifetime Jobs in the U.S. Economy,"
  Amer. Econ. Rev. 72 (Sept., 1982): 716—27.

  Holmstrom, Bengt. "Moral Hazard in Teams," Bell J. Econ.
  32l410.                                                  13 (Autumn, 1982):

  ________    "Moral Hazard and Observahility," Bell
  1979): 714_91
                                                           J.    Econ. 10 (Spring,

         — and Milgrorn, Paul. "Aggregation and
                                                 Linearity in the Provision of
  Intertemporal Incentives," Ecoriometrica 55 (March, 1987): 303—29.

  Johnson, D. Gale. "Resource Allocation
  (April, 1950): 111—23.                 under Share Contract," J.P.E. 68

  Joskow, Paul L. "Contract Duration
                                     and Relation-Specific Investments: Empir-
  ical Evidence from Coal Markets,"
                                    Am. Econ. Rev. 77 (March, 1987): 168—85.
 Kennan, John. "Bonding and Enforcement
 1979.                                           of Labor Contracts," ______________
                                                                      Econ. Letters

 Klein, Benjamin, Crawford, Robert G. and
                                          Alchian, Armen A. "Vertical Inte-
 gration, Appropriable Rents and the
 89 (Aug., 1981): 615—6in.           Competitive Contracting Process," J.P.E.

 Koopmans, Tjalling and Beckmann, Martin.
 Location of Economic Activities,"         "Assignment Problems and the
                                   Econometrica 25 (Jan., 1957): 53-76.
 Kostiuk, Peter. "Firm Organization and
                                         Compensation of Corporate Execu-
 tives," unpublished Ph.D. dissertation,
                                         Univ. of Chicago, 1985.
 Lazear, Edward P.       "Pay Equality and Industrial Politics," Hoover Institu
 tion, 1986.

_______      "Why   Is   There Mandatory Retirement?" J.P.E.87 (Dec.1979): 1261-


________ and Rosen, Sherwin. "Rank Order Tournaments
                                                                as Optimum Labor
Contracts," J.P.E. 89 (Oct., 1981): 841—6J4.

Marshall, Alfred. Principles of Economics (8th ed.). London: Macmillan,
1 930.


Marshall, Robert C. and Zarkin,
                                Gary A., "The Effects of Job Tenure on Wage
Offers," Duke University, 1985.

Milgrom, Paul. "Employment Contracts,
                                       Influence Activities and Efficient
Organization Design," Univ. of California, Berkeley, 1987.

Mirrlees, James A. "The Optimum Structure
                                           of Incentives and Authority
within an Organization," Bell J. Econ. 7 (Spring, 1976): 105-31.
                                          26


                                        and Compensation: A Theoretical and
Murphy, Kevin J. "Ability, Performance
Empirical Investigation of Managerial Compensation," unpublished Ph.D.
dissertation, Univ. of Chicago, 19814.
                                        E. "Prizes and Incentives: Toward a
Nalebuff, Barry J. and StiglitZ, Joseph
                                   Competition," Bell J. Econ. 114 (Spring,
General Theory of Compensation and
1983): 21_143.
                                                       Richard J. "Economic
O'Keeffe, Mary, Viscusi, W. Kip, and Zeckhauser,
                                       J. Labor Econ. 2 (Jan., 19814):
Contests: Comparative Reward Schemes,"
27—56.

Radner, Roy. "Monitoring Cooperative Agreements in a Repeated Principal
Agent Relationship," Econometrica 149 (Sept.,
                                              1981): 1127—11148.

Rashdall, Hastings. The Universities in Europe in the Middle Ages. Oxford:
                                      -
Oxford Univ. Press, 1895.
                                                         of Earnings," Bell
Rosen, Sherwin. "Authority, Control and the Distribution
J. Ecori. 13 (Oct., 1982): 311—23.

           "Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments," Amer. Econ.
Rev. 76 (Sept., 1986): 701—15.

             "Some Economics of Teaching," J. of Labor Econ. 1987 (forth
coming).

 Scholes, Myron S. and Wolfsori, Mark A.       "Taxes and Organization Theory,"
 Stanford U., Sept., 1986.

 Shavell, Steven. "Risk Sharing and Incentives in the Principal and Agent
 Relationship," Bell J. Econ. 10 (Spring, 1979): 5573.

 Stigler, George J. "The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the
 Market," J.Polit.Ecori. 59 (Jan., 1951): 18593.

 Stiglitz, Joseph E. "Incentives, Risk and Information: Notes Toward a
 Theory of Hierarchy," Bell J. Econ. 6 (Autumn, 1975): 552—79.

 Topel, Robert, "Job Mobility and Earnings Growth: A Reinterpretation of
                                       R.E. Ehrenberg (ed.), Research in
 Human Capital Earnings Functions," in
 Labor Economics, Greenwich: JAI Press, 1987.

 Weitzman, Martin. "Prices Versus Quantities," Review of Economic Studies,
 '41 (Oct. 1974): 1477—91.

 Williamson, Oliver. Markets and HjerarchieS:AnalYsis and Antitrust
 cations, New York: Free Press, 1975.

                 The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York: Free Press,
 1985.

 ________        "Hierarchical   Control and Optimum Firm Size," J.P.E. 75 (April,
  1 967).
