                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        ENDOWMENTS, SKILL-BIASED TECHNOLOGY, AND FACTOR PRICES:
                     A UNIFIED APPROACH TO TRADE

                                        Peter M. Morrow
                                         Daniel Trefler

                                      Working Paper 24078
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24078


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We are deeply indebted to David Weinstein for help throughout this project. We also thank Daron
Acemoglu, Matilde Bombardini, Arnaud Costinot, Alan Deardorff, Dave Donaldson, Gene
Grossman, Keith Head, Elhanan Helpman, Angelo Melino, Andres Rodriguez-Clare, Jonathan
Vogel, and seminar participants at Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, Berkeley, Colorado,
Columbia, Essex, LSE, the NBER (ITI), Oxford, Simon Fraser, Toronto, UBC, UC Santa Cruz,
the West Coast Trade Conference (Stanford), Western Economic Association (Hawaii) for
helpful comments and suggestions. Swapnika Rachapalli provided exceptional research
assistance. Peter Morrow thanks the Economics Department at the University of California,
Berkeley where he was a Visiting Scholar. Trefler thanks the Canadian Institute for Advance
Studies (CIFAR) Program in Institutions, Organizations and Growth. Both authors thank the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Peter M. Morrow and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Endowments, Skill-Biased Technology, and Factor Prices: A Unified Approach to Trade
Peter M. Morrow and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 24078
November 2017
JEL No. F1,F11,F14

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop a multi-factor, multi-sector Eaton-Kortum model in order to examine the impact of
trade costs, factor endowments, and technology (both Ricardian and factor-augmenting) on factor
prices, trade in goods, and trade in the services of primary factors (value-added trade). This
framework nests the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) model and the Vanek factor content of trade
prediction. We take the model to the data using skilled and unskilled data for 38 countries. We
have two findings. First, the key determinants of international variation in the factor content of
trade are endowments and international variation in factor inputs used per dollar of output. Input-
usage variation in turn is driven by (1) factor-augmenting international technology differences
and (2) international factor price differences. Second, our estimates of factor-augmenting
international technology differences — which imply cross-country variation in skill-biased
technologies — are empirically similar to those used to rationalize cross-country evidence on
income differences and directed technical change.


Peter M. Morrow
Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 St. George St., Room 336
Toronto, Ontario
M5S 3G7, Canada
peter.morrow@utoronto.ca

Daniel Trefler
Rotman School of Management
University of Toronto
105 St. George Street
Toronto, ON M5S 3E6
CANADA
and NBER
dtrefler@rotman.utoronto.ca




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24078
This paper develops a multi-factor, multi-sector Eaton and Kortum (2002) model featuring the
interindustry linkages of Caliendo and Parro (2015) to provide a unified framework for thinking
about how technology, endowments, and trade costs impact factor prices, trade in goods, and the
factor content of trade. The factor content of trade remains a critical object of interest because of its
intimate connection to value-added trade. Value-added trade is the value of primary factor services
embodied in trade; relatedly, the factor content of trade is the quantity of primary factor services
embodied in trade i.e., value added trade is the factor content of trade evaluated at domestic factor
prices. Therefore the current interest in value-added trade (e.g. Johnson and Noguera, 2012)
and global value chains (e.g. Alfaro, Antràs, Chor and Conconi, 2015) should translate into an
interest in the factor content of trade and factor prices. This paper is about these two and their
determinants.
   Our unified framework nests the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) factor content prediction into
a more general prediction that allows for Ricardian and factor-augmenting international technol-
ogy differences, trade costs, and departures from factor price equalization. Taking the model to
empirics using the World Input-Output Database, we make two empirical contributions. First, we
show that the failure of the Vanek factor-content prediction is largely explained (i) by departures
from factor price equalization, (ii) by factor augmenting international technology differences and,
to a lesser extent, (iii) by trade costs for government services. Second, the factor-augmenting
international technology differences that make the Vanek prediction work display the same pattern
of skill bias needed to explain cross-country income differences (e.g., Caselli and Coleman, 2006,
Caselli, 2016) and cross-country evidence on directed technical change (Acemoglu, 1998). This
provides a bridge between the development accounting and directed technical change literatures
on the one hand and HOV empirics on the other.
   Our starting point is the observation that existing HOV empirics are not embedded in a unified
theory of the impacts of productivity, endowments, and trade costs on factor prices and trade. This
makes it impossible to reconcile the diverse findings in the literature, let alone assess the relative
importance of various determinants within a single framework. Depending on the study, the most
important determinant is endowments (e.g., Davis, Weinstein, Bradford and Shimpo, 1997), or
Hicks-neutral productivity differences (e.g., Trefler, 1995, Debaere, 2003), or Ricardian productiv-
ity differences (e.g., Marshall, 2012, but not Nishioka, 2012), or factor-augmenting productivity
differences (e.g., Trefler, 1993a, but not Gabaix, 1997a), or factor prices (e.g., Fadinger, 2011).
Trade costs are rarely considered (e.g., Staiger, Deardorff and Stern, 1987). Davis and Weinstein
(2001) are unique in ambitiously considering all of these determinants. However, they do not
provide an integrated theory and their empirical modelling is in some places based on informal
reasoning that creates problems. For example, they use reduced-form estimation to conclude that
the failure of the HOV prediction is due in part to the failure of factor price equalization. Using
our unified framework we show that their reduced-form estimating equation is very different from
that implied by our theory and that the parameters needed to support their conclusion are not
identified by their data. This points to the need for a unified theory.
   We show that the failure of the Vanek prediction is primarily due to international differences
in the use of skilled and unskilled labor that result from (1) substitution effects associated with


                                                   1
international factor price differences and (2) factor-augmenting international technology differ-
ences. Notice that separately identifying the two is a non-trivial inference problem. For example,
China’s heavy reliance on unskilled labor across industries is due to a combination of low wages
and low productivity for unskilled labor: A model is needed to separately identify these wage and
productivity effects. Yet this issue has never been raised in the HOV literature.
   Our estimated model successfully fits the entire supply-side content of the model. Specifically,
it fits the following: (a) A Techniques equation relating international differences in factor demands
(‘techniques’) to international differences in wages and technology; (b) A Wage or factor market
clearing equation relating international differences in factor prices to international differences in
endowments and technology; and, (c) A Vanek equation relating the factor content of trade (itself a
function of factor prices and technology) to endowments. These three equations describe the entire
supply side of the model so there are no other supply-side equations we can exploit.
   In addition to identifying the key roles of factor prices and factor-augmenting technology, we
find that the Vanek equation displays ‘missing trade’ (Trefler, 1995) unless we treat Government
Services as nontradable. This highlights the benefits of developing a model with explicit trade
costs.1
   Turning to the our second contribution, we relate our analysis to the literatures on development
accounting and directed technical change. The development accounting literature has shown that
richer countries are more productive and that this productivity advantage is more pronounced
for skilled than unskilled labor i.e., technology differences are factor-augmenting and skill-biased
(Caselli, 2005, Caselli and Coleman, 2006, Caselli and Feyrer, 2007, Caselli, 2016). Using our multi-
sector, multi-country method of estimating factor-augmenting technology parameters we find that
richer countries are more productive in their use of both skilled and unskilled labor. (In contrast,
Caselli and Coleman (2006) find a negative relationship between income and unskilled-augmenting
technology.) Further, the ratio of our skilled-to-unskilled technology parameters almost exactly
equals those that come off of a CES aggregate production function. It is interesting that estimates
from a detailed micro model match those from an aggregate macro model.2
   The directed technical change literature has shown that skill bias is systematically related to
factor endowments: Relatively skill-abundant countries should have relatively low skilled wages,
but nevertheless direct innovation towards improving the productivity of skilled labor. (See
Acemoglu, 1998, Caselli and Coleman, 2006, and Acemoglu, 2009. For open-economy empirics
see Acemoglu and Zilibotti, 2001 and Blum, 2010). Our estimates also support a core prediction
of the directed technical change literature: On the balanced growth path with an elasticity of
   1 In this paper we focus primarily on the supply side. There is an important literature on the interaction between

demand- and supply-side determinants. Notably, Caron, Fally and Markusen (2014) offer important insights into
missing trade by introducing demand-side non-homotheticities.
   2 We treat factor-augmenting parameters as technology parameters. Burstein and Vogel (2017) provide a theoretical

way of endogenizing these and relating them to firm-size heterogeneity. Malmberg (2017) treats the technology pa-
rameters not as technologies but as factor-quality parameters. The two are isomorphic. He then uses the factor-quality
parameters in a fascinating decomposition of the sources of cross-country income differences and finds that they are
hugely important. We do not attempt such a decomposition. Nor do we estimate parameters using the same type of
data. Malmberg uses trade data whereas in our primary specification we use production data. Since trade data likely
depend on preferences (e.g., Armington home bias), technology/factor-quality estimates based on trade data likely also
depend on preferences.



                                                          2
substitution between skilled and unskilled labor that exceeds unity (σ > 1), skill-abundant
countries are relatively more productive in their use of skilled labor i.e., a country’s technical
change is directed towards its abundant factor. To our knowledge, Blum (2010) is the only other
empirical international trade paper to investigate this issue and he finds the opposite result.
Although our multi-sector open-economy model does not nest Acemoglu’s (2009, chapter 15)
more aggregate closed-economy model, Acemoglu’s core induced technical change equation
suggests a way of backing out the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor
from our estimated factor-augmenting technology parameters. The resulting elasticity of 1.67 is
squarely within the range of existing estimates from the labor literature.


Literature Review
   This paper is most closely related to Davis and Weinstein (2001). There are three notable
differences between our work and that of Davis and Weinstein. First, being an older study, they
had more limited access to data. (a) They only had data for 10 OECD countries, which means that
they did not have much variation in the development status of the sample countries. (b) They
did not have data separately for skilled and unskilled labor, which means that they could not
investigate skill bias or directed technical change. (c) They did not have factor price data, which
means they could not directly investigate their core claim about the importance of failures of factor
price equalization for understanding the factor content of trade. We use the World Input-Output
Database (Timmer, Dietzenbacher, Los, Stehrer and Vries, 2015), which has data for 38 countries,
for skilled and unskilled labor, and for factor prices. Second, Davis and Weinstein modelled
substitution effects and the failure of factor price equalization in a reduced-form way; in contrast,
we micro-found our model and, in the process, show that Davis and Weinstein were basing their
conclusions on parameters that are not identified by their data.3 Third, they considered Hicks-
neutral technology differences whereas we show that factor-augmenting technology differences
between skilled and unskilled labor are a key feature of the data for HOV, development accounting,
and directed technical change.
   Our model is an extension of Caliendo and Parro (2015) to allow for trade in final goods,
multiple primary factors and factor-augmenting international technology differences. Other multi-
sector and/or multi-factor extensions of Eaton and Kortum (2002) appear in Burstein, Cravino
and Vogel (2013), Caron et al. (2014), Caliendo, Dvorkin and Parro (2017b) and Burstein and
Vogel (2017). Our model also generalizes the HOV model to allow for heterogeneous firms and
trade costs [as in the Melitz-based (2003) models of Bernard, Redding and Schott (2007b) and
Burstein and Vogel (2011)]. Finally, our paper is related to the literature on global value chains
(e.g. Caliendo, Parro and Tsyvinski, 2017a, and Antràs and de Gortari, 2017).4
   Sections 1–3 present our general equilibrium model, describe our three estimating equations,
   3 As noted by Diamond, McFadden and Rodriguez (1978), one cannot separately identify substitution effects from
factor-augmenting technology differences unless one has data on factor prices and the elasticity of substitution between
factors, neither of which Davis and Weinstein used.
   4 To see this, note that value-added trade depends both on the world input-output table of intermediates used per

unit of output (B) and on a matrix of inputs per unit of output for each factor (D). Caliendo et al. (2017a) and Antràs
and de Gortari (2017) parameterize and estimate B, we parameterize and estimate D.



                                                           3
and discuss identification. Section 4 describes the data. Section 5 presents our baseline results
and evaluates the performance of the model. Section 6 draws out the implications for factor price
equalization, substitution effects, factor-augmenting technology differences, skill bias, develop-
ment accounting, and directed technical change. Section 7 links our results to HOV ‘folklore’, and
section 8 concludes.


1. Theory

We slightly modify the Caliendo and Parro (2015) multi-sector Eaton and Kortum (2002) model.
Let i,j = 1,...,N index countries, g,h = 1,...,G index goods or industries, and let ω g ∈ [0,1] index
varieties of good g. A variety is potentially produced by many firms producing a homogeneous
product and selling it in perfectly competitive international markets. Unit costs of producing ω g
in country i are given by c gi /z gi (ω g ) where z gi (ω g ) is Fréchet-distributed efficiency and c gi is
described below. There are also iceberg trade costs: τgi,j is the cost of shipping any variety of g
from country i to country j or, more succinctly, the cost of shipping ( g,i ) to j. The τgi,j satisfy the
triangle inequality. The price of ω g in country j is therefore
                                                                                      c gi τgi,j
                                                      p gj (ω g ) = min                          .                                                       (1)
                                                                                i    z gi (ω g )

1.1. Households

Preferences in country i are given by
                                                                                                                U
                                                                                                      ρ ρ−g 1 γgi
                                                      
                                                  G   Z          1                 ρ g −1                g
                                 U=           ∏               0
                                                                       q0gi (ω g )     ρg
                                                                                              dω g
                                              g =1
                                                                                                               

where q0gi (ω g ) is the amount of ω g consumed in country i, ρ g > 1 is the elasticity of substitution
for consumption, and the non-negative Cobb-Douglas share parameters satisfy ∑ g γU
                                                                                 gi = 1 .


1.2. Goods Producers

Each country i is endowed with an inelastic supply of primary factors Vf i where f indexes factors
e.g., unskilled labor. Output q gi (ω g ) of variety ω g in country i is produced using the Caliendo et
al. (2017b) extension of the one-factor Caliendo and Parro (2015) technology:
                                          (                                                             ) σ−σ 1 γgi
                                                                                               σ−σ 1                  G
                                              ∑ αfg   1/σ
                                                                                                                      ∏
                                                                                                                                             γh,gi
             q gi (ω g ) = z gi ω g                           λ gi π f i Vf gi (ω g )                                            Yh,gi (ω g )            (2)
                                              f                                                                       h =1

where Yh,gi (ω g ) is a good-h CES input bundle with elasticity of substitution ρh .5 Vf gi (ω g ) is the
input of primary factor f . σ is the elasticity of substitution between primary factors. π f i is
the efficiency of factor f in country i and captures factor-augmenting international technology
  5 As in Caliendo and Parro (2015), this input bundle has the same form as the good-h consumption bundle that
appears in braces in the utility function.



                                                                            4
differences. It is central to this paper. z gi (ω g ) are Fréchet with location parameter 1 and shape
parameter θ g . λ gi is the efficiency of industry g in country i and captures Ricardian technology
differences.6 The Cobb-Douglas parameters satisfy γgi + ∑hG=1 γh,gi = 1 and are non-negative. γh,gi
is the share of the good-h intermediate bundle in the cost of producing varieties of ( g,i ).7
   The unit cost function for q gi (ω g ) is c gi /z gi (ω g ). We next develop an expression for c gi . The unit
                                                                 hR              1− ρ g      i1/(1−ρg )
cost function in i for a good-g input bundle is Pgi ≡                 p gi (ω g )         dω g            . A deep insight
from Caliendo and Parro (2015) is that in this setting of multi-sector ‘roundabout’ production, Pgi
and c gi are jointly determined as solutions to the following two equations:
                                                        h
                                                                N                     −θg i−1/θg
                                           Pgi = κ g        ∑   j =1
                                                                         c gj τgj,i                                       (3)

                                                                            1−σ # 1−1 σ γgi
                                           "                                            
                                                       
                                                              wfi                                  G
                             c gi = κ gi        ∑ αfg       λ gi π f i                            ∏ ( Phi )γ   h,gi
                                                                                                                          (4)
                                                 f                                                h =1
                                                                                           

where w f i is the price of factor f in country i and the term in braces is the unit cost function for
primary factors.8


1.3. Expenditure Shares

We next derive the trade shares which Eaton and Kortum denote by π and which we denote by π.   e
                  egi,j be the share of g that j sources from i. As suggested by equation (3),
Specifically, let π
                                                                                    −θ g
                                                                       c gi τgi,j
                                                 egi,j =
                                                 π                                      −θ g .                           (5)
                                                            ∑iN0 =1 c gi0 τgi0 ,j

The proof is similar to that in Caliendo and Parro (2015).9


1.4. Equilibrium

We now depart from Caliendo and Parro (2015) in allowing for trade in final goods, an important
feature of our empirical analysis.
  Income and expenditure: Let Q gi be the value of ( g,i ) output summed across varieties: Q gi ≡
R                  
   c gi /z gi (ω g ) q gi (ω g ) dω g . The condition that sales of ( g,i ) equal expenditures on ( g,i ) is
                                                "                                 #
                                              N         G                   
                                       Q gi = ∑ π egi,j ∑ γg,hj + γgj γhj Qhj .
                                                                      U
                                                                                                             (6)
                                                j =1        h =1

An explanation and proof of this equation appear in the appendix. For what follows, the reader
only needs to know that the term in brackets is country j’s expenditures on ( g,i ).
   6 (λ          γgi
              replaces Eaton and Kortum’s (2002) Tgi . For our empirical purposes it makes no difference whether we take
          gi )
λ gi out of the production function and put it into the Fréchet location parameter.
            h,gi ≥ 0 control input intensities. The α f g ≥ 0 control factor intensities and ∑ f α f g = 1.
    7 The α
   8 In equations (3)–(4), κ = Γ ((1 + θ − σ ) /θ )1/(1−σg ) and κ = ( γ )−γgi
                            g           g   g    g                gi    gi     ∏h (γh,gi /αh,gi )−γh,gi . Equation (3) follows
from standard Fréchet properties e.g., Caliendo and Parro (2015, eqn. 4). Equation (4) is the dual of equation (2).
   9 λ does not appear directly in equation (5) because λ is subsumed within c . See equation (4).
       gi                                                   gi                    gi



                                                                        5
    Goods market clearing: Setting supply equal to demand for a variety of ( g,i ) yields
                                                           "                              #
                                            p gj (ω g )−ρg           G             
                    q gi (ω g ) = ∑ τgi,j         1− ρ g
                                                             egi,j ∑ γg,hj + γU
                                                             π                gj γhj Q hj                         (7)
                                 j ∈ J (i )     Pgj                h =1


where J (i ) is the set of importers that source ω g from country i.10
    Factor market clearing: The exposition of factor market clearing usually builds on an expression
for factor demand per unit of a firm’s output. However, the input-output data that we will
use only records factor demand per dollar of an industry’s output i.e., d f gi ≡ Vf gi /Q gi where
       R
Vf gi ≡ Vf gi (ω g )dω g is industry ( g,i ) employment of factor f . We therefore work with d f gi . Using
Shephard’s lemma and aggregating to the industry level,
                                                                             −σ
                                                 γgi      α f g w f i /π f i
                                      d f gi   =                                        .                         (8)
                                                 π f i ∑ 0 α f 0 g w f 0 i /π f 0 i 1−σ
                                                                                   
                                                        f

The proof appears in the appendix. Factor market clearing is ∑ g Vf gi = Vf i or

                                                      G
                                                  ∑g=1 d f gi Qgi = Vf i .                                        (9)

    Equilibrium: Equilibrium is a set of prices w f i and p gi (ω g ) which clear factor markets domes-
tically (equation 9) and clear product markets internationally (equation 7) subject to producers
minimizing costs (equation 8) and consumers maximizing utility. In equations (7)–(9), the variables
( Pgi ,c gi ,π
             egi,j ,Q gi ) satisfy equations (3)–(6) and the definition of Q gi .


2. Empirical Counterparts, Value-Added Trade and HOV

Input-output tables report data that are aggregated up from varieties to goods (industries) and that
are in values. Recall that Q gi is the value of ( g,i ). Let Cgi,j be the value of country j’s consumption of
( g,i ), let Mgi,j be the value of country j’s imports of ( g,i ), let Xgi be the value of country i’s exports
of g, and let bgi,hj be the value of intermediate purchases of ( g,i ) per dollar of (h,j) output. The
following lemma relates the theoretical parameters to the data. If we were interested in calibrating
trade in final and intermediate goods to underlying technology parameters, as in Caliendo et al.
(2017a) and Antràs and de Gortari (2017), then this lemma would be of importance. However, we
are not headed in this direction so the lemma is stated primarily for completeness. The proof is in
the appendix.
                                     G
Lemma 1 (1) Cgi,j = π    egi,j γU                                egi,j ∑hG=1 (γg,hj + γU
                                gj ∑ h=1 γhj Q hj . (2) M gi,j = π                     gj γhj ) Q hj for j 6 = i . (3)
Xgi = ∑ j6=i Mgi,j . (4) bgi,hj = πegi,j γg,hj .
  10 τ  appears just after the summation in order to convert demand for delivered goods (q/τ) into demand for
      gi,j
supplied goods (q).




                                                                6
   Let Qi , Cij , Mij , and Xi be G × 1 vectors with gth elements of Q gi , Cgj,i , Mgj,i , and Xgi , respec-
tively. Let Bij be a G × G matrix whose ( g,h)-th element is bgi,hj . Define the matrices
                                                                                           
                 Q1 · · · 0                                                  C11 · · · C N1
                .      ..    ..                                          .     ..     .. 
           Q ≡   .                                                   C≡     .
                .         .   .  ,                                      .        .    .  ,
                 0 · · · QN                                                  C1N · · · C NN
                                                                                                       
                    X1       −M21 · · · −M N1                                 B11 B12 · · · B1N
                −M12         X2      · · · −M N2                           B21 B22 · · · B2N
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         
           T ≡      ..         ..    ..     ..                   and B ≡ 
                                                                            ..      ..  ..      ..       
                      .          .       .    .                             .        .     .     .
                                                                                                        
                                                                                                        
                         −M1N −M2N · · ·              XN                       B N1 B N2 · · · B NN

where Q, C, and T are NG × N and B is NG × NG. Output is used for intermediates (BQ), for
consumption final demand (C) and for trade T so that Q = BQ + C + T or

                                               T = (I NG − B)Q − C                                                 (10)

where I NG is the NG × NG identity matrix. Equation (10) is the goods-market clearing equation
and always holds both in equilibrium and in the data.11
   Let D f i be a 1 × G vector with gth column element d f gi . Define the 1 × NG vectors D f ≡
[D f 1 · · · D f N ] and A f ≡ D f (I NG − B)−1 . Let Ti be the ith column of T. Define

                                        Ff i ≡ A f Ti = D f (I NG − B)−1 Ti .                                      (11)

Ff i is the amount of factor f employed worldwide to produce country i’s net trade vector Ti .
Following Trefler and Zhu (2010), we explain this as follows. Consider tracking the global supply
chain needed to produce Ti . Production directly requires a vector BTi of intermediate inputs. This
is the first link in the global value chain. In the second link, producing BTi requires B(BTi ) = B2 Ti
of intermediate inputs and this too can be divided into domestic and foreign intermediates.
Adding an infinite number of links to the global value chain, the intermediate inputs required
to deliver Ti is ∑∞    n
                  n=1 B Ti . Further, the gross output (intermediates plus final output) required is
Ti + ∑ ∞    n        ∞    n                 −1
       n=1 B Ti = ∑n=0 B Ti = ( I NG − B ) Ti . This explains how our equation (11) definition of
the factor content of trade tracks global value chains.
   In light of this, it is not surprising that this definition is intimately related to what Johnson and
Noguera (2012, forthcoming) as well as Hummels, Ishii and Yi (2001) and Yi (2003, 2010) refer to as
trade in value added. To see this without getting bogged down in notation, suppose that the unit in
which each primary factor is measured is the annual value of its service flow i.e., its value added.
For labor this would be payroll. Then the Johnson-Noguera trade in value added for country i
equals ∑ f w f i Ff i . Extensions to bilateral trade are straightforward.
   The Vanek factor content of trade prediction is Ff i = Vf i − si ∑ j Vf j . Consider a generalization
of it. Let C j be the jth column of C and let Cw = ∑ j C j . A typical element of Cw is Cgi,w = ∑ j Cgi,j
i.e., world consumption of ( g,i ). Let si be country i’s share of world consumption (∑i si = 1).
  11 Though   not obvious, it can be derived by aggregating up equation (7) from varieties to goods. See Trefler and Zhu
(2010) for a detailed derivation.


                                                           7
Theorem 1 (Trefler and Zhu, 2010): Define ν f i ≡ A f (Ci − si Cw ). Goods market clearing (equation 10)
alone implies
                                                                           N
                                                   F f i = Vf i − s i      ∑ Vf j + ν f i .                                            (12)
                                                                           j =1

The proof appears in the appendix. There are many reasons to expect ν f i 6= 0 including trade costs
(τgi,j > 1 for i 6= j), nontraded sectors (τgi,j = ∞ for i 6= j), international differences in preferences
(γU
  gi depends on i), and non-homotheticies (as in Caron et al. 2014). The significance of the theorem
flows from the empirical observation, established below, that after correcting for the nontradability
of government services, the ν f i are small.
    It will be useful later to have a shorthand notation for C j − s j Cw and its typical element
Cgi,j − s j Cgi,w . We say that consumption similarity holds if Cgi,j = s j Cgi,w i.e., if country j’s share
of world consumption of each ( g,i ) equals s j . This is a common expression; for instance, if there
are no intermediate inputs then Cgi,j = Mgi,j and Cgi,w = Q gi , then consumption similarity is just
a restatement of gravity without trade costs (Mgi,j = s j Q gi ). It is straightforward to show in our
model that if preferences are internationally identical and trade costs are zero then ν f i = 0.12
    Finally, it may seem surprising that equation (12) holds so generally: All that is required is
goods market clearing. To make the point that much (but not all) of the empirics of this paper hold
more generally, in the online appendix we establish all the core equations needed for our empirics
using a Krugman (1980) love-of-variety model. There we continue to assume that the production
function is separable in primary factors and intermediates and that the primary-factors aggregator
is CES as these are both important for our empirics.


3. Empirical Specification

Using equation (8) to calculate d f gi /d f g,us and rearranging yields

                                                          d f gi = β f i d f g,us /δgi                                                 (13)

where                                                                        −σ               −1
                                                           w f i /π f i
                                                      
                                                                                      πfi
                                             βfi ≡                                                                                     (14)
                                                          w f ,us /π f ,us           π f ,us
and                                                                                    1− σ
                                                 γg,us ∑ f 0 α f 0 g w f 0 i /π f 0 i
                                           δgi ≡                                             .                                         (15)
                                                  γgi ∑ 0 α f 0 g w f 0 ,us /π f 0 ,us 1−σ
                                                                                         
                                                       f

These β f i are central to what follows. The terms in the first and second pairs of parentheses of (14)
crystallize the substitution and productivity effects at the heart of Davis and Weinstein (2001) and
  12 To   see this, normalize world expenditures to unity so that s j is j’s total expenditures. γU
                                                                                                  gj is the fraction of j’s final
consumption expenditure allocated to g. γU                                                  egi,j γU
                                         gj s j is what j spends on final consumption of g. π      gj s j is what j spends
on final consumption of ( g,i ). Hence Cgi,j = π     egi,j γU                                                               U      U
                                                            gj s j . Internationally identical preferences means that γ gj = γ g for all
g and j. Zero trade costs means τgi,j = 1 for all ( g,i ) and j and so implies that π      egi,j is constant across all j for a given ( g,i )
(see equation 5). Call this π                                U
                                                      egi γg s j . Summing this over j and using ∑ j s j = 1 yields Cgi,w = π
                                 egi . Hence, Cgi,j = π                                                                              egi γU
                                                                                                                                          g
so that s j Cgi,w = π    U
                    egi γg s j . This establishes Cgi,j = s j Cgi,w or, in matrix notation, C j = s j Cw . Hence ν f j = 0.



                                                                       8
Trefler (1993a), respectively. The (direct) amount of a factor used to produce a unit of output can be
high relative to the United States either because of low productivity adjusted wages (substitution
effects) or because of low productivity. To avoid confusion, we refer to the π f ≡ (π f i , . . . ,π f N )
as ‘productivity’ parameters and the β f ≡ ( β f i , . . . ,β f N ) as ‘reduced-form’ parameters since they
capture international differences in both productivity and factor prices.13


3.1. The Three Estimating Equations

With the additional structure that flows from equations (13)-(15), we can now develop our three
estimating equations. These equations completely describe the supply side of the model — there
are no other supply-side equations of interest. Consider first the Vanek equation. Recall that
Ff i = D f (I NG − B)−1 Ti is the factor content of trade using observed factor usage D f . Let D f ( β f )
be a 1 × GN matrix with typical element β f i d f g,us /δgi (the right-hand side of equation 13) and
define
                                         Ff i ( β f ) ≡ D f β f [I NG − B]−1 Ti .
                                                               
                                                                                                                         (16)

(We suppress the δgi as arguments.) Under the assumptions of our model, D f ( β f ) equals the data
D f and hence Ff i ( β f ) equals the data Ff i . It follows that our generalized Vanek equation becomes
                                                                         N
                                         F f i ( β f ) = Vf i − s i   ∑ j = 1 Vf j + ν f i .                             (V)

The equation label (V) is for Vanek. Since Ff i ( β f ) is linear in D f ( β f ) and D f ( β f ) is linear in
β f , Ff i ( β f ) is linear in β f . Hence, equation (V) can be written as a system of linear equations
that uniquely solve for the vector β f . Notice that the unknown parameters (β f i ) show up on the
left-hand side of the Vanek equation as in Davis and Weinstein (2001).
   Turning to the factor-market clearing equation, or Wage equation for short, substitute factor
demands (equation 13) into the factor-market clearing condition (equation 9) and solve for pro-
ductivity adjusted wages to obtain
                                                                                                  !1/σ
                               w f i /π f i        π f ,us Vf ,us 1/σ         G   d f g,us Q gi
                                                                

                              w f ,us /π f ,us
                                               =
                                                    π f i Vf i               ∑ δgi Vf us                 .               (17)
                                                                             g =1

See the appendix for a proof. The first term (in square brackets) shows that productivity adjusted
factor prices are decreasing in productivity adjusted factor supplies, ceteris paribus. The second
term shows that the price of factor f is bid up if output Q gi is large in sectors with high per-unit
demands for factor f , ceteris paribus. These demands are high when the sector is intensive in factor
f (d f g,us is large). Rearranging this equation yields our second estimating equation:
                                                            "                     # −1
                                                                G
                                                              d f g,us Q gi
                             W f i (D f , Q, Vf i , δ) ≡ ∑                               = β f i + εW
                                                                                                    fi                   (W)
                                                         g =1
                                                                δgi Vf i

where δ ≡ {δgi }∀ g,i , W f i () is a function, and the error term εW
                                                                    f i is discussed below. The equation
label (W) is for Wage, a short form for ‘labor-market clearing’.
  13 Ona trivial identification issue, we only identify the π f i /π f ,us and not the π f i and π f ,us separately. This is a
standard feature of international productivity comparisons.


                                                                 9
   Turning to the third and last equation, the Techniques equation, we aggregate equation (13)
up to the same level as the Vanek and Wage equations, namely, to the factor-country level.
Specifically, taking the employment-weighted average of equation (13) yields ∑ g θ f gi d f gi /d f g,us =
∑ g θ f gi β f i /δgi where θ f gi ≡ Vf gi /Vf i is the share of f that is employed in industry g. The θ f gi are
data and satisfy ∑ g θ f gi = 1. Rearranging to isolate β f i yields

                                                             ∑G
                                                                                               
                                                              g=1 θ f gi d f gi /d f g,us
                                       T f i (D f , δ) ≡                                           = β f i + εTfi                                 (T)
                                                                     ∑G
                                                                      g=1 θ f gi /δgi

where T f i () is a function and the error term ε Tfi is discussed below. (The dependence of T f i on the
θ f gi is suppressed.) Equation (T) also shows that average factor f usage is hig when θ f gi is large
and δgi small so that ∑ g θ f gi /δgi is large. The equation label (T) is for Techniques. ‘Techniques’
refers to factor demand choices whereas technology refers to parameters of the cost function.
   Turning to the error terms, suppose that the production function (equation 2) is mis-specified.
Then equation (13) is mis-specified and requires an error term: d f gi = β f i d f g,us /δgi + ε f gi . Starting
with this equation and re-deriving equations (W) and (T) generates the errors εW        T 14
                                                                               f i and ε f i .


3.2. Calibrating the δgi

The only things that are not data in equations (T), (V) and (W) are the δgi and β f i . Before explaining
how we calibrate the δgi we make the following observations.
   First, equations (13)–(15) imply something very surprising: Conditional on factor prices, factor
demands are independent of λ gi . That is, the key data that might be expected to inform Ricardian
comparative advantage — the d f gi — are not informative of the Ricardian parameters λ gi . To be
clear, factor demands per unit of output do depend on the λ gi , but these demands are not observable.
We only observe factor demands per dollar of output. It had been our expectation that in our core
equation d f gi = β f i d f g,us /δgi , the β f i would capture factor-augmenting technology differences (π f i )
and the δgi would capture Ricardian technology differences (λ gi ). The latter is incorrect and, as a
result, the δgi are not terribly interesting.
   Second, the λ gi and π f i only enter into the model via the term λ gi π f i in the production
function (equation 2). We can therefore always rescale them by a country-specific scalar i.e.,
λ gi π f i = (λ gi /φi )(π f i φi ) for any positive constant φi . φi is a free parameter that corresponds
to a normalization of the productivity terms. This normalization logic extends to the terms β f i
                                                                                 
and δgi since they only enter the model via the term d f gi = d f g,us β f i /δgi in equation (13). We
have already argued that the δgi are not terribly interesting so it is convenient to normalize them
using ∑ g θ Lgi δgi = 1 where θ Lgi is the share of country i’s labor employed in good g. This loads
aggregate productivity onto the π f i allowing us to compare them with previous work (e.g. Caselli
                                                                              
and Coleman (2006)). Since d f gi is invariant to this scaling, so is Ff i β f (see equation (16)). It
follows that our results in section 5 are invariant to our choice of normalization.15
  14 εW ≡
      fi    ∑ g ε f gi Q gi / ∑ g (d f g,us /δgi ) Q gi and ε Tfi ≡ ∑ g (ε f gi θ gi /d f g,us )/ ∑ g (θ gi /δgi ).
  15 Specifically, what matters for the section 5 plots is the position of the data relative                          to the 45◦ line. Those positions
are invariant to the choice of scaling; scaling just relabels each axis.



                                                                            10
                                                  Figure 1: Identification




(a): Identical technologies                    (b): Identical curvature                   (c): Technology differences
     Choose curvature                               Choose tech. diff.                         with PFPE


   Third and intuitively, δgi /δg,us is the average difference in input requirements d f g,us /d f gi after
purging the latter of their β f i components. This suggests three different ways of calibrating the
δgi .16 (i) Regress ln d f gi /d f g,us on ( g,i ) fixed effects and treat the fixed effects as the calibrated
δbgi . (ii) Regress ln d f gi /d f g,us on ( g,i ) and ( f ,i ) fixed effects and treat the ( g,i ) fixed effects as
the calibrated δbgi . (iii) From equation (13) and our normalization, δgi = δgi / ∑ g0 θ Lg0 i δg0 i =
(d f g,us /d f gi )/ ∑ g0 θ Lg0 i (d f g0 ,us /d f g0 i ). δgi computed in this way depends on the choice of factor f .
Taking the geometric mean over two factors (skilled labor S and unskilled labor U) yields our third
calibration method:

                                                (dUg,us /dUgi )1/2 (dSg,us /dSgi )1/2
                                δbgi ≡                                                             .                       (18)
                                         ∑G
                                          g0 =1 θ Lg0 i ( dUg0 ,us /dUg0 i )
                                                                             1/2 ( d 0 /d 0 )1/2
                                                                                    Sg ,us Sg i

Fortunately, the three calibration methods are equivalent and we thus use the method in equation
(18) for the remainder of the paper.17,18
   To conclude, equations (T), (V) and (W) with the δgi set equal to the δbgi are our three estimating
equations.


3.3. Identification

We say that productivity-adjusted factor price equalization holds if
                                                         wfi   w f ,us
                                                             =         .                                                   (19)
                                                         πfi   π f ,us
  16 By   equation (15), δg,us = 1 ∀ g.
  17 More   precisely, they are equivalent up to a country-specific normalization which we take to be ∑ g θ Lgi δgi = 1.
  18 The above three methods weight each factor equally. In the regression methods of (i) and (ii), the optimal GMM

weights depend on the variance of ln dUgi /dUg,us relative to the variance of ln dSgi /dSg,us . Since these two covariances
are very close to being equal, equal weights are close to optimal. Nevertheless, we have experimented by doubling the
weight on one factor and halving the weight on the other. In terms of equation (18), this involves changing the exponents
from (1/2,1/2) to either (1/4,3/4) or (3/4,1/4). The results reported below are not at all sensitive to this re-weighting.



                                                                11
A surprising conclusion emerges from examination of equations (T), (V) and (W): By themselves
they cannot identify the factor-augmenting technology parameters π f i nor the substitution effects
associated with failure of PFPE i.e., they cannot be used to answer our major question. In these
equations the only unknown parameters are the β f i . Further, the only place where w f i , π f i and σ
appear are in the β f i . Let βb f i , π
                                       b f i and b
                                                 σ be estimates of β f i , π f i and σ, respectively, so that
                                                                     −bσ               −1
                                                   w f i /π
                                              
                                                           bfi                 π
                                                                               bfi
                                   βb f i =                                                    .           (20)
                                                  w f ,us /π
                                                           b f ,us            π
                                                                              b f ,us

Hence, given data on factor prices and given estimates βb f i , we cannot uniquely identify (π     σ ):
                                                                                             bfi , b
We can only identify combinations of the π b f i and b
                                                     σ. This lack of identification is well-known
(Diamond et al., 1978) and intimately connected to the main concerns of this paper. To see this,
suppose that we observe data on factor prices and the amounts of U and S per unit of output
used in two different countries i.e., suppose we observe (wUi ,wSi ) and (dUgi ,dSgi ) for countries
i = 1,2. Figure 1(a) plots an isoquant in (U,S) space. Points correspond to (dUgi ,dSgi ) and
slopes to −wUi /wSi . Now consider the problem of estimating cost or demand functions that are
consistent with these data. One approach is to make the identifying assumption that technologies
are internationally identical and then fit the data by adjusting the curvature of the isoquant. See
panel (a). In our context where primary factors enter the production function via a CES aggregator,
this means adjusting σ. Another approach is to assume that there are international technology
differences so that isoquants differ across countries. See panel (b). In our CES context this means
adjusting the π f i . In between there are countless other possibilities involving mixtures of curvature
and international technology differences. That is, σ and the π f i are not identified.
  Trefler (1993a) is the special case where PFPE is imposed so that βb f i = (π          b f ,us )−1 i.e., the
                                                                                  b f i /π
π f i are identified, but not σ. It follows that Trefler could not address the Davis and Weinstein
(2001) question about the importance of substitution effects when PFPE fails. The point is further
illustrated in panel (c) where the axes are productivity adjusted factor inputs so that international
differences in technology and factor prices disappear. Since all data for an industry are on a single
point, substitution effects along an isoquant cannot be examined and σ cannot be estimated.
  Davis and Weinstein (2001) is the special case in which PFPE fails and there are only Hicks-
neutral productivity differences (πSi = πUi = πi ). From equation (20), this implies βb f i =
(w f i /w f ,us )−bσ (πi /πus )bσ−1 which means that one cannot use the reduced-form βb f i to infer the w f i ,
π f i and σ separately i.e., to make claims about whether it is international differences in factor
prices or technology that are needed to ‘fix’ the Vanek equation. Since Davis and Weinstein do not
use data on factor prices w f i or external estimates of the elasticity of substitution σ, their reduced-
form estimates cannot support their claims. And, given Diamond et al.’s (1978) more general
non-identification result, this identification problem holds for any cost function. Surprisingly, then,




                                                               12
Davis and Weinstein (2001) ask a great question but do not answer it.19
    Given these identification issues our strategy is as follows. We estimate the β f i from equations
(T) and (W), choose a value of b  σ that comes out of a directed technical change equation and that
is also consistent with the labor literature, and use wage data together with the βb f i and equation
(20) to back out the π        b f i .20 We can then examine whether the π
                                                                        b f i are consistent with PFPE (i.e.
w f i /π
       b f i = w f ,us /π
                        b f ,us ) and answer the Davis and Weinstein question. This in turn is linked to the
development accounting exercise of Caselli and Coleman (2006) in which wage and endowment
data are used to calculate and characterize the skill bias of technology and the directed technical
change of Acemoglu (1998) in which the skill bias is partially explained by endowments.


4. The Data

Unless otherwise noted, all data come from the World Input-Output Database (WIOD) as assem-
bled by Timmer et al. (2015). This data set has the advantage of providing information on the full
world input-output matrix B and satisfying all data identities. Our data cover 38 developed and
developing countries and 22 industries in the year 2006.21 Countries and industries are listed in
the appendix. WIOD includes trade data (T), input-output data (B), output data (Q gi ), and data
on labor by industry, type, and country (Vf gi ). Direct input requirements are d f gi = Vf gi /Q gi .
Skilled workers (S) are those possessing some tertiary education. Unskilled workers (U) are the
remainder of the labor force. The wage (w f i ) for each factor in a given country is given by aggregate
compensation to the factor divided by the aggregate number of workers possessing that level of
education.22


5. Results

5.1. The Wage and Techniques Equations

We begin by estimating the β f i from the (W) and (T) equations. We do this separately by factor.
To this end, we stack the TUi and WUi and regress the stacked vector on a set of country dummies
to estimate the β Ui . We then repeat this for skilled labor to estimate the β Si . Denote these OLS
estimates by βb f i . (Throughout this paper a β f i with a ‘hat’ always refers to these estimates.) To
deepen our understanding of these estimates, note that for each ( f ,i ) pair, equation (W) defines a
  19 What    makes lack of identification surprising in their context is that their approach is very intuitive. They assume a
reduced-form relationship between wages and endowments that is reminiscent of that in Katz and Murphy (1992). In
our setting this is ln(wSi /wUi ) = −ξ ln(VSi /VUi ) for some constant ξ. It would thus seem that endowments can be used
in place of wages and estimates of 1/ξ can be used in place of σ. We have tried without success to write down a cost
function to support this intuition. Part of the problem is that the Katz and Murphy logic is based on the demand for
labor in a single sector model. Adding in market clearing (demand and supply) and multiple sectors undermines this
logic i.e., ln(wSi /wUi ) = −ξ ln(VSi /VUi ) is incompatible with labor-market clearing (equation 9).
  20 We discuss our choice of b   σ in detail below. It will be 1.67 in our baseline specification below.
  21 We use 2006 because it is the most recent year before the Great Recession and the subsequent trade collapse.
  22 The Techniques and Wage equations (T) and (W) are defined so as to be unit free and thus naturally scaled. In

contrast, the Vanek equation (V) is not unit free. Therefore, throughout this paper, we scale the Vanek equation by σ f
where σ2f ≡ Σi (Vf i − si Vf w )2 /N. (This is a variance because Vf i − si Vf w has a zero mean.) All the important results in
this paper are invariant to the choice of scaling: Scaling simply eases visual exposition.



                                                              13
βW                                                                                    T
 f i that makes the Wage equation fit perfectly. Likewise, equation (T) defines a β f i that makes the
Techniques equation fit perfectly. Our OLS estimator satisfies βb f i = ( βW + β T )/2.23   fi        fi
   Figure 2 presents the results. The left- and right-hand plots display results for unskilled
and skilled labor, respectively. The top row plots the Wage equation (W), meaning, it plots
W f i (D f , Q, Vf i , δb) against βb f i . The middle row plots the Techniques equation (T), meaning, it
plots T f i (D f , δb) against βb f i . It is clear that the fit is very good.
   The Techniques and Wage equations are not collinear. However, there is only one source of
error that prevents them from fitting perfectly, namely, that equation (13) does not fit perfectly.24 If
equation (13) were to fit perfectly, then the (W) and (T) equations would fit perfectly. To investigate
the fit of equation (13), the bottom panels of figure 2 plot ln d f gi /d f g,us against ln βb f i /δbgi . As is
apparent, the fit is very good. The R2 for unskilled and skilled labor are 0.89 and 0.84, respectively.
This explains why the (W) and (T) equations both fit so well.
   The βb f i are reported in appendix table A1. Note that we can easily reject the hypothesis that
βbUi = βbSi for all i at way less than the 1% level.25


5.2. The Vanek Equation

We begin by plotting the factor content of trade against its prediction. Since we predict techniques
so well, actual factor demands D f are very close to estimated factor demands D f ( βb f ) and, conse-
quently, actual factor contents Ff i are very close to estimated factor contents Ff i ( βb f ). We therefore
only report the results for Ff i ( βb f ).26 The top row of figure 3 plots Ff i ( βb f ) against Vf i − si Vf w .
The left- and right-hand panels are for unskilled and skilled labor, respectively. The good news
for the Vanek equation is that the correlation is very high: the spearman rank correlation is 0.97
for unskilled labor and 0.98 for skilled labor. There are two outliers, China to the right and the
United States to the left. The correlations without these outliers are also very high, 0.96 and 0.98
for unskilled and skilled labor, respectively. Also note that the share of observations for which
Ff i ( βb f ) and Vf i − si Vf w have the same sign (the ‘sign test’) is 0.95 for both unskilled and skilled
labor. This good fit of the Vanek equation for skilled and unskilled labor is a new result in the
literature.   27

  23 Alternatively, we could have done feasible GLS. That is, for factor f , let hW      T
                                                                                  f and h f be estimates of the inverse of the
variances of the (W) and (T) equations. Then the feasible GLS estimator is βbFGLS = βW hW + β T h T . βbFGLS is virtually
                                                                                   fi        fi   f        fi f   fi
identical to the OLS estimate βb f i . Note that feasible GLS is GMM. Also note that GMM with optimal weighting is both
biased in small samples (Altonji and Segal, 1996) and unworkable here because the optimal-weight GMM estimator will
fit one equation perfectly and set the weight on the other equation to 0. That is, it will either choose βW        T
                                                                                                          f i and h f = 0 or
choose β Tfi and hW                                              W          T
                  f = 0. Finally, since the correlation between β f i and β f i is 0.99, all these estimators yield very similar
estimates.
  24 See foonote 14 above.
  25 F38 = 27.56 where the 1% critical value is F38 = 1.88.
      76                                          76
  26 The reason for the lack of a perfect fit between F and F ( βb f ) is the error term ε f gi described in the last paragraph
                                                        fi    fi
of section 3.1.
  27 The good fit has been documented by Trefler and Zhu (2010) for the case of aggregate labor. We cannot directly

compare our results to Davis and Weinstein (2001) because they use aggregate labor and Hicks-neutral technology, but
the results are much better than those associated with their most similar specification (T3).



                                                              14
                     Figure 2: Performance of the Wage and Techniques Equations: Two-Equation Approach

                           25                 Unskilled Labor                                                        Skilled Labor




                                                                                                 8
                           20




                                                                                                 6
Wage Equation


                           15
     βbUi




                                                                                   βbSi
                                                                                                 4
                           10




                                                                                                 2
                           5
                           0




                                                                                                 0
                                 0        5              10         15   20                            0         2            4            6           8
                                          WUi (DU , Q, VUi , δb)                                                     WSi (DS , Q, VSi , δb)
                           30




                                                                                                   8
Techniques Equation




                                                                                                   6
                           20
        βbUi




                                                                                    βbSi
                                                                                                   4
                           10




                                                                                                   2
                           0




                                                                                                   0




                                 0             10              20        30                            0         2             4           6           8
                                                    TUi (DU , δb)                                                          TSi (DS , δb)
                                                                                                       4
Disaggregated Techniques


                                4
                      




                                                                                                   


                                                                                                       2
        ln βbUi /δbgi




                                                                                     ln βbSi /δbgi
                                2




                                                                                                       0
          




                                                                                       
                                0




                                                                                                       -2
                                -2




                                                                                                       -4




                                     -2              0              2         4                             -4        -2           0               2       4
                                                                                                                                              
                                               ln dUgi /dUg,us                                                             ln dSgi /dSg,us
Notes: The left-hand side plots are for unskilled labor, the right-hand side plots are for skilled labor. The top panels
are the Wage equation (W). The middle panels are the Techniques equations (T). The bottom panels are relative factor
demands from equation (13), namely, ln(d f gi /d f g,us ) = ln( β f i /δgi ). All equations are evaluated at the estimated values
βb f i and calibrated values δbgi . In the top and middle panels, each observation is a factor and country ( f ,i ) while in the
bottom panels each observation is a factor, industry and country ( f ,g,i ). The 45◦ line is displayed in each panel.




                                                                              15
                                         Figure 3: Performance of the Vanek Equation

                                   Unskilled Labor                                                         Skilled Labor
               1.5




                                                                                  1
               1
 FUi ( βbU )




                                                                    FSi ( βbS )
               .5




                                                                                  0
               0
               -.5




                                                                                  -1

                     -3        0                3          6                                -3   -2        -1    0       1     2   3   4

                                    VUi − si ∑ j VUj                                                        VSi − si ∑ j VSj
               6




                                                                                  4
               4




                                                                                  2
    bU )
 0 (β




                                                                    bS )
               2




                                                                 0 (β
FUi




                                                                                  0
                                                                FSi
               0




                                                                                  -2
               -2




                                                                                  -4




                          -2   0           2           4   6                           -4             -2             0         2       4
                                    VUi − si ∑ j VUj                                                        VSi − si ∑ j VSj

Notes: All panels plot the Vanek equation (V). The left- and right-hand columns are for unskilled and skilled labor,
respectively. The top row uses the factor content of trade i.e., Ff i ( βb f ). The bottom row uses the Government Services
adjusted factor content of trade i.e., F 0 ( βb f ). Each observation is a factor and country ( f ,i ) and the most extreme
                                                fi
observations in each panel are the United States (to the left) and China (to the right). All lines are 45◦ lines.




                                                               16
5.2.1. Missing Trade

There is only one problem with the performance of the Vanek equation, namely, Trefler’s (1995)
‘missing trade.’ This is apparent from the displayed 45◦ line, which is steeper than a line of best
fit.28 It is obvious that if one wants to explain missing trade then one must deal with trade costs
and especially nontraded services e.g., Trefler (1995) and Davis and Weinstein (2001). Further, an
immediate implication of theorem 1 and equation (12) is that if nontradables lead to departures
from the Vanek equation then they do so via departures from consumption similarity.
   Since this paper is primarily concerned with the role of factor prices and factor-augmenting
technology, and since the handling of missing trade is orthogonal to these issues (i.e., it has no
impact on how we estimate the β f i ), we focus solely on the most obvious source of nontradables,
namely, Government Services, which by definition should be nontraded.29
   We follow Trefler and Zhu (2010) in our treatment of Government Services. For expositional
simplicity, assume for the moment that there are no intermediate inputs so that consumption
similarity is the same as gravity without trade costs. Also, let g = G denote Government Services.
Had consumption similarity held in Government Services, country i would have consumed a share
si of the Government Services produced by country j (QGj ). Hence, i’s imports of Government
Services from j would have been si QGj and country j’s exports to the world would have been
(1 − s j ) QGj (production less consumption). Let Ti0 be the vector Ti in equation (11), but with the
elements corresponding to MGi,j and XGj replaced by s j QGi and (1 − s j ) QGj , respectively. The easy
generalization of Ti0 to include intermediate inputs, which is what we use for the remainder of the
paper, is described in the appendix.
    With Ti0 in hand we can compute the adjusted factor content of trade as Ff0 i ≡ D f [I NG − B]−1 Ti0
or, using estimated techniques,
                                                       
                                  Ff0 i ( βb f ) ≡ D f βb f [I NG − B]−1 Ti0 .                      (21)

   The bottom row of figure 3 plots Ff0 i ( βb f ) against Vf i − si Vf w . As is apparent, missing trade is
much less: The OLS slope is 0.65 for unskilled labor and 0.66 for skilled labor. Online appendix
figure A1 drops the outliers China and the United States and shows that the fit inside the ‘pack’
is very good. Further, we could raise the slope even more if we treated other sectors such as
Construction as nontradable.
   Our approach is surprisingly similar to that of Davis and Weinstein (2001), who deal with
nontradables by netting out the endowments used to produce nontradables i.e., by netting out
the factor content of nontradables. The following lemma establishes this. It appeals to the fact that
if preferences are internationally identical and trade costs are zero then Cgj,i = si Cgj,w .30
  28 The   slope from an OLS regression of Ff i ( βb f ) on Vf i − si Vf w is 0.23 for unskilled labor and 0.16 for skilled labor.
  29 That is, System of National Accounts manuals instruct national statistical agencies to exclude from this sector all
government services that are sold via market transactions. By way of example, Canadian postal services are sold to
the public but police services are not so that Government Services excludes the post office but not the police. Since by
definition Government Services are not sold on markets, they are nontraded — we do not see California state troopers
patrolling the streets of São Paolo. We therefore need to treat Government Services differently.
  30 That is, i’s consumption of ( g,j ) is proportional to world consumption of ( g,j ) for all g where the constant of

proportionality is i’s expenditure share si . See footnote 12.


                                                                  17
Lemma 2 Let G 0 be the set of nontradable goods. Define Vf0 i ≡ ∑ g∈G0 A f gi Cgii as the factor content of
nontradable consumption or, equivalently, the endowments used to produce nontradable consumption. Let
Vf0 w ≡ ∑ j Vf0 j . Assume that Cgj,i = si Cgj,w for all i and j and all g ∈/ G 0 (i.e., for tradable goods). Recall
from theorem 1 that Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w − A f (Ci − si Cw ). Then
                                                                          h               i
    1. A f (Ci − si Cw ) = Vf0 i − si Vf0 w and Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w − Vf0 i − si Vf0 w

   2. A f (Ci − si Cw ) = Ff0 i − Ff i           and    Ff0 i = (Vf i − si Vf w )

Part 1 states that under the conditions of the lemma, one can derive the type of estimating equation
first examined by Davis and Weinstein. The second part derives our estimating equation. Together,
the two parts imply that the approaches are equivalent. The term A f (Ci − si Cw ) appears on the
right side in Davis and Weinstein and on the left side in our work.
   The advantage of putting A f (Ci − si Cw ) = Vf0 i − si Vf0 w on the right side is that netting out
the factor content of nontradable endowments is intuitive. The disadvantage is that this term is
endogenous and so belongs on the left side. Empirically, if we put it on the right side there is not
much improvement in missing trade (the slope is only 0.28 for unskilled labor and 0.29 for skilled
labor). The reason is simple: Vf0 i − si Vf0 w is small relative to Vf i − si Vf w so that the latter term
dominates and the slope does not rise much.


5.2.2. The Role of the βb f for the Vanek Equation

To investigate the role of the βb f for the fit of the Vanek equation, in figure 4 we set β f =
( β f 1 , . . . ,β f N ) = ι where ι is an N-vector of ones. Ff0 i (ι) is the factor content of trade if all countries
use US techniques save for differences in δgi . We plot Ff0 i (ι) against Vf i − si Vf w . The fit is horrible in
two dimensions. First, there is an increase in missing trade, which is related to previous findings
(Trefler, 1995, Davis and Weinstein, 2001, Trefler and Zhu, 2010) that missing trade is exacerbated
when all countries are forced to have the same choice of techniques.31 Second, the rank correlation
deteriorates: 0.44 for unskilled labor and 0.26 for skilled labor. We conclude from this that the β f
play a central role for understanding the Vanek prediction.


5.3. Spirit of HO

When we teach the Heckscher-Ohlin model to our students we focus on the role of relative abun-
dance and relative factor intensities. In contrast, since Vanek (1968) and Leamer (1980), empirical
research has examined the Vanek equation one factor at a time. We return to the earlier tradition
by examining skilled relative to unskilled labour. This also serves as a ‘stress test’ of our results.
   Figure 5 reports the results in relative terms. The Wage and Techniques terms are in ratios.
We put the Vanek equation in differences rather than ratios because — since Ff0 i can be positive,
                    0 /F 0 is both hard to interpret and becomes extreme when F 0 is close to 0.
negative or zero — FSi  Ui                                                     Ui
Turning to figure 5, each equation does extremely well when examined in terms of skilled relative
to unskilled labour! No previous paper has subjected its results to this stress test. Further, these
  31 Slopes   are 0.03 and 0.19 for unskilled and skilled labor, respectively.


                                                               18
                             Figure 4: Performance of the Vanek Equations (β f i = 1)

         6                  Unskilled Labor                                                      Skilled Labor




                                                                            4
         4




                                                                            2
 0 (ι)

         2




                                                                    0 (ι)
FUi




                                                                            0
                                                                   FSi
         0




                                                                            -2
         -2




                                                                            -4
              -2        0           2           4            6                   -4         -2            0          2     4
                             VUi − si ∑ j VUj                                                     VSi − si ∑ j VSj

Notes: Both panels plot the Vanek equation (V). The left- and right-hand columns are for unskilled and skilled labor,
respectively. The plots use the Government Services adjusted factor content of trade, but sets the β f i = 1 i.e., Ff0 i (ι). The
45◦ line is displayed. Each observation is a factor and country ( f ,i ).




results will be of great interest to those who teach the pre-Vanek/Leamer characterization of the
Heckscher-Ohlin model.


5.4. The Full-Information, Three-Equation Approach

We want to ensure that we have exploited all of the supply-side information about productivity in
estimating the β f i . The only source that we have not yet exploited is the comparative advantage
information contained in trade flows, which suggests that we should also use the Vanek equation
for estimation of the β f i . A reason for being cautious is that trade flows combine information from
both the supply and demand sides and so are ‘contaminated’ by demand. We therefore begin
by understanding how to quarantine this contamination. The intuition is simple: If consumption
similarity holds then demand patterns are proportional across countries and the Vanek equation is
uncontaminated by demand. We formalize this.

Lemma 3 Suppose Cgij = si Cgwj ∀ g,i,j. Then equation (V) is equivalent to

                                            Ff i (ι) = β−f i1 Vf i − si ∑ j β−f j1 Vf j .                                 (VT)

Further, the β f i that make this equation fit perfectly are given by

                                                  si /Vf i                  Ff i (ι) Ff ,us (ι)
                                                                                                 
                                                              s
                                 ( βVT
                                    fi )
                                         −1
                                            ≡               + i                     −                 .                     (22)
                                                 sus /Vf ,us Vf i             si        sus

Equation (VT) states that under consumption similarity we can generalize Trefler’s (1993) Vanek
equation to the case where there are Ricardian productivity differences and where productivity



                                                                 19
               Figure 5: Differencing Across Factors: Two Equation Approach (T and W)


                                                                            Vanek Equation




                                                         1.5
                                    bS ) − F 0 ( βbU )
                                                         1
                                            Ui
                                                         .5
                                                         0
                                 0 (β
                                FSi
                                                         -.5
                                                         -1


                                                               -1 h        -.5      0i  h .5      1       i 1.5
                                                                      VSi − si ∑ j VSj − VUi − si ∑ j VUj


                                                                            Wage Equation
                                                         3
                                     βbSi / βbUi
                                                         2
                                                         1
                                                         0




                                                               0                    1                  2       3
                                                                                        WSi /WUi


                                                                         Techniques Equation
                                                         3
                                     βbSi / βbUi
                                                         2
                                                         1
                                                         0




                                                               0                1                  2       3
                                                                                        TSi /TUi

Notes: The top row plots the difference in the Government Services adjusted factor content of trade FSi    0 (β
                                                                                                              bS ) − F 0 ( βbU )
                                                               h                i h                i                    Ui
against the difference in the predicted factor content of trade VSi − si ∑ j VSj − VUi − si ∑ j VUj . The middle row plots
WSi /WUi against βbSi / βbUi . The bottom row plots relative unit input requirements (TSi /TUi ) against βbSi / βbUi . All lines
are 45◦ lines.

                                                                                        20
adjusted factor price equalization fails.32 Equation (22) states that if we estimated the β f i solely
from the modified Vanek equation (VT) then we would end up with β f i = βVT
                                                                         fi .
    We next show that the βVT
                           f i capture important aspects of productivity from the development
accounting literature. To make sense of the first term on the right-hand side of equation (22),
consider a single-good economy with an aggregate production function
                                             h             σ −1
                                                                                 i σ
                                                                             σ −1 σ −1
                                         Yi = αU (πUi VUi ) σ + αS (πSi VSi ) σ                                                           (23)

where Yi is both output and income. Equating the marginal product of factor f with its factor price
yields
                                                                          σ −1               σ1
                                                   w f i = α f (π f i )     σ    Yi /Vf i          .                                      (24)

Dividing by the corresponding equation for the United States and substituting out Yi using si =
Yi / ∑ j Yj yields
                                                                         si /Vf i
                                                             β−f i1 =
                                                                        sus /Vf ,us
That is, the first term in equation (22) comes straight out of the most basic Development Account-
ing exercise.33
    The second term in equation (22) is the information about productivity contained in trade flows.
Specifically, after dividing through by si to control for country size, if factor f in country i has a
larger factor content of trade than in the United States then factor f is revealed by trade to be more
productive in i than in the United States.
    This discussion demonstrates that if consumption similarity holds — or empirically by equation
(12), if the Vanek equation fits well — then the Vanek equation is a third (and final) source of
information about productivity. Moving to estimation using the Vanek equation, we note that
Ff0 i ( β f ) is linear in β f ≡ ( β f 1 , . . . ,β f N ) so that equation (V) can be rewritten as

                                         H f i (Vf 1 , . . . ,Vf N ,Ff0 1 (ι), . . . ,Ff0 N (ι),δb) = β f i                               (V 0 )

for some function H f i which depends only on data. Doing this allows us to simply stack equations
(W), (T) and (V 0 ) and estimate the β f i using OLS and country-factor dummy variables. Let b  βb                                            f
denote the vector of estimates.
    The first thing to note about the estimates is that b
                                                        βb f is very close to the two-equation estimate βb f :
the correlation for each factor is 0.99. The second thing to note is that the full-information, three-
equation approach produces good results. These are on display in figure 6. The three columns
  32     To see that it is a generalization of Trefler note the following. Under productivity adjusted factor price equalization,
( β f i )−1 = π f i /π f ,us , δgi /δg,us = 1, and Ff i (ι) is the factor content of trade using US techniques (denoted Fus        f i ). Hence
equation (VT) becomes Fus           fi  =  π   V
                                             fi fi  −  s  ∑ π   V
                                                         i j fj fj , which     is  Trefler’s equation.   Also   note that without factor   price
equalization, it is very unlikely that Cgij = si Cgwj ∀ g,i,j holds.
                                                                                     σ −1
                                                                                          h                       i1
   33 Here are the details.                                                                                        σ
                                             w f i /w f ,us  =      (π f i /π f ,us ) σ (si /Vf i )/(sus /Vf ,us ) .      Rearranging yields
(w f i /w f ,us )σ (π f i /π f ,us )1−σ = (si /Vf i )/(sus /Vf ,us ). From equation (20), the left-hand side is β−f i1 . The π f i that
satisfies this equation is exactly the same measure of productivity as in Caselli and Coleman (2006) for the case without
capital. See their footnote 7.



                                                                        21
                                                                                       Figure 6: Full-Information, Three-Equation Approach

                                                     Unskilled Labor                                                    Skilled Labor                                                    Skilled / Unskilled




                                                                                                                                                                        3




                                  40
                                                                                                         8




                                  30
                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                                 bb




                        Ui
                                  20
                                                                                                         4




        βb
                                                                                              βSi




        b
                                                                                             bb
                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                βSi / βUi
                                                                                                                                                 bb




     Wage Equation
                                                                                                         2




                                  10
                                  0
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                        0
                                        0        5         10            15       20                          0    2         4          6   8                                 0                  1                2           3
                                                          WUi                                                               WSi                                                                  WSi / WUi




                                  40
                                                                                                         8
                                                                                                                                                                        3




                                  30
                                                                                                         6
                                                                                                                                                                        2


                                                                                                                                                 bb




                        Ui
                                  20
                                                                                                         4




             βb
                                                                                              βSi




             b
                                                                                             bb
                                                                                                                                                βSi / βUi
                                                                                                                                                 bb
                                                                                                                                                                        1




22
                                                                                                         2




                                  10



     Techniques Equation
                                  0
                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                        0




                                        0            10             20            30                          0    2         4          6   8                                 0              1               2            3

                                                          TUi                                                               TSi                                                                  TSi / TUi




                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                        1.5




                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                                                        1




                                   4
                                                                                                                                                                βbU )




                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                             0 (b
                                                                                                                                                                        .5




                          βbU )
                                                                                                 βbS )




                                   2
                                                                                                         0




                       0 (b
                                                                                              0 (b
                                                                                                                                                                        0




                      FUi
                                                                                             FSi
                                                                                                                                                    βbS ) − FUi




                                   0
                                                                                                         -2
                                                                                                                                                 0 (b
                                                                                                                                                                        -.5

                                                                                                                                                FSi




     Vanek Equation
                                   -2
                                                                                                         -4
                                                                                                                                                                        -1




                                            -2        0         2             4    6                          -4   -2        0          2   4                                 -1       -.5           0       .5       1       1.5

                                                          VUi − si VUw                                                   VSi − si VSw                                              (VSi − si VSw ) − (VUi − si VUw )


     Notes: The left-hand column plots are for unskilled labor, the middle column plots are for skilled labor, and the right-hand column plots are for skilled relative to unskilled
     labor. The top row is the Wage equation (W), the middle row is the Techniques equation (T), and the bottom row is the Vanek equation (V). All equations are evaluated at
     the full-information, three-equation estimates of the β f i and calibrated values of the δgi . Each observation is a factor and country. The 45◦ line is displayed in each panel.
                           Table 1: Test Statistics for the Fit of the Vanek Equation

                                      Unskilled Labor                                        Skilled Labor
   Factor Content           Rank      Variance Sign           Slope               Rank      Variance Sign           Slope
   of Trade                 Corr.      Ratio     Test          Test               Corr.      Ratio     Test          Test
                             (1)        (2)       (3)           (4)                (5)         (6)      (7)           (8)
   1. Ff i                  0.953      0.038    0.868         0.193               0.974      0.016     0.947        0.127
   2. Ff i ( βb f )         0.965       0.052       0.947     0.226               0.982       0.027       0.947     0.163
   3. Ff0 i ( βb f )        0.978       0.424       0.947     0.648               0.990       0.452       0.921     0.664
   4. Ff i ( βb f )         0.962       0.078       0.895     0.276               0.976       0.089       0.921      0.29
   5.   Ff0 i [ι]           0.441       0.001       0.763     0.034               0.256       0.052       0.474     0.185

   6. Ff0 i (b
             βb f )         0.995       0.588       0.947     0.765               0.995       0.607       0.974     0.776

Notes: This table presents test statistics for the fit of the Vanek equation (V) for different specifications of the factor
content of trade. In row 1, the actual factor content of trade is used. In row 2, the factor content of trade is calculated
using βb f (the two-equation estimate of β f ) and equation (16). In row 3, the factor content of trade is adjusted for
nontraded Government Services using equation (21). In row 4, the nontraded Government Services adjustment is put
on the right-hand side of the Vanek equation as in part 1 of lemma 2 and as in Davis and Weinstein (2001). In row 5,
the factor content of trade is again adjusted for nontraded Government Services using equation (21), but all elements
of the vector βb f are set to 1. In row 6, the factor content of trade is again adjusted for nontraded Government Services
using equation (21), but the estimate of β f is from the three-equation approach. ‘Rank Corr.’ is the rank or Spearman
correlation between the factor content of trade and Vf i − si Vf w . ‘Variance Ratio’ is the variance of the factor content of
trade divided by the variance of Vf i − si Vf w . ‘Sign Test’ is the proportion of observations for which the factor content of
trade and Vf i − si Vf w have the same sign. ‘Slope Test’ is the OLS slope estimate from a regression of the factor content
of trade on Vf i − si Vf w .




from left to right are for unskilled labor, skilled labor, and the ratio of skilled to unskilled labor.
The three rows from top to bottom are for the Wage equation, the Techniques equation, and the
Vanek equation. In all nine panels, the fit is very good. Turning specifically to the Vanek equation,
notice that there is less missing trade than before. The slope coefficient from a regression of F 0 (b
                                                                                                     βb )              fi   f
on Vf i − si Vf w is now 0.77 for unskilled labor and 0.78 for unskilled labor. The rank correlation
statistics for each are high at 0.99. Online appendix figure A1 redoes the figure without the US and
Chinese outliers.
   It is conventional in HOV papers to report a large number of test statistics. While we feel that
the plots tell the full story, we give a nod to convention in Table 1. The table notes explain the
familiar tests. It is worth noting that WIOD reports Vf gi across high, medium, and low skilled
labor. The online appendix presents analogous results to those in figures 2 and 3 and table 1 when
we look at these three types of labor separately.34
  34 The online appendix also reports separately results for capital and labor where labor is defined as the sum of the

the three labor types. We report these two sets of results separately because our exercise requires a single elasticity of
substitution across factors for results that are comparable to those in the text (e.g. the elasticity of substitution between
skilled and unskilled labor is the same as between labor and capital). Constraining the elasticity of substitution to be the
same between two types of labor as between labor and capital delivers similar results. We choose not to report results
for capital in the main text for two reasons. First, internationally comparable and reliable data on the cost of capital is
difficult to come by and, second, capital can easily be thought of as a traded good as in Fitzgerald and Hallak (2004).



                                                              23
6. Factor Prices, Substitution Effects, Factor Bias, and Directed Technical Change

Up to this point, much of the paper has been concerned with issues surrounding the specification
and fit of the Vanek, Wage and Techniques equations, issues which depend only on the reduced-
form β f i . We now turn to a host of questions which depend critically on the underlying structural
parameters i.e., on the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor (σ) and the
factor-augmenting technology parameters (π f i ).
   The intuition for how we can extract π f i from the β f comes from Caselli and Coleman (2006)
and our discussion of identification. Simplify notation with the normalization π f ,us = 1 and by
normalizing wages using w f ,us = 1 for f = S,U. Then from equation (20)

                                              π f i = ( β f i /w− σ 1/(σ−1)
                                                                fi )        .                                         (25)

What this says is that for a given value of σ, international factor price differences generate in-
ternational differences in factor demands according to w−  σ
                                                        f i , which in turn generates differences
in the estimates β f i . Any variation in the β f i not explained by variation in factor prices must be
due to international technology differences (the π f i ). How so depends on whether or not σ is
greater or less than unity. For example, suppose that a country has greater unskilled-intensive
demand (relative to the United States) than is predicted based on its wages and the elasticity of
substitution. If skilled and unskilled labor are substitutes (σ > 1), then unskilled-augmenting
productivity must be higher in this country. If skilled and unskilled labor are complements (σ < 1),
then unskilled-augmenting productivity must be lower. Thus, we need an estimate of σ.
   Typical values for the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor range be-
tween 1.4 and 2. Although we discuss and justify our choice of σ in detail in section 6.5, we start
near the midpoint with σ=1.67.35 Since our results are completely insensitive to how we estimate
the β f i , we use our two-equation estimates ( βb f i ). Plugging these into equation (25) generates our
productivity estimates. These are also reported in appendix table A1. We turn now to using those
estimates to answer substantive questions.


6.1. Are Productivity Adjusted Factor Prices Equalized?

Leamer and Levinsohn’s (1995, p. 1360) factor price insensitivity theorem states that in the FPE set,
factor prices are insensitive to endowments.36 In the context of the factor-market clearing condition
(equation 17), this means that the impact on wages of differences in productivity adjusted factor
endowments                                                             1/σ
                                                      π f ,us Vf ,us
                                                       
                                                Sfi ≡
                                                       π̂ f i Vf i
  35  The seminal citation is Katz and Murphy (1992) which provides σ = 1.4. Caselli and Coleman (2006) use values
of σ between 1.1 and 2. Card and Lemieux (2001) find σ = 2.5. See Ciccone and Peri (2005) for a review of estimate
of the elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labor. See Antràs (2004) for estimates of the elasticity of
substitution between capital and aggregate labor.
  36 In our context, the theorem is productivity adjusted factor price insensitivity.




                                                            24
                                      Table 2: Decomposition of the Wage Equation

                                                         Panel A: Unskilled Labor
                                                                  (1)            (2)                          (3)
                                                               ln (SUi )      ln (RUi )                         W)
                                                                                                            ln(eUi
                                             
                                 wUi wUus
                        ln       πUi / πUus                          1.38∗∗∗               -0.34           -0.040∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.44)               (0.45)            (0.01)
                        R-squared                                      0.21                 0.02              0.23

                                                           Panel B: Skilled Labor
                                                             ln (SSi )       ln (RSi )                    ln(eW
                                                                                                                Si )
                                 wSi wSus
                        ln       πSi / πSus                          0.89∗∗∗                0.12           -0.0085∗∗∗
                                                                      (0.22)               (0.22)             (0.00)
                        R-squared                                      0.31                 0.01               0.22

                                          Panel C: Skilled Relative to Unskilled Labor
                                                        ln (SSUi )     ln (RSUi )                        ln(eW
                                                                                                               SUi )
                                 wSi πUi wSus πUus
                        ln       wUi πSi / wUus πSus                 0.96∗∗∗               0.027∗           0.014∗∗
                                                                      (0.01)               (0.01)            (0.01)
                        R-squared                                      0.99                 0.10              0.15
                    Notes: Within each panel, each column represents a separate regression. The de-
                    pendent variable is identified by the column header and the independent variable
                    is identified by the column on the left. All regressions are OLS with 38 observa-
                    tions. Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.




are exactly offset by differences in industrial composition
                                                                                          !1/σ
                                                                      G   d f g,us Q gi
                                                       Rfi ≡         ∑ δb V                      .
                                                                     g =1    gi f us

Restated, Rybczynski effects (R f i ) exactly offset supply effects (S f i ). Then from equation (17) in
logs,
                                                   w f i /π
                                                                    
                                                           bfi
                                         ln                               = ln S f i + ln R f i + ln eW
                                                                                                      fi                (26)
                                                  w f ,us /π f ,us
where we have added an error term so that equation (26) is an identity.37

   Given that equation (26) is an identity we can use a variance decomposition to assess the relative

importance of each of the three right-hand side components of (26). We implement this following

Bernard, Jensen, Redding and Schott (2007a). Consider column 1 of the upper panel of table 2,

which deals with unskilled labor. It is a regression of ln S f i on the left-hand side term of equation

(26). The coefficient is large, indicating that the supply component explains most of the variation

in wages. Repeating this for ln R f i in column 2 and ln εW
                                                          f i in column 3 shows that the supply

component is by far the most important. Notice that the coefficients in columns 1–3 must sum to
 37 The   error term is intimately related to εW
                                               f i described in footnote 14.



                                                                            25
unity by construction. In this sense, the three coefficients provide a variance decomposition of the

left-hand side of equation (26) into its components.38

   We repeat the exercise for skilled labor in panel B of table 2 and skilled relative to unskilled labor

in panel C of table 2. As is apparent, the same conclusions emerge, namely, productivity adjusted

factor prices are highly sensitive to productivity adjusted factor supplies. We conclude from this

that Davis and Weinstein (2001) were correct to emphasize failure of factor price equalization and

the role of factor supplies.39


6.2. International Differences in Unit Factor Demands: Substitution Effects or Productivity?

We can now answer the fundamental question posed by Davis and Weinstein, namely, are interna-

tional differences in average choice of techniques due more to substitution effects (failure of PFPE)

or to international technology differences? We start with the Techniques equation (T), take logs
                                                                     
                                                               d f gi
and rewrite it to isolate the object of interest, ∑G
                                                   g=1 θ f gi d f g,us :

                                                                                  −σ                         −1
                                     d f gi                     w f i /π
                                                                                          
                G                                                                                   π                      
                                                                                                                                   G
                                                                                                                                                      
            ∑
                                                                        bfi                         bfi
   ln           g =1
                       θ f gi
                                    d f g,us
                                                    = ln
                                                               w f ,us /π f ,us
                                                                                        + ln
                                                                                                   π f ,us
                                                                                                                    + ln       ∑   g =1
                                                                                                                                          θ f gi /δbgi + ln e Tfi

                                                                                                                                                               (27)

where we have added an error term so that equation (27) is an identity.40 Looking to the right of

the equal sign, differences in average techniques are associated with (1) substitution effects due

to differences in productivity adjusted factor prices, (2) productivity effects due to differences in

factor-augmenting technology, (3) the δgi terms, and (4) an error term. Similar to our decomposition

of the Wage equation, we assess the contribution of each of these four components by separately

regressing each on the left-hand side term of equation (27). The coefficients from the four separate

regressions again sum to unity.

   Table 3 reports the results. Panels A and B present results for unskilled and skilled labor,

respectively. They show that most of the variance in techniques relative to the United States is

due to international differences in factor-augmenting technology. Factor prices, the δgi terms, and

errors are less important. In contrast, panel C presents results for the ratio of skilled to unskilled

labour. (Roughly, panels A and B are about ln dUgi and ln dSgi , respectively, whereas panel C
  38 It is tempting to interpret the coefficients in table 2 in terms of first moments (slopes); however, the coefficients

speak to second moments e.g., a negative coefficient means that the component is associated with a smaller variance of
factor prices.
  39 Our finding of a lack of ‘Rybczynski effects’ is consistent with the results of Gandal, Hanson and Slaughter (2004),

Lewis (2004) and Blum (2010), though less consistent with the results of Hanson and Slaughter (2002).
  40 The error term is intimately related to ε T described in footnote 14.
                                               fi


                                                                                   26
                                        Table 3: Decomposition of the Techniques Equation
                                                      Panel A: Unskilled Labor
                                                    (1)                     (2)                                         (3)                 (4)
                                                          −σ                  −1
                                                  wUi /π                                                                                      T
                                                                            π
                                                                                                            ln(∑ g θUgi /δ̂gi )
                                                       bUi                                                                                          
                                              ln w /π                   ln π Ui                                                           ln eUi
                                                                            b
    h          d i                                     U,us     U,us                            U,us

  ln ∑G          Ugi
      g=1 θUgi dUg,us                                   -0.32∗∗∗                             1.20∗∗∗             0.087∗∗∗                 0.032∗∗∗
                                                          (0.09)                              (0.09)                 (0.02)                (0.01)
  R-squared                                                0.26                                0.85                   0.36                  0.51

                                                                  Panel B: Skilled Labor
                                                                   −σ                     −1
                                                         wSi /π                                                                               T
                                                                                    ln ππSi                 ln(∑ g θSgi /δ̂gi )
                                                               bSi                                                                                 
                                               ln                                                                                         ln eSi
                                                                                        b
                                                        wS,us /πS,us                              S,us
    h             d i
  ln ∑G
      g =1 θ Sgi
                    Sgi
                  dSg,us                                  -0.45∗                             1.29∗∗∗                 0.15∗∗∗              0.015∗∗∗
                                                          (0.27)                              (0.22)                 (0.05)                (0.00)
  R-squared                                                0.07                                0.49                   0.19                  0.29

                                              Panel C: Skilled Relative to Unskilled Labor
                                                     bUi wS,us πU,us −σ      bSi πS,us −1
                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                     ∑ g θSgi /δ̂gi
                                                                                   
                                            ln w  Si π                       π                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                    
                                                b w     /      w        ln      /                           ln                            ln eSUi
                                                πSi     Uiπ      S,us    U,usπ
                                                                             b    π          Ui      U,us            ∑ g θUgi /δ̂gi
           ∑G
                                       
            g=1 θSgi ( dSgi /dSg,us )
  ln                                                     1.85∗∗∗                            -0.73∗∗∗                 0.16∗∗∗              -0.29∗∗∗
           ∑G
            g=1 θUgi ( dUgi /dUg,us )
                                                          (0.22)                              (0.20)                 (0.04)                (0.08)
  R-squared                                                0.66                                0.28                   0.30                  0.25
Notes: Within each panel, each column represents a separate regression. The dependent variable is identified by the
column header and the independent variable is identified by the column on the left. All regressions are OLS with 38
observations. Standard errors are in parentheses. ∗∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗ p<0.05, ∗ p<0.1.




is about ln dSgi /dUgi ). For variation in relative factor demands it is factor prices that are most

important. Recapping, differences in factor-augmenting productivity are most important when

analyzing per unit input requirements, but substitution effects caused by departures from PFPE

are most important when looking at input requirements of skilled relative to unskilled labor.


6.3. The Vanek Equation: Technology Differences or Failure of Factor Price Equalization?

Davis and Weinstein (2001) and Trefler (1993a) place substitution effects and factor-augmenting

productivity at the forefront of their respective analyses. We are the first to integrate the two

within a unified empirical framework and can now examine the relative importance of each. The

Vanek equation is not log-linear in the βb f i so no simple variance decomposition is possible. The

most obvious thing to do is shut down the wage and productivity terms one at a time. Recall from

equation (20) together with the normalizations π f ,us = 1 and w f ,us = 1 that

                                                                                 b f i )−bσ π
                                                                βb f i = (w f i /π          b−fi
                                                                                                 1




                                                                                27
                                                                                                      −bσ
can be decomposed into a productivity adjusted factor price term w f i /π
                                                                        bfi                                  and a factor-
                           b−
augmenting technology term π   1
                             fi .

   We begin by shutting down the factor price term and computing what the factor content of trade
                                                 b−
would look like. In our notation, this is Ff0 i (π  1
                                                             b −1    b −1           b −1
                                                   f ) where π f = ( π f 1 , . . . ,π f N ). Column 1 of figure

               b−
7 plots Ff0 i (π  1
                 f ) against Vf i − si Vf w for unskilled labor (top row) and skilled labor (bottom) row.

The rank correlations are 0.80 and 0.50, respectively. Thus for unskilled labor and to a lesser extent

for skilled labor, factor augmentation is important. We next shut down the factor-augmenting

technology term and compute what the factor content of trade would look like. In our notation

this is Ff0 i ([w f /π
                     b f ]−bσ ) where [w f /π
                                            b f ]−bσ = ([w f 1 /π
                                                                b f 1 ]−bσ , . . . ,[w f N /π
                                                                                            b f N ]−bσ ). Column 2 of figure 7

plots Ff0 i ([w f /π
                   b f ]−bσ ) against Vf i − si Vf w . The fit is horrible and the rank correlations are negative,

which means that factor-augmenting technology is exceedingly important.

   These results taken together imply that there are important interactions between factor prices

and productivity. To examine these we start by defining the ‘marginal contribution of productivity’

                                              Ff0 i ( βb f ) − Ff0 i ([w f /π
                                                                            b f ]−bσ ) .

The idea is that if β f were linear in [w f /π            b−
                                             b f ]−bσ and π  1                                  0 b −1
                                                            f then this expression would equal Ff i ( π f ).

So the above term is the marginal contribution of (nonlinearly) adding in factor-augmenting tech-

nology. We likewise defined the ‘marginal contribution of factor prices’ as

                                                   Ff0 i ( βb f ) − Ff0 i (π
                                                                           b− 1
                                                                             f ).


These marginal contributions appear in columns 3 and 4 of figure 7, respectively. Two things stand

out. First, from column 3, the marginal contribution of productivity is very important and performs

extremely well both in terms of correlations and missing trade. Second, from column 4, the marginal

contribution of factor prices is unimportant. However, because neither productivity nor factor

prices performs very well by itself, one must ultimately conclude that both productivity and factor

prices are important for understanding the Vanek equation.


6.4. Development Accounting Revisited: Is There Skill Bias in Cross-Country Technology Differ-

     ences?

In this subsection we address two questions. First, how similar are our estimates of the π f i to those

in the development accounting literature? Second, do our estimates display the skill bias which is

                                                                 28
                                                            Figure 7: Vanek Equation: Relative Importance of Substitution Effects vs. Factor Augmentation

                                                                                                                                                                  Marginal                                                                   Marginal
                                           Contribution of                                      Contribution of                                                 Contribution of                                                           Contribution of
                                                    1                                                                                                                    1
                                                 π−
                                                  f                                               (w f /π
                                                                                                        b f )−bσ                                                      π−
                                                                                                                                                                       f                                                                    (w f /π
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  b f )−bσ




                                                                                                                                                 4




                   30
                                                                                                                                                                                                       10




                                                                               .04




                   20
                                                                               .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                                                                 2




                                                                               0




                   10
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -10




                                                                               -.02
                                                                                                                                                 0




                   0

       Unskilled
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -20




                                                                               -.04




                   -10
                                                                               -.06
                                                                                                                                                 -2
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -30




                                      -2        0       2          4       6               -2         0          2          4       6                      -2        0         2           4       6                            -2        0           2         4       6




                                                                                                                                                 4




29
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000




                   3000
                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1000




                                                                                                                                                 2




                   2000
                                                                               .5
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0




                   1000
                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                               0




                   0

       Skilled
                                                                                                                                                 -2




                                                                               -.5
                                                                               -1
                                                                                                                                                 -4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -3000 -2000 -1000




                   -2000 -1000
                                 -4        -2       0          2       4              -4        -2           0         2        4                     -4        -2         0           2       4                           -4        -2           0        2        4


                                            Vf i − s i Vf w                                          Vf i − s i Vf w                                                 Vf i − s i Vf w                                                          Vf i − s i Vf w



     Notes: The top row deals with unskilled labor. The bottom row deals with skilled labor. The horizontal axis is always Vf i − si Vf w . In the first column, the vertical axis is
     Ff0 i (π
            b− 1                                                0          b −bσ ). In the third column, the vertical axis is Ff0 i ( βb f ) − Ff0 i ([w f /π
                                                                                                                                                            b f ]−bσ ) i.e., the marginal contribution of π  b−  1
              f ). In the second column the vertical axis is Ff i ([ w f / π f ]                                                                                                                               f
     after controlling for (w f /πb f )−bσ . In the fourth column the vertical axis is F 0 ( βb f ) − F 0 (π           fi               fi
                                                                                                           b −1 ) i.e., the marginal contribution of (w f /π
                                                                                                                                             f
                                                                                                                                                                  b f )−bσ after controlling for π
                                                                                                                                                                                                 b −1 . All lines                                               f
     are OLS best fits.
                    Figure 8: Factor-augmenting International Technology Differences


                       ln(πUi ) and ln(yi )                                                ln(πSi ) and ln(yi )




                                                                             2
           0
           -2




                                                                             0
   bUi )




                                                                     bSi )
                                                                             -2
           -4
ln(π




                                                                  ln(π
                                                                             -4
           -6
           -8




                                                                             -6
                8      9              10               11                         8                 9             10   11

                      ln(yi )                                                                           ln(yi )

Notes: The left column plots ln(πbUi ) against (log) real income per worker from the Penn World Tables. Each dot is a
country. right column plots ln(π
                               bSi ) against (log) real income per worker. All lines are OLS best fits.




so central to Caselli and Coleman (2006)? As discussed in sections 3.3 and 5.4, there are significant

methodological similarities between our approach and theirs. Nevertheless, these questions are

not trivial because there are also many differences between the two approaches.41

      Are our estimates of the π f i close to those of Caselli and Coleman (2006)? The answer is: not

quite. Caselli and Coleman (2006, figures 1 and 2) show that while πSi has the expected positive

correlation with log real income per worker, πUi does not. Figure 8 shows that our π
                                                                                   bSi and π
                                                                                           bUi are

both positively correlated with log real income per worker. We think that this is a sensible result:

As countries grow rich both their skilled and unskilled workers become more productive.

      More importantly, we confirm Caselli and Coleman’s measures of skill bias in cross-country

technology differences. To see this, start with an aggregate production function, use equation (24)

to equate the ratio of marginal productivities to the ratio of factor prices, and then invert to solve

for the Caselli and Coleman technology ratios:

                                        cc                   σ−σ 1                  σ−1 1
                                       πSi     0       wSi                   VSi
                                        cc = α
                                       πUi             wUi                   VUi
                                                                                                .                      (28)

                           σ
where α0 ≡ (αS /αU ) 1−σ . Figure 9 plots the log of these (up to a constant α0 ) against the log of

our π    bUi . The fit is remarkable (R2 = 0.95), which establishes a strong link between the HOV and
    bSi /π
   41 By
     way of just a few examples, Caselli and Coleman (2006) includes capital and precisely measures endowments of
human capital whereas we use highly disaggregated sectoral data and the factor market clearing equation (W).


                                                             30
                      Figure 9: Factor Bias — HOV versus Development Accounting




                                 1
                                 0
                         bUi )
                    bSi /π
                                 -1
                 ln(π
                                 -2
                                 -3




                                      -4           -3             -2            -1             0
                                                     cc            b bσ   b 1
                                                                         σ −1 VSi σ−1
                                                  ln πbccSi α0 ≡ ln wwUi
                                                      π
                                                      b               Si
                                                       Ui                     VUi




development accounting literatures. It is also interesting that the multi-sector HOV model reproduces

results from an aggregate production function.


6.5. Directed Technical Change: Are the π f i Biased Towards a Country’s Abundant Factor?

The previous result about skill bias is static i.e., it is derived from a time-invariant production

function. In a series of papers summarized in Acemoglu (2009, chapter 15), the author argues that

whether innovation is directed towards skilled or unskilled labor will depend on offsetting effects:

Innovation will be directed towards the expensive factor (the price effect) and towards the more

abundant factor (the market-size effect). Under fairly general assumptions, the market-size effect

dominates so that technical change is directed towards a country’s abundant factor. The key piece

in the proof of Acemoglu’s argument deals with the innovation process. Letting ηi be the efficiency

of R&D in the skill-intensive relative to the unskilled-intensive sectors, Acemoglu (2009, eq. 15.27)

derives the following equation, which contains most of the economics of directed technical change:
                                                                                          
                                              πSi                                    VSi
                                           ln     = γ0 + γ1 ln ηi + (σ − 1) ln                     (29)
                                              πUi                                    VUi




                                                               31
where γ0 and γ1 are exogenous parameters of Acemoglu’s model and σ is the (derived) elasticity

of substitution.42 It is important to note that this is a macro elasticity whereas in our model σ is a

micro elasticity. Nevertheless, we equate the two.43

   We investigate this equation and also use it to estimate σ. Recall that in order to define the π
                                                                                                  bfi

we needed to choose a value for σ and combine it with βb f i and w f i where here we treat βb f i as data.
                                      b f i = π f i (σ; βb f i ,w f i ) and rewrite equation (29) as
(See equation 25.) We therefore write π
                                                                                    
                              πSi (σ; βbSi ,wSi )                                VSi
                           ln                     = γ0 + γ1 ln ηi + (σ − 1) ln         .                                  (30)
                              πUi (σ; βbUi ,wUi )                                VUi

This is a nonlinear equation in σ, which we estimate as follows. Collapse γ0 + γ1 ln ηi into an

intercept γ (we relax this below), pick an initial value of σ — call it σ0 — and run the regression
                                                                               
                                  πSi (σ0 ; βbSi ,wSi )                     VSi
                              ln                        = γ + (σ1 − 1) ln         + ei                                    (31)
                                 πUi (σ0 ; βbUi ,wUi ))                     VUi

to recover an estimate of σ1 . Iterate until σ0 = σ1 . For all starting values of σ0 between 0.5 and 50

                                     σ = 1.67, which is the value used throughout this paper. The
we quickly converge to a final value b

t-statistic is 2.93 and the R2 = 0.28. The plot of the data and fitted line appear in the left panel of

figure 10.

   This establishes three things. First, we have now generated a b
                                                                 σ which is consistent with a

(closed-economy) model of directed technical change. Second, this b
                                                                  σ is in the middle of the range

                                                    σ > 1, which implies that countries indeed direct
of existing estimates of σ. See footnote 35. Third, b

their innovation towards improving the productivity of their abundant factor.

   We can refine the analysis somewhat by recognizing that the intercept γ in equation (31) de-

pends on ln ηi and so is not a constant. We proxy it by income per worker (yi ) and, since we do

not know what this function looks like we experiment with polynomials of order 1 through 4 and

with semi-parametric estimators. All approaches yield virtually identical results so we only report
  42 To understand why Acemoglu (2009) refers to this as a ‘derived’ demand, we must review the setup of his model.
There are two sectors. Sector S (U) is produced with machines and factor S (U). Aggregate output is CES in the two
sectoral outputs. It follows that aggregate output is a function of S and U, which in turn implies a ‘derived’ elasticity of
substitution σ. One way of seeing that this derived elasticity behaves like one is that it equals the inverse of the elasticity
of relative wages with respect to endowments. See the discussion following Acemoglu’s equation 15.19.
  43 Two additional caveats about the link between our model and Acemoglu’s model flow from the fact that the

Acemoglu (2009) model is for a closed economy. First, Rybczynski effects are limited in scope in a closed economy.
Second, innovation is driven by market-size effects, including export markets. (See Lileeva and Trefler (2010) for some
empirics on this point.) With trade costs, presumably the relevant market size will look like a market potential function
in which weight is given to each trading partner’s market in proportion to trade costs. These caveats point to the need
for developing a dynamic, open-economy model to pursue the analysis rigorously.




                                                              32
                                 Figure 10: Linking HOV with Directed Technical Change



                                  Panel A                                                                      Panel B




                                                                                       2
           1
        bUi )




                                                                                   bUi )
                                                                                       1
           0
   bSi /π




                                                                              bSi /π
                                                                                       0
ln(π




                                                                           ln(π
           -1




                                                                                       -1
           -2




                                                                                       -2
           -3




                   -2.5   -2      -1.5     -1      -.5          0                              -1   -.5                 0      .5   1
                                  ln(VSi /VUi )                                                               ln(VSi /VUi )

Notes: Panel A plots ln(VSi /VUi ) against ln(π       bUi ) where π f i is evaluated at σ=1.67. Panel B presents a partial
                                                 bSi /π
regression plot of ln(VSi /VUi ) against ln(π    bUi ) after controlling for a fourth-order polynominal in real income per
                                            bSi /π
worker (see equation 32).




the 4th-order result. Specifically, we estimate
                                                                                                                   
                                  πSi (σ; βbSi ,wSi )                                                         VSi
                                                          ∑
                                                              4                            k
                               ln                     =       k =0
                                                                     γk (ln yi ) + (σ − 1) ln                           + ei        (32)
                                  πUi (σ; βbUi ,wUi )                                                         VUi

                                                          σ = 1.89 (t = 4.92, R2 = 0.54). 1.89 is
using the same iterative procedure as before. This yields b

sufficiently close to 1.67 that it has no perceptible impact on our calculated π f i (σ; βb f i ,w f i ). The

right panel of figure 10 displays the partial regression plot. Once again, the fit is very good and

supports the conclusion that countries direct their innovation towards improving the productivity of their

abundant factors.


7. An Observation on Some HOV Folklore

Since Gabaix (1997b), there is a sense that something was terribly wrong with the approach in

Trefler (1993a). Because lemma 3 establishes a close connection between Trefler’s approach and

our current approach, some comment may be of help. There are two elements of the folklore.

                First, depending on how the β f are estimated, one ends up with very different conclusions

about the performance of the Vanek equation. Specifically, return to Trefler’s (1993) specification,

which is nested by equation (VT) of lemma 3 and recall that βVT
                                                             f i makes equation (VT) fit perfectly.

Using Trefler’s data, if one compares ( βVT   −1 with w /w
                                         fi )          fi  f ,us then one arrives at a positive view of


                                                                      33
the HOV model with PFPE. On the other hand, if one sets ( β f i )−1 = w f i /w f us and plugs this into

equation (VT) one arrives at a negative view. It is important to understand that this problem does

not carry over to our current approach. In case this is not obvious, recall from the start of section 5.1

that βW        T
      f i and β f i are the values of β f i that respectively make the Wage and Techniques equations

fit perfectly. As shown in online appendix figure A2, plugging either βW       T
                                                                       f i or β f i into the Vanek

equation results in a very good fit. Indeed, the fit is virtually identical to what we saw in the

bottom row of figure 3 because empirically, βb f i = ( βW      T            W       T
                                                        f i + β f i ) /2 ≈ β f i ≈ β f i . Thus the first

element of the folklore does not hold in the current setting.

   The second element of the folklore is that the estimates of the β f i do not change when trade is

set to 0. There are two points of note. (a) We do not use the Vanek equation or any trade data in

estimating βb f i so this observation is not germane to this paper. (b) Setting trade to zero has big

impacts elsewhere in the model. In particular, when trade is set to 0 we have Ff i ( βb f ) = 0. In

that case we get a horrible fit of the Vanek equation: A plot of 0 (= Ff i ( βb f )) against Vf i − si Vf w

is a horizontal line with slope 0 and correlation 0. It obviously matters if trade is set to 0. In

summary, the folklore concerns about Trefler’s (1993a) approach are of considerable interest, but

not applicable here.44


8. Conclusion

This paper develops a multi-factor, multi-sector model that integrates the insights and machinery

of Eaton and Kortum (2002) and Caliendo and Parro (2015) to provide a unified framework for

thinking about how technology, endowments, and trade costs impact factor prices, trade in goods

and the factor content of trade. Our motivation for developing this unified framework is that

existing HOV empirics are not embedded in a unified theory of the impacts of productivity,

endowments and trade costs on factor prices and trade. This makes it impossible to reconcile the

diverse findings in the literature, let alone assess the relative importance of various determinants

within a single framework. While there are many results in this paper, we believe that we have

made two primary empirical contributions of note.

   First, because our framework nests the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek (HOV) factor content prediction

into a more general prediction, we show that the failure of the HOV (“Vanek") prediction is largely

explained (i) by departures from factor price equalization, (ii) by factor augmenting international
 44 A   deeper explanation of the second element of the folklore appears in online Appendix C.


                                                          34
technology differences and, to a lesser extent, (iii) by trade costs for government services. We note

that distinguishing the first two is a non-trivial inference problem that has never before been raised

in the HOV literature. Second, the factor-augmenting international technology differences needed

to rationalize the Vanek prediction display the same pattern of skill bias needed to rationalize

cross-country income differences (e.g. Caselli and Coleman (2006)) and cross-country evidence

on directed technical change (e.g. (Acemoglu, 1998, 2009)). This provides a bridge between these

literatures and HOV empirics.

   Along the way, we have reconciled the diverse findings in the HOV literature which have

previously been different to reconcile due to the lack of a unified framework. Most prominently,

we have reconciled the findings of Trefler (1993b) and Davis and Weinstein (2001) who focus

factor augmenting productivity and a failure of productivity-adjusted factor price equalization,

respectively. We also show how an equation that nests the Vanek prediction can be derived even

when trade costs and differences in preferences are admitted to the model.




                                                 35
                                                    Appendix
Proof of Equation (6) From equation (2), a fraction γhj of the sales of (h,j) go to primary factors so
that γhj Qhj is the income generated by sales of (h,j). Hence ∑h γhj Qhj is the income of country j.
                                                                      G
   1. Final goods: The utility function implies that γU                                    U
                                                                 gj ∑ h=1 γhj Q hj (i.e., γ gj times income) is
      j’s expenditures on g for use as final goods. A fraction π            egi,j is sourced from i. Hence
        U egi,j ∑h γhj Qhj is j’s expenditures on ( g,i ) for use as final goods.
      γgj π
   2. Intermediates: From equation (2) with ( g,i ) and (h,j) swapped, γg,hj Qhj is the expendi-
      tures by (h,j) on g for use as intermediates. A fraction π             egi,j is sourced from i. Hence
        G
      ∑ h =1 π
             egi,j γg,hj Qhj is j’s expenditures on ( g,i ) for use as intermediates.
                           egi,j ∑hG=1 (γg,hj + γU
   3. From points 1 and 2, π                     gj γhj ) Q hj is j’s total expenditures on ( g,i ).

           egi,j ∑hG=1 (γg,hj + γU
Hence, ∑ j π                     gj γhj ) Q hj is world expenditures on ( g,i ). But this must equal Q gi . 

Proof of Equation (8) By Shephard’s lemma, firm ω g ’s per unit demand for primary factor
 f is just the derivative of the unit cost function i.e., the derivative of c gi /z gi (ω ). Hence
the firm’s total demand is Vf gi (ω ) = {∂[c gi /z gi (ω )]/∂w f i }q gi (ω ). Rearranging, Vf gi (ω ) =
[∂c gi /∂w f i ](c gi )−1 {[c gi /z gi (ω )]q gi (ω )}. Integrating over ω g and recalling the definitions of Vf gi
(above equation 8) and Q gi (above equation 6) yields Vf gi = [∂c gi /∂w f i ](c gi )−1 Q gi . Hence
d f gi ≡ Vf gi /Q gi = [∂c gi /∂w f i ]/c gi . From the unit cost function (equation 4), [∂c gi /∂w f i ]/c gi is
just the right-hand side of equation (8).                                                                       
Proof of Lemma 1 (1) Cgi,j is country j’s consumption of ( g,i ). The result follows from point 1
of the above proof of equation (6). (2) Follows immediately from point 3 of the above proof of
equation (6). (3) Mgi,j is country i’s exports of good g to country j. Summing over j yields country
i’s exports of g, which is Xgi . (4) From the production function (equation 2), the production of ( g,i )
uses γh,gi dollars of intermediate inputs per dollar of output. A fraction πehi,j of these intermediate
purchases are sourced from j. Hence, purchases of intermediates (h,j) per dollar of ( g,i ) output is
ehi,j γh,gi .
π                                                                                                     
Proof of Theorem 1 Pre-multiplying equation (10) by A f yields A f T = A f (I NG − B)Q − A f C =
                              
D f Q − A f C = Vf 1 · · · Vf N − A f C. Consider column i of this equation, namely,

                                                A f T i = Vf i − A f C i                                          (33)

where Ti and Ci are the ith columns of T and C, respectively. Hence

                                           A f Σ j T j = Σ j Vf j − A f Σ j C j .                                 (34)

Consider each of the three terms in this equation. Vf w ≡ Σ j Vf j is the world endowment of f .
Recall that T j is composed of blocks of G × 1 matrices. Let Tij be the ith block of T j . Then by
inspection of the definition of T together with balanced trade, Σ j Tij = Xi − Σ j M ji = 0G where 0G
is the G × 1 vector of zeros. Hence Σ j T j = 0 NG where 0 NG is the NG × 1 vector of zeros. Recall
that Cw ≡ ∑ j C j . Thus, equation (34) can be written as 0 = Vf w − A f Cw or 0 = si Vf w − A f (si Cw ).
Subtracting this from equation (33) yields Ff i = Vf i − si Vf w − A f (Ci − si Cw ).                  
Proof of Equations (17) and (W): Factor-market clearing (equation 9) yields Vf i = Σ g d f gi Q gi . Sub-
stituting in d f gi = d f g,us β f i /δgi (equation 13) delivers Vf i = β f i Σ g d f g,us Q gi /δgi . Rearranging this
yields equations (17) and (W).                                                                                       


                                                            36
Proof of Lemma 2 Part 1. By definition Vf0 i ≡ ∑ g∈G0 A f gi Cgi,i where G 0 is the set of nontrad-
able goods. Since Cgj,i = 0 for nontradables (i does not buy from j), Vf0 i ≡ ∑ j ∑ g∈G0 A f gj Cgj,i .
Hence Vf0 w ≡ ∑i Vf0 i = ∑i ∑ j ∑ g∈G0 A f gj Cgj,i = ∑ j ∑ g∈G0 A f gj Cgj,w . Hence Vf0 i − si Vf0 w =
∑ j ∑ g∈G0 A f gj (Cgj,i − si Cgj,w ). But consumption similarity holds for tradables i.e., (Cgj,i − si Cgj,w ) =
        / G 0 . Hence Vf0 i − si Vf0 w = ∑ j ∑ g A f gj (Cgj,i − si Cgj,w ) = A f (Ci − si Cw ).
0 for g ∈

Part 2. Let B gj,i be a row of the G × G matrix B ji . Then B gj,i Qi is country i’s intermediate demand
for good g produced in country j. i’s imports of g produced in j are

                                           Mgj,i = B gj,i Qi + Cgj,i .

Adjusted imports impose consumption similarity (meaning Cgj,i = si Cgj,w ) for g ∈ G 0 and are thus
                                    0
                                   Mgj,i = B gj,i Qi + si Cgj,w for g ∈ G 0 .

Likewise, exports are
                                         Xgi = Q gi − Bgi,i Qi − Cgi,i .
Adjusted exports impose consumption similarity (Cgj,i = si Cgj,w ) for g ∈ G 0 and are thus
                                  0
                                 Xgi = Q gi − Bgi,i Qi − si Cgi,w for g ∈ G 0 .

Consider the section 2 expression for the GN × 1 vector Ti . Let Ti0 be a GN × 1 vector whose
elements are as follows. When g is tradable (g ∈        / G 0 ), the gi element is Xgi and the gj element
(j 6= i) is − Mgj,i . When g is nontradable (g ∈ G 0 ), the gi element is Xgi   0 and the gj element (j 6 = i)
        0                                                    0
is − Mgj,i . It follows that the nonzero elements of Ti − Ti are either Xgi         0 −X
                                                                                          gi = Cgi,i − si Cgi,w
          0
or (− Mgj,i ) − (− Mgj,i ) = Cgj,i − si Cgj,w . That is, the nonzero elements are always of the form
Cgj,i − si Cgj,w . Since consumption similarity holds for tradables, the zero elements can also be
expressed as Cgj,i − si Cgj,w (= 0). Hence Ff0 i − Ff i = A f (Ti0 − Ti ) = A f (Ci − si Cw ).               

Consumption Similarity Calculation: From part 2 of the proof of lemma 2, we have already
           0 , X 0 and T0 in terms of the data Q , B , and s as well as C
defined Mgj,i    gi      i                      i   ij      i             jw where C jw is defined
implicitly using the world goods market clearing condition:
                                                            N
                                            Qi = Ciw + ∑ Bij Q j .                                          (35)
                                                            j =1

Note that imposing consumption similarity on Government Services affects consumption patterns,
but not production patterns Q or intermediate input usage ratios B.

List of Countries: Australia , Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, China, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Hungary, Indonesia,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Korea, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Mexico, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, Turkey, USA.

List of Industries and ISIC codes: Agriculture (110); Mining (200); Food, Beverages, Tobacco
(311); Textiles and Textile Products (321); Leather and Footwear (323); Wood and Products of
Wood (331); Pulp, Paper, Printing, and Publishing (341); Chemicals (351); Rubber and Plastics
(355); Non-Metallic Minerals (369); Basic and Fabricated Metals (371); Machinery, nec. (381);
Transport Equipment (384); Electrical and Optical Equipment (385); Manufacturing, nec.(390);
Electricity, Gas, Water Supply (400); Construction (500); Wholesale and Retail Trade (600); Hotels
and Restaurants (630); Transport (700); Finance, Insurance, Real Estate (800); Government Services
(900);

                                                       37
                                       Table A1: Values of β f i and π f i
                                             Unskilled Labor                 Skilled Labor
                                         (1)    (2)    (3)     (4)     (5)     (6)    (7)     (8)
                                                               wUi                            wSi
                     Country            βbUi   wUi     π
                                                       bUi     π
                                                               bUi    βbSi    wSi    π
                                                                                     bS,i     π
                                                                                              bSi
                     Australia          1.13   0.98 1.14       0.86   0.70    0.89 0.44      2.04
                     Austria           1.22    0.86 0.92       0.93   0.76    0.79 0.37      2.13
                     Belgium            0.81   1.42 1.76       0.81   0.41    1.10 0.33      3.29
                     Brazil            12.17 0.07 0.06         1.26   4.60    0.18 0.14      1.31
                     Bulgaria           8.68   0.07 0.03       2.20   2.91    0.10 0.01      6.63
                     Canada             1.19   0.97 1.21       0.80   0.93    0.74 0.43      1.74
                     China             11.99 0.04 0.01         3.50   1.95    0.04 0.00      50.46
                     Cyprus             1.89   0.44 0.33       1.33   2.48    0.48 0.62      0.77
                     Czech Republic     2.93   0.26 0.17       1.52   1.44    0.26 0.06      4.39
                     Denmark            0.79   1.43 1.73       0.83   0.96    0.98 0.89      1.10
                     Estonia           2.74    0.23 0.11       2.01   4.67    0.20 0.17      1.14
                     Finland            0.84   0.98 0.72       1.35   1.21    0.77 0.69      1.11
                     France             0.81   1.30 1.39       0.93   0.84    1.04 0.86      1.21
                     Germany            1.06   1.03 1.17       0.88   0.93    0.94 0.77      1.22
                     Great Britain     0.93    1.08 1.10       0.99   1.02    0.90 0.79      1.14
                     Greece            2.18    0.34 0.22       1.55   1.86    0.38 0.23      1.68
                     Hunary             3.59   0.23 0.17       1.35   2.61    0.29 0.19      1.52
                     Indonesia         23.25 0.03 0.02         1.70   5.57    0.07 0.02      4.03
                     Ireland           0.76    0.87 0.47       1.85   1.04    0.86 0.72      1.18
                     Italy              1.19   0.75 0.64       1.18   0.51    0.69 0.15      4.73
                     Japan              1.27   0.74 0.68       1.09   1.36    0.65 0.54      1.20
                     Latvia             3.48   0.21 0.13       1.60   3.28    0.20 0.10      1.94
                     Lithuania         4.58    0.17 0.12       1.40   6.66    0.17 0.20      0.85
                     Malta             2.16    0.40 0.33       1.22   0.83    0.48 0.12      3.97
                     Mexico            6.75    0.12 0.08       1.42   2.96    0.15 0.04      3.41
                     Netherlands       0.85    1.14 1.08       1.05   0.84    0.98 0.74      1.33
                     Poland            4.22    0.17 0.10       1.69   3.04    0.21 0.11      1.92
                     Portugal          2.75    0.41 0.49       0.84   0.88    0.66 0.29      2.25
                     Romanis           8.51    0.11 0.10       1.10   2.34    0.17 0.04      4.13
                     Russia            9.76    0.11 0.11       0.95   4.78    0.12 0.05      2.32
                     Slovakia           3.00   0.18 0.07       2.57   1.81    0.17 0.03      5.78
                     Slovenia          2.24    0.43 0.42       1.04   1.78    0.49 0.41      1.22
                     South Korea       1.69    0.29 0.10       2.90   5.14    0.25 0.35      0.70
                     Spain              1.08   0.68 0.43       1.58   1.50    0.60 0.52      1.17
                     Sweden             0.91   1.31 1.69       0.77   0.88    0.88 0.60      1.46
                     Taiwan             2.52   0.29 0.18       1.61   3.09    0.29 0.24      1.19
                     Turkey             4.70   0.11 0.04       2.80   2.00    0.19 0.05      4.17
                     United States     1.00    1.00 1.00       1.00   1.00    1.00 1.00      1.00



Notes: Columns 1 and 5 present βb f i . Columns 2 and 6 are data described in section 4. Columns 3, 4, 7, and 8 are
calculated using the data in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6, the definition of βb f i , and σ=1.67.




                                                        38
References

Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change
  And Wage Inequality,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1998, 113 (4), 1055–1089.
  , Introduction to Modern Economic Growth, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2009.
   and Fabrizio Zilibotti, “Productivity Differences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116
  (2), 563–606.
Alfaro, Laura, Pol Antràs, Davin Chor, and Paola Conconi, “Internalizing Global Value Chains:
  A Firm-Level Analysis,” NBER Working Papers 21582, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  Inc September 2015.
Altonji, Joseph G and Lewis M Segal, “Small-Sample Bias in GMM Estimation of Covariance
  Structures,” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, July 1996, 14 (3), 353–66.
Antràs, Pol, “Is the U.S. Aggregate Production Function Cobb-Douglas? New Estimates of the
 Elasticity of Substitution,” B.E. Journal of Macroeconomics, April 2004, 4 (1), 1–36.
  and Alonso de Gortari, “On the Geography of Global Value Chains,” working paper, May 2017.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen, Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Firms in
  International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer 2007, 21 (3), 105–130.
  , Stephen J. Redding, and Peter K. Schott, “Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms
  Comparative Advantage and Heterogeneous Firms,” Review of Economic Studies, January 2007,
  74 (1), 31–66.
Blum, Bernardo S., “Endowments, Output, and the Bias of Directed Innovation,” Review of Eco-
  nomic Studies, April 2010, 77 (2), 534–559.
Burstein, Ariel and Jonathan Vogel, “Factor Prices and International Trade: A Unifying Perspec-
  tive,” NBER Working Papers 16904, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc March 2011.
  and , “International Trade, Technology, and the Skill Premium,” Journal of Political Economy,
  October 2017, 125 (5), 1356–1412.
  , Javier Cravino, and Jonathan Vogel, “Importing Skill-Biased Technology,” American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, April 2013, 5 (2), 32–71.
Caliendo, Lorenzo and Fernando Parro, “Estimates of the Trade and Welfare Effects of NAFTA,”
  Review of Economic Studies, 2015, 82 (1), 1–44.
  , , and Aleh Tsyvinski, “Distortions and the Structure of the World Economy,” working paper,
  June 2017.
  , Maximiliano Dvorkin, and Fernando Parro, “The Impact of Trade on Labor Market Dynam-
  ics,” working paper, July 2017.
Card, David and Thomas Lemieux, “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College
  for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 2001, 116 (2),
  705–746.
Caron, Justin, Thibault Fally, and James R. Markusen, “International Trade Puzzles: A Solution
  Linking Production and Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2014, 129 (3), 1501–
  1552.

                                                39
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for Cross-Country Income Differences,” in Philippe Aghion and
  Steven Durlauf, eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth, Else-
  vier, 2005, chapter 9, pp. 679–741.

  , Technology Differences over Time and Space, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2016.

   and James Feyrer, “The Marginal Product of Capital,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2007,
  122 (2), 535–568.

   and Wilbur John Coleman, “The World Technology Frontier,” American Economic Review, June
  2006, 96 (3), 499–522.

Ciccone, Antonio and Giovanni Peri, “Long-Run Substitutability Between More and Less Edu-
  cated Workers: Evidence from U.S. States, 1950-1990,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Novem-
  ber 2005, 87 (4), 652–663.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein, “An Account of Global Factor Trade,” American Eco-
 nomic Review, December 2001, 91 (5), 1423–1453.

  , , Scott C. Bradford, and Kazushige Shimpo, “Using International and Japanese Regional
  Data to Determine When the Factor Abundance Theory of Trade Works,” American Economic
  Review, June 1997, 87 (3), 421–446.

Debaere, Peter, “Relative Factor Abundance and Trade,” Journal of Political Economy, June 2003,
 111 (3), 589–610.

Diamond, Peter, Daniel McFadden, and Miguel Rodriguez, “Measurement of the Elasticity of
  Factor Substitution and Bias of Technical Change,” in Melvyn Fuss and Daniel L. McFadden,
  eds., Production Economics: A Dual Approach to Theory and Applications Volume II: Applications of
  the Theory of Production, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1978, pp. 125–147.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica, Septem-
  ber 2002, 75 (5), 1741–1779.

Fadinger, Harald, “Productivity Differences in an Interdependent World,” Journal of International
  Economics, July 2011, 84 (2), 221–232.

Fitzgerald, Doireann and Juan Carlos Hallak, “Specialization, factor accumulation and develop-
  ment,” Journal of International Economics, December 2004, 64 (2), 277–302.

Gabaix, Xavier, “The Factor Content of Trade: A Rejection of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Leontief Hy-
 pothesis,” 1997. Mimeo, Harvard University.

  , “The Factor Content of Trade: A Rejection of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Leontief Hypothesis,” 1997.
  Mimeo, Harvard University.

Gandal, Neil, Gordon H. Hanson, and M.J.Matthew J. Slaughter, “Technology, Trade, and Ad-
 justment to Immigration in Israel,” European Economic Review, April 2004, 48 (2), 403–428.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Labor-Market Adjustment in Open Economies:
 Evidence from US States,” Journal of International Economics, June 2002, 57 (1), 3–29.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman, Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing Returns,
 Imperfect Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1985.



                                                 40
Hottman, Colin, Stephen J. Redding, and David E. Weinstein, “What is ‘Firm Heterogeneity’ in
 Trade Models? The Role of Quality, Scope, Markups, and Cost,” Working Paper 20436, National
 Bureau of Economic Research, August 2014.

Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi, “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
 World Trade,” Journal of International Economics, June 2001, 54 (1), 75–96.

Johnson, Robert C. and Guillermo Noguera, “Accounting for intermediates: Production sharing
  and trade in value added,” Journal of International Economics, March 2012, 86 (2), 224–236.

   and , “A Portrait of Trade in Value Added over Four Decades,” Review of Economics and
  Statistics, forthcoming.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
 Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 107 (1), 35–78.

Krugman, Paul R., “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of Trade,” American
  Economic Review, December 1980, 70 (5), 950–959.

Leamer, Edward E., “The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered,” Journal of Political Economy, 1980, 88,
  495–503.

   and James Levinsohn, “International Trade Theory: The Evidence,” in G. M. Grossman and
  K. Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3 of Handbook of International Economics,
  Elsevier, December 1995, chapter 26, pp. 1339–1394.

Lewis, Ethan, “How Did the Miami Labor Market Absorb the Mariel Immigrants?,” Working
  Papers 04-3, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 2004.

Lileeva, Alla and Daniel Trefler, “Improved Access to Foreign Markets Raises Plant-Level Pro-
  ductivity ... for Some Plants,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 2010, CXXV (3), 1051–1100.

Malmberg, Hannes, “Human Capital and Development Accounting Revisited,” working paper„
 IIES July 2017.

Marshall, Kathryn G., “International Productivity and Factor Price Comparisons,” Journal of Inter-
 national Economics, July 2012, 87 (2), 386–390.

Melitz, Marc J., “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
 Productivity,” Econometrica, November 2003, 71 (6), 1695–1725.

Nishioka, Shuichiro, “International Differences in Production Techniques: Implications for the
  Factor Content of Trade,” Journal of International Economics, May 2012, 87 (1), 98–104.

Schott, Peter, “Across-Product versus Within-Product Specialization in International Trade,” Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, May 2004, 119 (2), 647–678.

Staiger, Robert W., Alan V. Deardorff, and Robert M. Stern, “An Evaluation of Factor Endow-
  ments and Protection as Determinants of Japanese and American Foreign Trade,” The Canadian
  Journal of Economics, August 1987, 20 (3), 449–463.

Timmer, Marcel P., Erik Dietzenbacher, Bart Los, Robert Stehrer, and Gaaitzen J. Vries, “An
  Illustrated User Guide to the World Input-Output Database: the Case of Global Automotive
  Production,” Review of International Economics, August 2015, 23 (3), 575–605.



                                                 41
Trefler, Daniel, “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!,” Journal of Political
  Economy, December 1993, 101 (6), 961–987.

  , “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An Econometric Study of U.S.
  Import Policy,” Journal of Political Economy, February 1993, 101 (1), 138–160.

  , “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,” American Economic Review, December
  1995, 85 (5), 1029–1046.

   and Susan Chun Zhu, “The Structure of Factor Content Predictions,” Journal of International
  Economics, November 2010, 82 (2), 195–207.

Vanek, Jaroslav, “The Factor Proportions Theory: The N-Factor Case,” Kyklos, October 1968, 21,
  749–56.

Yi, Kei-Mu, “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?,” Journal of Political
  Economy, February 2003, 111 (1), 52–102.

  , “Can Multistage Production Explain the Home Bias in Trade?,” American Economic Review,
  March 2010, 100 (1), 364–393.




                                                42
