                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE MARGINAL PRODUCT OF CLIMATE

                                       Tatyana Deryugina
                                        Solomon Hsiang

                                      Working Paper 24072
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24072


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




Portions of this analysis were previously circulated as an NBER working paper under the title
"Does the Environment Still Matter? Daily Temperature and Income in the United States." We
thank Max Auffhammer, Marshall Burke, Tamma Carleton, Melissa Dell, Olivier Deschenes,
Don Fullerton, Michael Greenstone, Hilary Hoynes, Amir Jina, Larry Karp, Bentley Macleod,
Kyle Meng, Edward Miguel, Robert Pindyck, Billy Pizer, Jonathan Proctor, Julian Reif, James
Rising, Michael Roberts, Francois Salanie, Wolfram Schlenker, Richard Schmalensee, Joe
Shapiro, Tony Smith, David Strömberg, James Stock, Anna Tompsett, Reed Walker, Frank
Wolak, and seminar participants at Chicago, FEEM, IZA, LSE, MIT, NBER EEE Summer
Institute, Princeton, Stanford, Stockholm, Toulouse School of Economics, UC Berkeley, UC
Davis, UC Santa Barbara, UI Urbana-Champaign, UNC, and Yale for discussions and comments.
We thank Tamma Carleton, Michael Delgado, DJ Rasmussen, and Andrew Wilson for research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Tatyana Deryugina and Solomon Hsiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Marginal Product of Climate
Tatyana Deryugina and Solomon Hsiang
NBER Working Paper No. 24072
November 2017
JEL No. E23,O4,Q5,R13

                                         ABSTRACT

We develop an empirical approach to value changes to a climate in terms of total market output
given optimal factor allocations in general equilibrium. Our approach accounts for unobservable
heterogeneity across locations as well as the costs and benefits of adaptation in climates of
arbitrary dimension. Importantly, we demonstrate that the Envelope Theorem implies the
marginal product of a long-run climate can be exactly identified using only idiosyncratic weather
variation. We apply this method to the temperature climate of the modern United States and find
that, despite evidence that populations adapt, the marginal product of temperature has remained
unchanged during 1970-2010, with high temperatures having low net value. Integrating marginal
products recovers a value function for temperature, describing the causal effect of non-marginal
climate changes net of adaptive re-optimization. We use this value function to consider the
influence of temperature in the current cross-section and a future climate change scenario.


Tatyana Deryugina
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
515 East Gregory Drive, MC-520
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
deryugin@illinois.edu

Solomon Hsiang
Goldman School of Public Policy
University of California, Berkeley
2607 Hearst Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-7320
and NBER
shsiang@berkeley.edu
1    Introduction
We consider the contribution of climate to the total market output of United States (US)
counties. Empirical construction of these values is challenging because it requires simulta-
neously accounting for all unobservable differences between counties (Deschênes and Green-
stone, 2007) and all endogenous adaptations to climate net of costs (Schlenker, Roberts, and
Lobell, 2013)—criteria that no prior approach has yet delivered (Hsiang, 2016). Here we de-
velop a single unified framework that satisfies both of these criteria for an arbitrary number
of unobserved allocative adaptations in an economy at general equilibrium responding to a
high-dimensional climate. We show that our approach can recover the marginal product of
climate by using only idiosyncratic weather variation and a reduced-form estimator.
    It is well known that the short-run income response to weather and the long-run income
response to climate are not the same mathematical object, due to possible adaptive re-
optimization (Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw, 1994; Kelly, Kolstad, and Mitchell, 2005).
Our core insight is that the marginal effect of weather, suitably defined, is nonetheless
exactly equal to the marginal effect of climate on total output when an economy is in com-
petitive equilibrium. This equality holds locally because the two surfaces that describe the
weather-income and climate-income relationships are exactly tangent in the neighborhood
of the equilibrium allocation. The surfaces are tangent because no adaptive reallocation
occurs due to short-run idiosyncratic weather fluctuations, by definition, and because the
effect of any marginal adaptation on income in the long-run is exactly zero as a result of
the Envelope Theorem (e.g. Guo and Costello, 2013). Thus, in neither the weather-income
nor the climate-income case are local marginal effects influenced by adaptive behavior.
    The equivalence between the marginal effects of climate and the marginal effects of
weather enables us to measure the local gradient of the long-run relationship implicitly by
directly measuring the local gradient of the short-run relationship. The short-run response
can be empirically identified by exploiting idiosyncratic variations in weather over time
within each location, enabling the removal of unobserved cross-sectional heterogeneity from
parameter estimates (Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007). A large number of local gradient
estimates observed at “nearby” baseline climates can then be “pieced together” through
integration to reconstruct the long-run income response surface, which cannot otherwise
be observed directly. The key data requirements necessary for this approach to be valid
is a large panel of similar economies that (i) span the space of possible climates, which we
define precisely below, (ii) are sufficiently densely packed in this space such that integration
between positions is reasonable, and (iii) experience short-run weather disturbances that
are not “too large” in the sense that they do not perturb the economy so far from its
equilibrium that the Envelope Theorem no longer applies.
    We demonstrate the application of this approach using a large number of ‘small macro-

                                               2
economies’ represented by the panel of modern US counties, which plausibly satisfy the crite-
ria above. We examine counties’ local income response to small perturbations in the annual
distribution of daily temperatures and discover a remarkably strong and stable relationship
between temperatures and production across space, seasons, and time. Importantly, we
show that investments in human-made capital—in the form of air conditioning and cities—
appear to be partial substitutes for climate in production, in the sense of Hartwick (1977)
and Solow (1991). However, we continue to observe large contributions of climate to output
even in extremely urbanized contexts and in the twenty-first century, indicating a high net
value of certain climates despite the existence of numerous possible margins of adaptation.
       Our approach enables us to integrate marginal effects of climate to compute causal ef-
fects on production due to non-marginal climate changes. Thus, we can compute differences
in economic production that are attributable to differences in contemporaneous locations’
climates, as well as to estimate changes in future production due to projected future warm-
ing, holding technology constant. In both cases, our estimates account for both the costs
and benefits of all margins of endogenous adaptation. On net, we find that existing climate
differences between counties generate substantial differences in their output, with hotter
climates having lower average production, ceteris paribus, a result that we recover without
exploiting cross-sectional variation in estimation of our parameters. For example, we esti-
mate that the climate of Northern Minnesota returns over $2,000 per capita more annually
than the climate of Southern Texas. For similar reasons, projections of future output are
substantially reduced once future warming and resulting adaptation are both accounted for.
Net of all currently available adaptation technologies, we estimate the value of projected
changes in US production due to warming during the twenty-first century at -$6.7 trillion in
net present value (US 2011 dollars, RCP8.5, discounted at 3% annually) in the median sce-
nario, using our preferred specification. The 90% confidence interval of this loss is $4.7-10.4
trillion when accounting for climate model uncertainty (Burke et al., 2015).1
       An ancillary but potentially important insight from our empirical work is that accounting
for adaptive reallocations increases total projected losses under warming relative to an
approach that assumes uniform marginal effects everywhere. This result is counter to the
widely referenced “folk theorem” that accounting for endogenous adaptation empirically
should necessarily reduce the estimated impacts of climate change. In our context, we find
the marginal damages from warming—which are larger for cooler and less adapted northern
counties—are positively correlated across space with the distribution of economic activity.
Thus, models that assume uniform marginal effects under-estimate future losses because
   1
    It should be noted that these values do not represent welfare calculations, nor do they account for non-
market impacts of warming. They also do not include effects of climate change through non-temperature
channels (e.g., floods), and they clearly cannot account for possible future technological innovations that do
not yet exist in our data.



                                                      3
marginal damage estimates for northern locations are biased toward zero by pooling them,
in estimation, with hotter and more adapted (but less productive) southern counties.
    The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2, we introduce definitions for climate,
the space of all possible climates, the marginal product of climate, the role of climate in
a market equilibrium, and the relationship between climate and weather. In Section 3 we
derive how the marginal product of climate can be estimated using weather variation and
how these estimates can be used to compute non-marginal effects of climate. In Section
4 we explain our empirical implementation in the modern US, deriving how we recover
the marginal product of high-dimensional daily temperature distributions. In Section 5
we examine the structure of the marginal product of temperature in the US, including its
stability over time, the dynamics of income growth, and the effects of adaptation. In Section
6 we examine what mechanisms might be responsible for these results, considering both
different sectors of production (e.g. agriculture, manufacturing) and the role of human-made
capital (e.g. air-conditioning) as partial substitutes for climate in production. In Section 7
we use our results to compute the non-marginal effects of temperature on the current cross-
section of income and the projected value of future warming. Section 8 discusses important
caveats of our analysis and points towards areas for future research.

2    Theoretical setup and statement of the problem
To quantify the full marginal product of a climate, we must compute the economic value
generated by an economy facing that climate relative to the same economy when it faces a
slightly different climate, including the costs and benefits of any adaptation measures taken
in response. Accounting for the benefits of adaptation is relatively straightforward, since
the reduced sensitivity of populations is directly observable (e.g. Barreca et al., 2016), but
accounting for adaptation costs has remained a persistent challenge because they are not
directly observed (Carleton and Hsiang, 2016). The costs of any adaptive measures that
require resources (e.g. capital) are the opportunity costs of allocating those resources to
other economic opportunities. Systematically enumerating these costs may be challenging
or impossible, since there is a vast number of adjustments populations make when adapting
to their climate. We point out here that in general equilibrium, all of these adaptations
can simply be thought of as allocation decisions made conditional on the climate, and their
total opportunity cost to the market is therefore the loss of total revenue relative to an
alternative allocation. Thus, it is not necessary to enumerate these costs individually to
capture their total, so long as we observe changes in total revenue in response to climate.
    We begin by first defining what we mean by the word “climate.” Much of the prior
economics literature considers this definition to be self-evident, but numerous debates have
stemmed from disagreements about what this language represents mathematically. We



                                               4
therefore provide a precise definition for climate. Our definition is novel in its articulation
but we believe it both reflects and subsumes most prior conceptions and is consistent with
colloquial understanding of the term. It also leads naturally to a corresponding definition of
the term “weather,” reflecting the notion that “the climate is what you expect, the weather
is what you get.”2 These mathematical definitions are essential to our approach because
they guarantee that climate and weather have the same dimensionality, lie in the same
sub-regions of a vector-space, and can be mapped to data.
2.1      Defining climate and its marginal product
The climate of a location describes the joint probability distribution over a large number
of possible environmental conditions that may occur at that location over a period of time.
Because this distribution is a function, the transformation of climate and other inputs into
economic output (a scalar) must be mapped through a functional.3 The challenge of our
analysis is to find a suitable framework for transforming this functional into an empirically
tractable object while also accounting for endogenous adaptation to any changes in climate.
       Let relevant environmental state variables at location i, observed continuously in time
τ , be represented by the random vector x:

                     xiτ = [temperatureiτ , precipitationiτ , humidityiτ , ...] ,                          (1)

where xiτ is a draw from the joint probability distribution function fx (.). We are interested
in how changes to this function alter the economic value of output in a given economy.
Assume a functional that maps this function to scalar economic output Ỹ exists:

                                           fx (.) 7→ Ỹ (fx (.), b),                                       (2)

where b is a vector of length N that describes all endogenous control variables in the
economy, including the allocation of all inputs not described by x. Alteration of these
control variables is how the economy may adapt to changes in fx (.). Define Ψ to be the
function space of physically valid probability distribution functions over x, i.e. fx (.) ∈ Ψ.
       To make the characterization of (2) empirically tractable, we exploit a smooth “function-
generating function” ψ(.) that describes the entire function4 fx (.) in terms of a vector C:

                                           C 7→ ψ(C) = fx (.).                                             (3)
   2
      This quote is has been attributed to M. Twain and R. Heinlein, although its true origins are unclear.
   3
      A functional is similar to a function, but takes functions (rather than scalars or vectors) as arguments
and outputs a scalar. A definite integral is a commonly used functional.
    4
      Note that ψ(.) may be set-valued such that it generates a set of functions fx (.) for each vector C. This
is not a concern for us here because each function fx (.) will still have a well-defined inverse C.




                                                      5
Output from ψ(.) must always be a probability distribution. ψ(.) must also be sufficiently
structured such that it reconstructs all economically relevant features of fx (.) based on C.
For example, if physics constrained Ψ to be the family of univariate Normal distributions
over x, then C would simply contain a mean and variance and ψ(C) would translate these
values into a function over x.
   Let the vector C have length K and lie in the space C ⊆ RK . C is defined such that
C ∈ C ⇐⇒ ψ(C) ∈ Ψ. That is, for any position C in the space C, there exists a valid
probability distribution over x generated by ψ(C). Thus, we can rewrite Ỹ (fx (.), b) =
Ỹ (ψ(C), b) = Y (C, b) where the notation Y (.) simply embeds ψ(.) in Ỹ (.). The purpose of
ψ(.) in this formulation is that its inverse maps from the function space Ψ, which is difficult
to handle empirically as the domain of an independent variable, to the vector space C. This
allows us to substitute the functional Ỹ (.) with the more manageable function Y (.).
   By construction, the vector C is sufficient to describe all economically relevant features
of fx (.). We therefore define C as the climate. Correspondingly, C is the space of possible
climates. Our objective is to define and measure the economic value of relocating an econ-
omy within this space. To describe the value of such relocations, we define the marginal
product of climate evaluated at location C0 in C to be

                 dY (C0 , b∗0 )          Y (C0 + C0 , b∗0 + b∗ 0 ) − Y (C0 , b∗0 )
                                                                                  
                                = lim                                                ,     (4)
                     dC          C0 →0                    C0

where the vectors b∗0 and b∗0 + b∗ 0 are endogenously adjusted to adapt the economy to the
two climates C0 and C0 +C0 , respectively. We next discuss such adaptations in more detail.
2.2   Adaptation to climate in general equilibrium
Assume a competitive market equilibrium with complete information where C affects en-
dowments, productivities, and utility (Arrow and Debreu, 1954). Firms rent labor and sell
output to rational consumers according to a price-vector p = p(C), which may depend on
the climate. All agents know their climate C and adjust their behavior and factor alloca-
tions to it independently. As mentioned earlier, the vector b describes all control variables
available to decision-makers, including production, consumption, and investment. Aggre-
gate utility U (C, b) then depends on b and may also depend on C. Individual firms are
price-takers and unable to alter U (C, b). They observe C and p(C), then produce output
in a decentralized manner until some equilibrium b∗ is achieved.
   Denote the economy’s production possibility frontier as P P F (C, b), which directly de-
pends on C if the climate affects what output is feasible and indirectly depends on C
through adaptations via b. The equilibrium allocation, which incorporates all endogenous
adjustments to the climate, is then b∗ = b∗ (C). To ensure that b∗ exists, we assume that
b lies in a space B, a dense subset of RN . Further, we make the usual assumption that Y


                                                  6
                                               b2                                b2
     U(C,b)
                       better-than set



                                                                b*(C2)
   PPF(C,b)                         p(C)

                                                               b*(C1)                 Y(C2,b*)
                            b*(C)


                                               Y(C,b*)
              production possibility set                                              Y(C1,b*)

                                                    b1                                 b1

Figure 1: General equilibrium in a climate C. Left: the equilibrium allocation is b∗ (C)
with endogenous price vector p and total market revenue (income) Y . Right: The climate
of an economy is altered from C1 to C2 , producing a new optimal allocation b∗ (C2 ) and
changing both the price vector and total revenue Y .


is concave and differentiable in b. Under the conditions stated above, Koopmans (1957)
shows that the equilibrium allocation b∗ (C) must maximize total market revenue in the
economy if it also maximizes aggregate utility, so long as prices are nonzero:

                       b∗ (C) = arg max Y (C, b(C)) | p(C), U (C, b).                            (5)
                                           b

Thus, as far as market revenue is concerned, all costs of adaptation to climate are opportu-
nity costs due to the re-allocation of resources in response to changes in C. If an exogenous
change in the climate induces an endogenous adjustment in b∗ , then it must be the case
that any reductions in Y caused by this adjustment were outweighed by the gains.
   Figure 1 illustrates an example economy where b = (b1 , b2 ). Both b1 (an input to
production as drawn) and b2 (an output and the numeraire) are endogenously determined.
U (C, b) and P P F (C, b) may be influenced by climate and total market revenue Y(C, b∗ ) is
maximized given prices (left panel). If the climate C changes from C1 to C2 (right panel),
both the production possibility set and the better-than set may change. The economy
will adapt to C2 by reallocating factors from b∗ (C1 ) to b∗ (C2 ). This reallocation will
again maximize total revenue Y in the economy given the new price vector. The marginal
product of climate thus implicitly captures all of these adaptive factor reallocations, but
measuring it does not require that we observe b∗ or p directly. Rather, we simply observe
how total revenue Y —the intercept of the separating hyper-plane with the numeraire’s axis
(b2 )—responds to changes in C net of these endogenous changes (right panel).


                                                         7
      This formulation of adaptation is general in the sense that it accounts for an arbitrary
number of endogenous adjustments to climate while allowing for the possibility that C
affects the economy by altering the better-than set and the PPF simultaneously. For ex-
ample, on the production side, increasing temperatures might reduce the yields of some
crops, altering the structure of the PPF and causing adjustment in the allocation of land
to different crop varieties or the more intensive use of irrigation, both of which are accom-
panied by the opportunity cost of using those resources for other productive activities. On
the preferences side, increasing temperatures might increase the demand for ice cream and
reduce the demand for hot chocolate, a response that would lead to some reallocation of
both production and consumption.
      If some factors have no market price, such as a completely externalized pollutant or a
non-market good, they will not be factored into market-based decisions and will not affect
total revenue. This is not an immediate concern for us because we are focused on changes
to total market output, although it is worth noting explicitly that our approach does not
capture non-market responses to climate and does not necessarily correspond to welfare.5
      Because our focus is the value of the climate in terms of total market production net of
all endogenous adjustments, it is helpful to write equilibrium output as the value function

                                      V (C) = Y (C, b∗ (C)),                                      (6)

which captures the net costs and benefits of all possible adaptations embodied by b∗ . If
there exist regions in the space C where endogenous adjustment of b can fully offset any
changes in total production induced by changes in C, then the value function V (C) will
be flat in that region. However, if compensating adjustments in b are not cost-effective or
unfeasible, then V (C) may have a steeper gradient that reflects the direct effect of C on Y .
      An important assumption above is that the elements of b can take on continuous values.
This is a natural assumption for most quantities in an economy of sufficiently large scale,
such as the number of apples sold in a regional market or the miles of road laid down within
a county. Although, in some cases often discussed as margins of adaptation to climate,
such as the construction of sea-walls or crop-switching, these decisions are often framed as
discrete. However, such a framing oversimplifies adaptive decisions by actual individuals
because these decisions have (continuous) intensive margins. For example, a sea-wall can
always be slightly longer or slightly higher and a farmer can always allocate a slightly larger
fraction of cropland to a new variety. At larger scales of aggregation, such as a county, the
assumption that elements of b takes on continuous values is strongly defensible, as many
discrete economic decisions of many individuals are aggregated into continuous measures.
  5
    Examples of two alternative approaches that take into account both market and non-market responses
to climate include Anthoff, Hepburn, and Tol (2009) and Hsiang et al. (2017).


                                                  8
2.3    Weather and climate
Once agents use their knowledge of C to adjust b, there remain no possible channels for the
probability distribution characterized by C to affect the economy except through realiza-
tions of xiτ . A climate that is generally wet will generate more rainy minutes and a climate
that is generally warm will generate more hot minutes. These actual events may affect Y ,
with effects possibly mediated by b∗ (C). We now describe the connection between xiτ and
what people colloquially refer to as “weather.” It is tempting to label xiτ the weather, but
elements in xiτ are continuous measures taken at continuous moments in time indexed by τ .
By contrast, the term “weather” typically summarizes values of xiτ observed over a longer
time period, such as a day or month. We formalize this idea below.
   Having observed some realizations of xiτ over the time interval t = [τ , τ ), we can con-
struct an empirical cumulative distribution function F̂x (.)it over these observations. Differ-
entiating F̂x (.)it gives us fˆx (.)it , an empirical analog to the probability density fx (.), which
also must lie in the space Ψ. Noting that the function-generating function ψ(.) can also
generate fˆx (.)it , we define cit as an empirical analog to C for location i during interval t:

                                      cit 7→ ψ(cit ) = fˆx (.)it .                               (7)

By construction, cit has the same dimensionality as C and also lies in C. Put simply, cit
summarizes the empirical distribution of many measures of xiτ taken over a finite interval
of time. We define cit as the weather realized at i during period t.
   We argue that this formal definition of cit maps very closely to common usages of the
term “weather.” For example, if one were to ask “What was today’s weather?”, nobody
would reply by describing xiτ directly—doing so would involve reporting a massive vector
of temperatures and other variables experienced during every moment in the day. A more
natural response would be to summarize all that information by describing its distribution as
“pretty warm,” or “a high of 80◦ F and low of 60◦ F.” Such summary statements correspond
to the elements in cit . After being told such summaries, it is then natural for individuals
to reconstruct in their mind what a day might actually look like, i.e. the distribution of
xiτ ’s they might experience on that day. This reconstruction procedure, taking place in the
mind of an economic agent, is the transformation described by ψ(.).
   Because C summarizes the probability distribution function fx (.), which produces re-
alizations xiτ that are in turn used to construct cit , it is straightforward to reformulate
cit ’s as random vectors generated by some function of C. Stated another way, weather is a
random realization of events that are determined by the climate. To capture this intuition
and simplify notation, below we refer to weather realizations c determined by C as c(C).




                                                   9
2.4   The marginal product of climate as the gradient of the value function
As suggested above, the probability distribution described by the climate C can only affect
economic production in two ways: (1) as information, through its effect on beliefs and
subsequent economic decisions embodied by b∗ , and (2) through its influence on weather
realizations c, which in turn directly affect economic outcomes. Following Hsiang (2016),
we term these pathways the belief effect and the direct effect, respectively, and we rewrite
Eq. 6 to explicitly acknowledge that c(.) is the only pathway of influence other than b(.):

                                 V (C) = Y (c(C), b∗ (C)).                                   (8)

The shape of this income-generating function Y (.) along the optimized path b∗ (C) over all
C ∈ C ultimately determines the value of climate V (C). Thus, the full marginal product of
the climate at C can be rewritten from Eq. 4 as the local gradient in the value function

                dY (c(C), b∗ (C))                   V (C + C0 ) − V (C)
                                                                       
                                    dV (C)
                                  =        = lim                          ,                  (9)
                      dC             dC     C0 →0          C0

where C0 describes the structure of an arbitrary perturbation to the current climate vector
                                                             dV (C)
C such that C + C0 ∈ C. Recovering the gradient vector        dC      for counties in the modern
United States is the goal of our empirical analysis below.
2.5   Relationship to prior work
Our analysis generalizes and bridges several previous innovative efforts to empirically mea-
sure the economic impact of climatic conditions (a complete discussion is in the Appendix).
Cross-sectional analyses of farms by Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994) and Schlenker,
Hanemann, and Fisher (2006) estimated analogs of Equation 8 with C being captured by
long-run averages, the former using simple averages of temperatures and rainfall and the
latter utilizing degree-days. Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) raised the concern that un-
observable heterogeneity across farms might introduce bias to these estimate, and proposed
differencing out these effects using a within-unit panel regression approach. However, this
strategy required the assumption that climate can be proxied by observed average weather
(Ĉ = cit ). Such assumptions have subsequently been widely challenged because economic
agents adapt to their climate, adjusting b∗ (C), but do not adapt to weather. Later work
explored the nature of such adaptation in multiple ways: Schlenker and Roberts (2009);
Aroonruengsawat and Auffhammer (2011); Hsiang and Narita (2012) and others showed
that historical experience with climates altered the marginal impact of weather; Deschênes
and Greenstone (2011); Barreca et al. (2016) and others showed how specific technologies
have mitigated effects of weather; Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012); Burke and Emerick (2016)
and others showed that the scope for adaptation may sometimes be limited even over longer


                                            10
periods; and Schlenker, Roberts, and Lobell (2013); Houser et al. (2015) and others point
to the importance of accounting for both costs and benefits of adaptation.
        Thus, the literature is overall in broad agreement that (i) climate and weather are
different objects, (ii) long-run climates are correlated with unobservable heterogeneity that
hinders direct empirical inference in cross-sections, (iii) adaption to climate may generate
important differences between the effects of climate and weather, and (iv) the costs and
benefits of adaptation must both be accounted for in valuations. Yet to date, no formulation
has accounted for all of these concerns in a single empirical framework. Below we show how
the market value of climate—purged of bias from unobservable heterogeneity and accounting
for both the costs and benefits of adaptation—can be empirically recovered by exploiting
weather variation and a within-unit panel estimator.

3        Identifying the full marginal product of climate empirically
As formulated here, an economy’s output Y depends on its position in the K+N dimensional
space C ×B. Exogenous changes in the position of the economy C ∈ C lead to endogenous re-
optimization of control variables b ∈ B such that, in the long run, income Y (c(C), b∗ (C)) =
V (C) is at an optimum with respect to the subspace B. A core empirical challenge has been
tracing out the path of an economy through C × B as it adjusts b∗ in response to changes
in C. To that end, our objective is to characterize the marginal product of climate6 along
this path:
                                     dV (C) h ∂V (C)               ∂V (C)
                                                                            i
                                           = ∂C1 , · · · ,          ∂CK
                                                                                ,                                (10)
                                      dC
                                                                      dV (C)
where Ck denotes the k-th element in C. To characterize                dC           empirically, we decompose it
into contributions that come from (1) the direct effect of changing C on weather realizations
c (direct effect) and (2) the endogenous adjustment of b in response to the knowledge or
belief that C has changed (belief effect):

                                                    K            N
                       dV (C)   dY (c(C), b∗ (C)) X ∂Y dck X ∂Y db∗n
                              =                  =            +            ,                                     (11)
                        dC            dC               ∂ck dC       ∂bn dC
                                                   k=1          n=1
                                                   |    {z   } |     {z   }
                                                          direct effects            belief effects

           dck         dbn                                                                     dc
where      dC    and   dC    are the k-th and n-th row vectors of Jacobians                    dC    (size K × K) and
db
dC      (size N × K),    respectively.7   Importantly, each partial derivative is evaluated “locally”
in the neighborhood of the initial climate C and its associated equilibrium b∗ (C).
    6
    Note that the marginal product of climate is equivalent to the gradient            of the value function ∇V (C),
which always points in the direction ofmost rapid ascent, locally.
                                         ∂c1         ∂c1
                                                                      ∂b                      ∂b1
                                                                                                      
                                         ∂C1
                                              · · · ∂C  K              ∂C1
                                                                          1
                                                                                        ···    ∂CK
  7                              dc
                                         .    ..     .         db
                                                                       .               ..          .. 
    The Jacobian matrices are dC    =  ..       .   ..  and dC =  ..                  .         . .
                                                                                                      
                                         ∂cK        ∂cK                ∂bN                     ∂bN
                                         ∂C1
                                              · · · ∂CK                ∂C1
                                                                                        ···    ∂CK



                                                     11
       In the ideal experiment, we would compare two identical economies with initial climate
C, perturbing the climate of one by a small disturbance C0 to C + C0 and allowing the
economy to adjust b∗ endogenously. The resulting difference in productivities would then
                              dV (C)
be the marginal product        dC ,    capturing contributions from both direct effects and belief
effects. As highlighted in the literature, the central empirical challenge to finding suitable
                                                 dV (C)
quasi-experimental conditions to measure          dC      empirically has been the absence of reliable
exogenous changes in C. For example, long-run average climate conditions may be corre-
lated with unobserved heterogeneity (Deschênes and Greenstone, 2007); and while gradual
changes of the climate within a location may be available in some contexts, they may be
correlated with unobserved trends in confounding variables that also evolve slowly (e.g. the
frequency-identification tradeoff described in Hsiang and Burke, 2014). Thus, it is appeal-
ing to examine random fluctuations in weather c as proposed by Deschênes and Greenstone
(2007), since this source of variation is generally orthogonal to unobserved heterogeneity.
                                                              dY                       dV
However, it has remained an open question whether             dc   can be mapped to    dC   in a manner
consistent with economic theory because populations adapt to climate (via b) but not to
weather and because the belief effects in Eq. 11 are likely too numerous to characterize
through enumeration. A key insight of this paper is that, while these two gradients are
different mathematical objects, their values are equal in the neighborhood of b∗ , allowing
us to measure the value of climate by isolating the marginal product of weather net of
unobserved heterogeneity. This insight results from application of the Envelope Theorem.8
       The intuition is as follows. Imagine there are identical adjacent villages along a road that
runs North-South, and each village has a single choice variable, i.e., b = b. Each village
also faces a one-dimensional climate C = C, with more northern villages experiencing
colder conditions. The surface Y (C, b) is illustrated in the left panel of Figure 2.9 Given
their climate C, individuals and firms in the villages maximize their utility and profit,
respectively. The result is that each village’s b∗ is such that Y is maximized by firms given
prices. Therefore, in equilibrium, villages’ outputs lie along the “ridge” of the Y surface
(viewed from the perspective of firms), which is equal to the value function V (C) indicated
by the blue line. An observer traveling along this road would observe that village economies
differ in b, since villages adapt as C changes. In contrast, if villages did not adapt, b would
be constant regardless of C, locating output along the road on a “slice” of the Y surface at
a fixed b rather than the ridge. Two examples of such slices are depicted as red and orange
lines for b1 and b2 , respectively, each of which is optimal for a single village located where
   8
     In related work, Guo and Costello (2013) exploit the Envelope Theorem to demonstrate that adaptation
to climate should generate limited value on the margin in California timberland management. Similarly,
Schlenker, Roberts, and Lobell (2013) demonstrate empirically that marginal costs of adaptation to tem-
perature in US maize production closely match marginal benefits at the current equilibrium, a result fully
consistent with the predictions of the Envelope Theorem as it is used in the present analysis.
   9
     In the Appendix A2, we expand on this example for the case with a two-dimensional climate.


                                                   12
                                                         Y
                                            Y                     b2 = b*
                 Y(C,b2)
          Y(C,b1)          Y(C,b*) = V(C)

                                                                                b1 = b*



                                                                                          V(C)

 Y(C,b)                                                                                   Y(C,b1)




                                                                                          Y(C,b2)
b
                                                C
                                                                                          C


Figure 2: Output in a one-dimensional climate C with one control variable b. Left: Gray
surface is output Y (C, b), blue line is the value function Y (C, b∗ (C)) = V (C), red and
orange lines are “slices” where b is held at fixed values. Right: Displaying V (C) and slices
from the left panel when they are projected onto the Y -C plane. Appendix Section A2
displays the value function for a two-dimensional climate.


the slice is crossed by the blue line.
     If we do not observe b for each village, then we only see the relationships between Y
and C, shown as the projection of the equilibrium (blue) onto the Y -C plane on the right
panel of Figure 2. The slices for b = b1 and b = b2 are also projected onto this plane, and
lie below the equilibrium everywhere except at the climate for which they are optimal.
     Now, if the weather of a village changes unexpectedly such that it is different from
its climate by ξ, b∗ will not be adjusted in the short run and the village will produce
Y (C + ξ, b∗ (C)). Output of the village will be determined by its respective slice of Y where
b is held fixed at b∗ (C) (e.g. the red line). For large perturbations, output will temporarily
fall below the ridge (blue line), but so long as the village’s beliefs about their climate do
not change, they will remain at b∗ (C) and output will recover when the weather returns to
C. For this reason, numerous researchers have argued that econometric measurements that
exploit weather variation as the independent variable do not recover the effect of altering C
once b is allowed to adjust (reviewed in Dell, Jones, and Olken, 2013; Hsiang, 2016). Here
we point out that, for small perturbations, the responses of Y to weather (red and orange
lines) are tangent to the value function (blue line) in the neighborhood of each village’s b∗ .
Thus, even if the value function cannot be observed directly, its local derivative—i.e. the
marginal product of climate—can be measured locally by exploiting variation in weather
where ξ is small. Then, if we can observe a large number of these local derivatives for nearby
villages with different initial C, we can piece them together via integration to recover the
overall shape of the value function along this hypothetical road where adaptations occur
continuously across neighboring villages.


                                                    13
      Therefore, the first key result is the equivalence, locally, of the marginal effect of climate
and the marginal effect of weather in the neighborhood of an initial equilibrium, regardless of
any possible margins of adaptation. This equivalence is obtained because (i) no adaptation
occurs in response to weather and (ii) adaptation has no influence on the marginal effect
of climate locally since Y is initially optimized. That is, the effect of adaptation locally is
zero in both cases. The second key result is that a large number of local marginal effects
can be integrated to compute the non-marginal effect of large changes in the climate.
      To see these results in the general case, let Ca be a benchmark climate at which we are
                                                                                                  dV (Ca )
evaluating the marginal product of climate. To estimate the k-th element of                         dC       (Eq
10), we differentiate V by Ck at           Ca .   By the chain rule, we have

                                   K                            N
dV (Ca )   ∂Y (c(Ca ), b∗ (Ca )) X ∂Y (c(Ca ), b∗ (Ca )) dcκ X ∂Y (c(Ca ), b∗ (Ca )) dbn
         =                      +                            +                            .
 dCk              ∂Ck                     ∂cκ            dCk          ∂bn            dCk
           |       {z          } |κ=1       {z              } |n=1
                                                                       {z               }
                        =0                                                            P
                                                       direct effects                     belief effects=0
                                                                                                             (12)
The climate, as a probability distribution, cannot affect any outcome by a pathway other
than through the weather realizations it causes and actions based on beliefs regarding its
structure. This implies the first term must be zero. Because V is the outcome when Y has
                                                                                          ∂Y
been optimized through each possible adaptation bn , we also know that                    ∂bn   = 0 for all n.
This means the sum of all belief effects must be zero even if observable adaptive adjustments
 db                                               ∂Y dcκ
dCk    are large. Thus, only the terms            ∂cκ dCk   (direct effects) may be nonzero.
      Next, we note that for any marginal change in the distribution of weather, there exists
                                                                                                      dcκ
a marginal change in climate that is equal in magnitude and structure such that                       dCk    =1
if κ = k and 0 otherwise. Thus, we can focus only on cases where κ = k, i.e. the effect of
the κ-th element of c is thought to be informative of the effect of the k-th element of C.10
                  dV (Ca )       ∂Y (Ca ,b∗ )
Then we have       dCk       =       ∂ck        , which says that the total marginal effect on V of the
kth dimension of the climate, evaluated at Ca , is equal to the partial derivative of income
with respect to the corresponding dimension of weather, also evaluated at Ca . Locally, the
marginal effect of the climate on income is identical to the marginal effect of the weather.
Extending this to all K dimensions of the climate we have our first result

                                            dV (Ca )   ∂Y (Ca , b∗ )
                                                     =               ,                                       (13)
                                              dC           ∂c

stating that the full K-dimensional marginal product of climate, net of all endogenous
adaptations, is equal to the vector of partial effects of K weather measures, ignoring all
  10                                            dc
      This restriction is equivalent to setting dC equal to the identity matrix and is quite weak. It simply
requires that we do not interpret changes in one measure of weather (e.g. realized average temperature) as
reflecting changes in an orthogonal climate measure (e.g. expected rainfall).



                                                            14
adaptations.11 Equation 13 is particularly useful empirically because the right-hand-side
term can be estimated in a multivariate time-series or panel model regression that is purged
of location-specific heterogeneity (e.g. using county fixed effects), following the approach
laid out in Deschênes and Greenstone (2007). Importantly, however, for Equation 13 to hold,
the outcome must represent a maximized quantity, which is true in the case of income—
studied here—but may not hold for other outcomes, such as crop yields or mortality risk.
       Empirical estimates of Equation 13 can be used to construct estimates of non-marginal
climate effects by integrating marginal effects of weather. For an arbitrary climate Cb , we
can solve for V (Cb ) by computing a line integral of the gradient in V along a continuous
path through the K-dimensional C-subspace (i.e. C) from Ca → Cb , starting from V (Ca ):
                                                               Z    Cb
                                         b            a                  dV (C)
                                V (C ) = V (C ) +                               dC.                  (14)
                                                                Ca        dC

                            dV (C)
At each position C ∈ C,      dC      is a vector of differentials describing all the marginal effects of
the climate measured locally at C. From Equation 13 we know that these differentials with
respect to climate can be substituted for using differentials with respect to weather, which in
                                                                   \∗ )
turn can be estimated empirically via regression. Empirically, ∂Y (C,b
                                                                     ∂c    = β̂weather , where
                                                                                               C
β̂weather is a reduced-form parameter estimate of the marginal effects of weather on total
economic production. Combining this fact with Eq. 13, we obtain our second result, an
estimate for the net value of a non-marginal change in the climate from Ca to Cb exploiting
only exogenous variation in weather:
                                                          Z    Cb
                                     b            a
                             V (C ) − V (C ) =                      β̂weather       · dC.            (15)
                                                           Ca                   C


Eq. 15 says that the change in value resulting from a non-marginal change in climate
can be computed as a line integral through a vector field of empirical gradient estimates
constructed by regressing income on idiosyncratic weather variations.
       Because non-marginal changes in climate may induce substantial adjustments to control
                               dV (C)
variables in the economy,       dC           may change with C, implying that fully accounting for
adaptation in Eq. 15 requires that new marginal effects β̂weather be empirically estimated
at each position in C. If these marginal effects are not constant across C, then V (C) has
curvature in the K-dimensional space. If a single marginal effect of weather is estimated,
pooling across many baseline climates, this is equivalent to forcing the marginal effect of
climate to be constant in each dimension of C. Such a “constant marginal effect model”
might reasonably approximate V (C), although it is difficult to be certain whether this is
  11
    Hsiang (2016) describes the assumption of Eq. 13 in prior work as the marginal treatment comparability
assumption, which holds exactly in this context.


                                                          15
the case ex ante. In our empirical implementation, we explore when constant marginal
effects are a good approximation and when nonlinearity is important for capturing adaptive
responses to climate expressed as curvature in V (C).

4         Empirical implementation for the modern United States
In our empirical analysis of the temperature climate for the US, we define ψ(.) such that
the probability distribution of daily average temperatures within each year and location is
described by a 17-bin histogram, where the interior fifteen bins are each 3◦ C wide and the
top and bottom bins are not bounded above and below, respectively. The space of possible
climates C is thus the 16-simplex, constrained such that the total number of days in a year
is exactly 365. The position of a county i on the 16-simplex C is then Ci , a 16-element-long
vector describing the expected count of days in each temperature bin less one.
4.1         Identification strategy
Our objective is to empirically estimate the value of permanently repositioning county i’s
climate Ci to some location Ci + C0 . To measure this value, our empirical strategy exploits
the result in Equation 13 and measures the marginal value of changes in the weather vector
cit within location i over time, which is equal to the marginal value of the permanent
distortion in Ci . The weather vector cit necessarily has the same 16-element structure as
Ci and can be written as cit = Ci + ξit , where ξit is a vector of disturbance terms.12 As ξit
varies randomly over time, the position of cit will “explore” C in the neighborhood of Ci ,
allowing us to estimate the local marginal effect of these changes on output. An important
econometric benefit of exploiting the within-county variation in cit is that it allows us
to utilize panel-regression techniques that condition out unobservable heterogeneity across
counties using a fixed effect (Schlenker and Roberts, 2009; Deschênes and Greenstone, 2011).
The left panel of Figure 3 displays an example realization of cit overlaid on the climate Ci .
The difference between these distributions (black outlines, bottom) is the vector ξit , which
provides our identifying variation.
         Once we empirically estimate the local structure of V (Ci ) by exploiting within-county
variation in cit , we can use these local marginal effects to compute V (Ci +C0 ) via integration
(Equation 15). The right panel of Figure 3 heuristically illustrates how we might apply this
approach to compute the difference in value between the climate of St. Paul, Minnesota and
Orlando, Florida. By tracing a path through adjacent counties from St. Paul to Orlando, we
gradually move through the 16-simplex of C and at each step use local variation in weather
                    ∂V (Ci )
to estimate          ∂cit ,    which we then integrate to determine the shape of the surface from
V (Ci ) to V (Ci+1 ). It is worth noting that the exact path taken from St. Paul to Orlando
should not matter, so long as V (C) is sufficiently smooth and counties are sufficiently “near”
    12
         Note that it need not be the case that E[cit ] = Ci in order to trace out a tangency to the value function.


                                                          16
        Marginal difference between climate & weather vectors
                         (or adjacent climates)                                                                                    St. Paul
                                                                                St. Paul

                                                            Climate at i
   Frequency




                                                                                   continuous marginal changes in climate
   of days                                                  Weather at i
                                                            (or climate at j)




   Frequency                  Difference is marginal
   of days                    change in distribution




  -15   -10     -5     0        5     10     15        20   25      >30
                                                                                Orlando                                                       Orlando
                           Daily temperature (˚C)



Figure 3: (Left) Comparing the average temperature distribution of a county, where bin
heights are Ci , (gray) with a slightly altered distribution resulting from the weather cit (red
outline), which might be identical to Cj for adjacent county j. The difference between these
distributions (black outline) is the identifying variation in temperature distributions (ξit ).
(Right) Example integration path (red) used to compute the difference in value of the climate
in St. Paul, MN versus Orlando, FL (both black). Small histograms illustrate hypothetical
temperature distributions along this path, evolving by almost continuous marginal changes.


one another in C, relative to the curvature of V (C). The more linear V (C) is, the more
reasonable it is to extrapolate between counties distant in C.
4.2      Regression specification
We construct our empirical specification to closely reflect the theoretical structure of the
climate value function. To do this, we combine Equations 10, 13, and 14, setting the
benchmark climate to Ci . Additionally, we allow the overall level of the value function to
depend on a variety of other unobserved location- and time-specific factors zit that may be
unrelated to the climate, such as history and human capital endowments, which affects the
county-specific time-varying constant of integration V (Ci |zit ):
                                                                                                                        Z   Ci +C0it
                                                                                             dV (C)
   Y (Ci + C0it , b∗ ) = V (Ci + C0it ) =                        V (Ci |zit ) +                       · dc
                                                                                  Ci            dc
                                                                                Z Ci +C0 h
                                                                                          it
                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                              ∂V (C)              ∂V (C)
                                                            =    V (Ci |zit ) +               ∂ck=1 , · · · , ∂ck=K
                                                                                                                           · dc
                                                                                  Ci
                                                                                h                              i
                                                            =    V (Ci |zit ) + ∂V   (Ci )
                                                                                  ∂ck=1    ,  · · · , ∂V (Ci )
                                                                                                      ∂ck=K
                                                                                                                 · ξit .      (16)
                                                       C0   →0
                                                       ξit → 0



                                                                           17
The term V (Ci |zit ) is the total income that the economy at i would obtain at time t
conditional on covariates zit if the climate remained at Ci , In the empirical specification,
we model the influence of zit using vectors of county fixed-effects, year fixed-effects, and
an auto-regressive term. The last equality in Eq. 16 is the first-order Taylor expansion
of V (Ci + ξit ) and holds exactly for sufficiently small changes in ξ. The last term in this
line is the inner product between the K-dimensional gradient vector of the value function
evaluated at Ci (the object of interest) and the disturbance vector ξit describing how weather
conditions in county i and time t deviate from Ci .
       Importantly, the marginal product of climate is identified locally, in the neighborhood
of Ci , and it is possible that marginal products at different positions in C are not identical.
This may occur if, for example, populations adapt to climates in ways that alter the local
marginal product (e.g. installing air conditioning). To account for non-constant marginal
effects, we construct a model that is nonlinear in each of the K dimensions of C, which allows
the marginal product of climate to change as a function of the position Ci ∈ C, thereby fully
capturing all effects of adaptation as well the net effect of all other non-linear responses in
the PPF (e.g. Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) or aggregate demand (e.g. Auffhammer, Baylis,
and Hausman, 2017).
       Next, we construct an empirical analog to Equation 16. The dimensions of climate we
consider in our main specification include daily temperature and precipitation distributions
in both the current and past year. Our main focus is on the effect of current temperatures,
however, as these other dimensions of the climate appear to have little effect on the value
function. We also account for within-county autocorrelation, unobserved heterogeneity
across counties, and nonlinear time trends. Specifically, we estimate

                            H
                              "                                                      #
                                Xh                                                  i        Xh                           i
                                                                                                                     g
                                                                                                  ζ n P̃itg + η n P̃i,t−1
                            X
                                           mh
Yit = ρYi,t−1 + µi + θt +              β        (T̃itm )h   +γ   mh       m
                                                                      (T̃i,t−1 )h        +                                  + it ,
                            h=1   m                                                          g
                                                                                                                            (17)
where counties are indexed by i and years are indexed by t. Yit is a measure of output, which
in our main specification is log income per capita. µi is a set of county fixed effects that
account for unobserved constant differences between counties, such as elevation. θt is a set of
year fixed effects that flexibly account for common trends, such as technological innovations
or trends in climate, and year-specific shocks, such as abrupt changes in energy prices. The
model allows the value function to be nonlinear in each dimension (bin) of the temperature
climate up to the order H, which is crucial for fully accounting for adaptation.13 In our
“constant marginal effects model,” we set H = 1, thereby constraining the marginal effect of
a hot day to remain fixed throughout the support of the weather data. We then re-estimate
  13
   We find that the role of precipitation is essentially zero, even in an affine model, so we do not present
models that account for curvature in the precipitation subspace of C.


                                                            18
Equation 17 with H = 3, allowing for independent and asymmetric curvature in every
temperature dimension of C. This allows, for example, the marginal effect of additional hot
days to become larger or smaller depending on whether a location already experiences a
large number of hot days.
       T̃itm is the number of days in county i and year t that have 24-hour average temperatures
(Td ) falling in the mth temperature bin. Each interior temperature bin is 3◦ C wide. We
define T̃itm=1 = the number of days when Td < −15◦ C, T̃itm=2 = the number of days when
Td ∈ [−15, −12)◦ C, T̃itm=3 = the number of days when Td ∈ [−12, −9)◦ C, and so on.14 The
top (m = 17) bin counts days with Td ≥ 30◦ C=86◦ F. The omitted category is the bin
for Td ∈ [12, 15)◦ C = [53.6, 59)◦ F . Daily precipitation bin values P̃ g are defined similarly:
each of the 12 precipitation bins spans 40mm of rainfall equivalent, with the bottom bin
corresponding to no precipitation and the top bin corresponding to precipitation > 400mm
in a day. Because temperatures and precipitation are, on average, serially correlated across
years within a county, we include lagged values for all T̃ m and P̃ g variables to capture any
possible direct effects that weather in the prior year might have on current output. We
explore additional lags (across time and space) in extensions.
       Yi,t−1 is a lagged dependent variable with serial correlation coefficient ρ. Including
this term is important because there is substantial serial correlation in outcomes at the
county level that is not accounted for by common trends. For example, the history of
capital investments within a county affects production in subsequent years. One drawback
of dynamic panel models, such as Equation 17, is that they are inconsistent when lagged
dependent variables and fixed effects are estimated simultaneously by OLS (Nickell, 1981).
However, this drawback is primarily a concern when panel lengths are short (e.g. ≤10
periods). We are not in this hazardous context, as our panel has 43 periods. The magnitude
of potential bias in our case is less than 5% of the magnitude of our point estimate, far
smaller than our uncertainty due to sampling error.15
       Finally, we estimate standard errors that are clustered in two dimensions (Cameron,
Gelbach, and Miller, 2011): within state-by-years and within counties. This approach
accounts for both spatial correlation across contemporary counties within each state and
autocorrelation within each county.16
  14
     For display purposes, coefficients on the two coldest temperature bins (Td < −15◦ C and Td ∈
[−12, −9)◦ C) are not shown in figures. Generally, there are few observations at these extremely cold tem-
peratures, and the estimated effects are highly uncertain and not statistically different from zero.
  15
     Nickell (1981) derives that the bias scales like −(1+ρ)
                                                      (T −1)
                                                             , where T is the number of periods. Based on
our estimate that ρ̂ = 0.825 for log personal income per capita, −(1+ρ)
                                                                  (T −1)
                                                                         is approximately 0.045 in our case.
For completeness, we have also computed estimates without any lagged dependent variable and continue to
obtain our main result (available upon request).
  16
     See Fisher et al. (2012) for a discussion of this technique to account for spatial autocorrelation and
Hsiang (2010) for a discussion of simultaneously accounting for spatial and temporal autocorrelation.



                                                    19
       The coefficients β mh are the parameters of interest, as they characterize the marginal
effect on Y of an additional day in the mth temperature bin, relative to a day with tempera-
tures in the omitted category. In the constant marginal effects model (H = 1), the vector of
coefficient estimates [β̂ m=1 , ...β̂ m=16 ] is directly interpretable as the gradient vector for the
                                                           \
value function, the marginal product of climate dVdC         (C)
                                                                 , as indicated by the inner-product
term in Eq. 16. When we set H = 3 to fully account for adaptation, interpretation becomes
more nuanced. The vector of coefficients (which is now three times longer) can no longer be
directly interpreted as the gradient vector of the value function because the first-order Tay-
lor expansion used in Equation 16 is no longer exact. Instead, the total effect of T̃itm days in
the mth temperature bin is estimated as the polynomial β̂ m1 T̃itm + β̂ m2 (T̃itm )2 + β̂ m3 (T̃itm )3 .
Thus, the marginal effect of each additional day in the mth temperature bin—i.e. mth
           \
element in dVdC
              (C)
                  —is the derivative of this polynomial with respect to the count of days in
the mth bin: β̂ m1 + 2β̂ m2 T̃itm + 3β̂ m3 (T̃itm )2 .
4.3      Data
We use county-level weather and income data for the lower 48 states over the period 1969-
2011.17 To measure daily maximum and minimum temperatures as well as precipitation,
we use surface data from the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).18
We match weather stations to counties using each station’s reported latitude and longitude.
We omit cases where the maximum or minimum temperature exceeds 60◦ C or is lower
than -80◦ C, as these are likely errors. If there are multiple stations within a county, we
average their measures for each day. Our measure of daily temperature is a simple average
between the maximum and minimum temperatures, which is the standard measure for
average temperature during a 24-hour period.19 We drop county-by-year observations that
do not have a complete set of daily observations, as their full daily temperature distribution
is unknown.20
       To measure income, we use Regional Economic Information System (REIS) data, pub-
lished by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The BEA, in turn, uses a variety of
sources to construct these measures.21 The most comprehensive income measure at the
county level is total personal income. It includes all types of labor income; proprietors’
income; dividends, interest, and rent payments; and government transfer payments. A sub-
set of personal income, earnings, includes only wages and salaries, other labor income, and
proprietors’ income. Wages and salaries include tips, commissions, bonuses, and any “pay-
  17
      For additional data details, including summary statistics for key variables, see the Appendix.
  18
      Available from ftp://ftp.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/ghcn/daily/by_year/.
   19
      Diurnal temperatures cycles are roughly sinusoidal, so this is a good approximation for the true mean.
   20
      As discussed in Auffhammer et al. (2013), weather station data is often incomplete due to mechanical
failures or political events.
   21
      For further details, see http://www.bea.gov/regional/pdf/lapi2016.pdf.



                                                         20
in-kind” provided by an employer. They are measured before any deductions are taken and
are derived from reports filed by employers to comply with unemployment insurance laws.
         REIS measures of farm income are derived from United States Department of Agricul-
ture estimates, which are based on sample surveys, Agricultural Census data, and adminis-
trative data. We use cash receipts from marketing crops to capture gross income. We also
examine net farm income, which includes additions to inventories, transfers such as subsi-
dies, crop insurance, and disaster payments (we examine these transfers in the Appendix).
We inflation-adjust all measures to 2011 dollars and convert them to per capita terms.

5         The marginal product of temperature
5.1         Results assuming constant marginal effects
We first present estimates of the marginal product of temperature assuming the value func-
tion V (C) is a flat hyperplane spanning a 16-dimensional C defining all possible contempo-
raneous temperature distributions, i.e. H = 1 in Equation 17. This model provides a good
first-order approximation of the marginal product of temperature.22 In the next section we
demonstrate how allowing for curvature in the value function alters these results.
         The left panel in Figure 4 shows our main result: the marginal product of daily temper-
ature with respect to personal income per capita. Specifically, the figure displays the vector
of coefficient estimates for contemporaneous daily temperatures [β̂ m=1 , ...β̂ m=16 ], which is
                                                            \
exactly equal to the estimated marginal product of climate dVdC
                                                              (C)
                                                                  . Because this vector is
the gradient of V (C), each point estimate β̂ m can be interpreted as the marginal effect
of increasing the annual count of days in that temperature bin by one (Deschênes and
Greenstone, 2011). Implicitly, such a change requires removing a day from the omitted
temperature bin to ensure a valid annual temperature distribution that lies in C.
         We find that counties’ log personal income per capita increases slightly as temperatures
rise from cool to moderate, then declines approximately linearly at temperatures above
15◦ C (59◦ F). Relative to a day with an average temperature of 15◦ C (59◦ F), a day at 29◦ C
(84.2◦ F) lowers annual income by roughly 0.065% (−0.00065 log points). This effect is
highly statistically significant. In the Appendix, we consider the effect of temperature on
the earnings component of personal income and obtain similar, albeit larger, results.
         For a sense of magnitudes, note that if output were uniform across 365 days in a year,
                                               1
then each day would contribute                365   = 0.27% of annual income. In this case, a decline of
0.065% of annual income from an extremely hot day with average temperature of 29◦ C
(84.2◦ F) indicates a productivity loss of roughly 23.6% relative to an average day. Lineariz-
ing the effect of temperature relative to the zero effect at 15◦ C (59◦ F), this is a marginal
                                              −23.6%
change in daily productivity of             (29−15)◦ C   = −1.68%/◦ C = −0.93%/◦ F.
    22
         Our estimates of the effect of rainfall, available upon request, are essentially zero.


                                                           21
                                                    Marginal product of temperature distribution in the current year   Marginal product of temperature distribution in the prior year
                                            0.05
 Log annual total income per capita × 100




                                               0




                                            -0.05




                                             -0.1
                                                                  Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit                                    Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

                                                     15     25         35       45        55        65    75    85      15      25         35       45        55        65    75    85

                                                    -10    -5      0        5        10        15    20    25   >30    -10     -5      0        5        10        15    20    25   >30

                                                                    Daily temperatures in Celsius                                       Daily temperatures in Celsius


Figure 4: The estimated marginal product of contemporaneous (left) and lagged annual
temperature distributions. Ordered point estimates plot elements of the gradient vector
\
dV (C)
  dC . Values can be interpreted as the relative effect of distorting the annual temperature
distribution by increasing the count of days at the indicated temperature by one. Outcome
is log annual total personal income per capita×100 (i.e. percentage points) in US counties
                                                               1
for 1969-2011. For reference, an average day contributes 365      = 0.27% of annual income.
Shaded area denotes 95% confidence intervals for comparisons against the omitted category
T ∈ [12, 15)◦ C. Left and right panels are estimated simultaneously in a single regression
model.


                                            The right panel in Figure 4 displays the estimated effect of daily temperatures on annual
income per capita the following year (γ m in Equation 17). We estimate these effects jointly
with the contemporaneous effect shown in the left panel. Except for the hottest temperature
bin (> 30◦ C), we do not observe any statistically significant effect of daily temperatures on
income the following year. Even this single significant coefficient may be spurious, as we
are testing sixteen coefficients. Alternatively, if interpreted as meaningful, this coefficient
suggests that roughly half of the income loss from the very hottest days is made up in the
following year.23
Persistence A key requirement of our approach is that the weather events we exploit for
identification do not perturb an economy so far from its equilibrium that the Envelope The-
orem is no longer valid. So far, one indication that this assumption holds here is the finding
that changing the temperature of an individual day lowers annual output by only fractions
of a percentage point. A second indication that we now test for is whether the economy
moves back to its initial equilibrium after an economic disturbance triggered by a single
                    23
   In later simulations, we include temperature lags to ensure we do not mis-estimate the effect of high
temperature days.


                                                                                                                22
Estimated effect as percent    100%                                        Log income per capita                                                        Farm income per capita
of contemporaneous effect


                                50%



                                 0%



                               -50%
                                      0      2           4             6           8           10          0            2             4             6            8           10
                                                             Lag (years)                                                                  Lag (years)


                                            AR1 response to any income disturbance in year 0       Distributed lag response to temperature specifically, ten lags per bin:
                                                                                                           21-24˚C            24-27˚C            27-30˚C             >30˚C



Figure 5: The inter-temporal dynamics of temperature effects on personal income and
farm income. All effects are relative to the estimated contemporaneous effect within each
temperature bin. Black lines are the effect of any disturbance to county income in the AR1
benchmark model. Colored lines are estimated lagged effects of temperatures in the top
four bins, using a model that omits the AR1 structure.


hot day. If the economic disturbance persists indefinitely, that might indicate a permanent
change in allocations b, which could in turn indicate a violation of our assumption that
economies are initially at an optimum b∗ (C) determined by their long-run climate. Thus,
we examine the persistence of output effects in the years following a marginal change in the
temperature distribution.
                              We also directly examine whether the effects of temperature changes and any endogenous
responses to them are more or less persistent than those of other idiosyncratic income
changes.24 Estimation of Equation 17 recovers ρ̂ = 0.825 for log personal income per
capita. Thus, an income loss of $1 in county i in year t will result in a conditional income
loss of $0.825 in year t + 1, $0.68 in year t + 2 and so on, relative to the case of no loss in
year t. However, this pattern of auto-correlation is largely identified off of variations in the
idiosyncratic disturbance term  —not from changes in county temperature.
                              To isolate the effects of temperature-induced changes in income, we estimate a variant
of Equation 17 where we replace the lagged dependent variable term (ρYi,t−1 ) with ten
annual lags of each temperature and precipitation bin. If current temperatures affect future
income similarly to other types of income disturbances, then the structure of these lags
should be similar to the negative-exponential structure of persistence indicated by ρ̂Yi,t−1 .
The results for log income per capita, as well as for farm income—which we analyze further
in Section 6—are shown in Figure 5.25 For comparability, all lags are normalized to the
contemporaneous effect of that temperature bin. The thick black line corresponds to the
           24
                              We thank James Stock for this suggestion.
           25
                              See the Appendix for an analogous test of earnings results.



                                                                                            23
repeated exponentiation of the estimated autoregressive coefficient (ρ̂ t , normalized). Thin
colored lines are the lagged effect of a single additional day in the indicated bin.
       The effects of hot days clearly decline over time with an average structure that resembles
the negative exponential decay captured in our auto-regressive model, although the 252 ad-
ditional parameters needed to characterize persistence (9 additional lags for 16 temperature
bins and 12 precipitation bins) cause the unrestricted lagged coefficients on temperature
bins to be much noisier than the baseline model. For total income, the effects of the hottest
three bins decay more rapidly than in the baseline model, a response partly captured in
the baseline model as the delayed positive response from hot temperatures (recall Figure
4). For farm income, the initial persistence of temperature-driven income changes tends to
be substantially lower than in the baseline model, but the ratios for lags larger than three
years are very similar to the autoregressive term (and close to zero).26 Nonetheless, in both
cases we observe effects that are persistent but do not appear to be permanent, supporting
our key assumption that these perturbations are marginal.
       Our finding that changes in the current temperature distribution of a county change the
future income trajectory of that county roughly similarly to the effects of other contempora-
neous income disturbances has two additional implications worth noting. First, this result
provides county-level support for prior country-level findings that temporary climatic condi-
tions alter future economic production, an effect modeled using growth rates in earlier work
(Hsiang, 2010; Dell, Jones, and Olken, 2012; Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015).27 Second,
evidence of any persistence implies that the total NPV cost of a change in the temperature
distribution is larger than the contemporaneous marginal product would suggest. Using a
3% discount rate and ρ̂, a change in total income due a shift in the temperature distribution
produces an NPV of income changes that is 5 times as large as the contemporaneous effects
in Figure 4.28 Below, we do not present this NPV and instead focus on the contempora-
neous marginal product of climate, although we do account for persistence in constructing
economic projections under climate change.
Stationarity of the relationship over time We consider whether the marginal product
of climate has changed appreciably over the time period in our sample (1969-2011). Some
consequences of climatic conditions have surely changed over this period, as have many other
  26
     It is possible that the relatively faster recovery of farm income is due to the particular ways in which
the PPF in agriculture recovers from temperature changes, although some of this recovery is likely due to
crop insurance indemnities paid out as a result of hot temperatures (see the Appendix).
  27
     Prior studies argued that such persistent effects could materialize, for example, if the evolution of durable
non-climatic state variables, such as the rate of investment in the capital stock, is influenced by the climate,
thereby causing historical climate conditions to affect future periods (Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015).
  28                                                                                           P∞ (s−t)
      The NPV of the altered income trajectory is a linear scaling of coefficients by 1−1ρ̂δ :  s=t δ     ∆Yism ≈
P∞ (s−t) (s−t) m           1    m
  s=t δ      ρ̂    β̂ = 1−ρ̂δ β̂ . Using a discount factor δ = 0.97 (implying an annual discount rate of 3%)
and ρ̂ = 0.825, we estimate this scaling factor to be 5.01.



                                                       24
                                                                                        1980-1989




                          Log annual total income per capita × 100
                                                                     0.05
                                                                                                       1970-1979




                                                                         0




                                                                     -0.05
                                                                                                    1990-1999

                                                                                                                2000-2010
                                                                      -0.1

                                                                                    Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
                                                                              15    25      35        45   55     65    75   85

                                                                             -10   -5     0     5   10 15 20 25              >30
                                                                                        Daily temperatures in Celsius


Figure 6: The stationary marginal product of climate over four decades. Figure shows the
gradient of the value function for temperature (as in Figure 4) using decade-long subsamples.


aspects of the US economy. For example, the spread of residential air conditioning appears
to be responsible for reducing heat-related mortality during the last half-century (Barreca
et al., 2016). Meanwhile, other technology, such as the heat-tolerance of maize, remained
essentially stationary during this time (Roberts and Schlenker, 2011). Importantly, prior
analyses that document how sensitivity to climate evolves over time do not account for
the net cost of those adaptations, i.e., opportunity costs due to re-optimization of b∗ , and
they cannot account for the (potentially offsetting) substitutions or complementarities that
inform the full economic value of these changes in equilibrium. By contrast, our estimate
of the gradient in the value function captures all market costs and benefits of adaptations
as well as general equilibrium effects, the net effects of which we can observe over time.
   To that end, we re-estimate the response of income to temperature separately for each
decade. These estimates, shown in Figure 6, are noisier because each relies on a smaller
sample, but they do not differ meaningfully from our pooled estimate or from one another.
In particular, the marginal effect of warm and hot days is essentially constant over time,
demonstrating a remarkable stability of this component of the gradient of the value function.
Importantly, such stability does not imply that welfare-increasing adaptations to tempera-
ture, such as the spread of air conditioning, have not occurred during the last half-century
                                                                                                                   db
in the US (recall that observable adaptive adjustments                                                             dC   may be arbitrarily large in Equa-
tion 12), but it does indicate that the collective net impact of all such adaptations did not
fundamentally alter the marginal product of climate. High temperature days remain costly
and moderate temperatures remain relatively productive even into the twenty-first century.



                                                                                                 25
                                  1st quarter (Jan-Mar)              2nd quarter (Apr-Jun)             3rd quarter (Jul-Sep)             4th quarter (Oct-Dec)
                           0.1
                                                                                                                                .001
 Log annual total income
     per capita × 100




               0             0
                                                                0                                0                                 0
                                                    Pooled
                       -0.1
                                                                                                                               -.001
                           0.1    West                               Midwest                           Northeast                         South
 Log annual total income




 -.0 2                                                       -.002                           -.0 2
     per capita × 100




                                                                                                                               -.002
                             0



                                                                           0                     30                            -.003
                           -0.1




 -.0 4                             25
                                         Daily temperature (℉)


                                         0
                                              45

                                                 10
                                                      65

                                                        20
                                                               85

                                                               >30
                                                                      25

                                                                           0
                                                                                45

                                                                                   10
                                                                                        65

                                                                                          20
                                                                                             -.0 4
                                                                           Daily temperature (℉)
                                                                                                 85

                                                                                                 >30
                                                                                                        25
                                                                                                             Daily temperature (℉)


                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                  45

                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                          65

                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                   85

                                                                                                                                   >30
                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                               Daily temperature (℉)


                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                    45

                                                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                                                            65

                                                                                                                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                     30
                                                                                                                                                                     85

                                                                                                                                                                     >30
                                         Daily temperature (℃)             Daily temperature (℃)             Daily temperature (℃)             Daily temperature (℃)


Figure 7: The marginal effect of climate estimated for sub-periods within each year and
sub-regions of the country, compared to the pooled estimate (dashed, identical to Figure
                                                                                                             0                     30
4). Top row: Effects of temperatures experienced in each quarter of the year (estimated
simultaneously), where annual income is allowed to respond to changes in the tempera-
ture distribution for each quarter separately. Bottom row: Effects of annual temperature
distributions by region (estimated simultaneously).


Seasonal and regional heterogeneity Next, we examine whether the marginal product
of climate varies substantially across seasons by estimating a version of Equation 17 where
we construct a set of temperature bins for each quarter. The results are shown in the
top row of Figure 7. The marginal effects of warm and hot days in the second and third
quarters (roughly corresponding to spring and summer) are extremely similar to each other
and to the pooled estimates. A similar pattern holds for cold days in the first and fourth
quarters. However, we lack precision to make meaningful comparisons between cold days in
the second and third quarters or between hot days in the first and fourth quarters, because
such days are uncommon. Overall, these results show that, for those portions of C with
sufficient data, the marginal product of climate is quite consistent across seasons.
                     Finally, we examine regional heterogeneity in the data. Recall that the marginal product
of climate is the local gradient of the value function V (C), measured in the vicinity of some
position C0 ∈ C. If the local shape of the value function depends on the climate of a location,
the local gradient vector will change as C is traversed, producing curvature in the value
function. Such curvature could result from endogenous adaptations to different climates

                                                                                              26
when populations select different b∗ (C) (e.g. investing in air conditioners), as illustrated in
Figure 2. Curvature in V (C) could also result from features of the income-generating process
that are beyond agents’ control, since the PPF may itself respond nonlinearly to temperature
(e.g. Schlenker and Roberts, 2009) as might aggregate demand (e.g. Auffhammer, Baylis,
and Hausman, 2017). For any of these reasons, if there is such curvature, then the marginal
product of climate will be different for different regions of the country, because counties in
different regions will, on average, be located in different parts of C.
   We examine the marginal product of climate for four major regions of the country, the
West, Midwest, South, and Northeast (as defined by the US Census), searching for prima
facie evidence of curvature in V (C). The results, shown in the bottom row of Figure 7,
indicate that the overall structure of the response to daily temperature distributions is
similar across the country, suggesting that curvature in the value function may exist but
is not dramatic for most temperatures. No regional subsample exhibits a response that is
statistically different from the pooled estimate at any temperature, although the structure
of point estimates at high temperatures provides suggestive evidence that the effect of such
temperatures is not identical everywhere. In particular, high temperatures are most costly
in the Midwest and least costly in the South. In Section 6 we investigate possible reasons
for these differences, but first we consider the structure of curvature in the value function
directly.
5.2    Results for a value function with curvature
We now present results that do not assume the gradient vector of the value function V (C) is
constant, effectively allowing the marginal effect of distorting the temperature distribution
by C0 to depend on the county’s initial position within C. Accounting for curvature in the
value function becomes important if, for example, the marginal effect of additional hot days
declines as a population experiences and adapts to higher numbers of hot days. To estimate
a curved surface, we set H = 3 in Equation 17 such that income is cubic in the count of days
in each bin, allowing the value function to curve in any of its sixteen dimensions. Because
this approach fully accounts for changes in the marginal effect of temperature distributions
due to adaptation, we denote it the “full adaptation model,” in contrast to the previously
estimated “constant marginal effect” model.
   Figure 8 presents the results of these two models for all temperature bins above 15◦ C.
Because the gradient vector of the value function in the full adaptation model is no longer
constant, it cannot be plotted as in earlier sections. Instead, we display the total (non-
marginal) contribution of days within each temperature bin to annual income. Each curve
can be thought of as a one-dimensional cross-section through the 16-dimensional value
function, with the derivative representing the marginal effect of an additional day at that
temperature. For each temperature bin, each individual county will be roughly centered


                                              27
                                                       Cumulative effect on annual income per capita                               In sample distribution
                                              constant marginal effect per day       full adaptation (cubic) model             probability distribution functions
                                                                                                                       .05
                                                                                                                                                                    15-18°C
                                     0                                                                  15-18°C
                                                                   15-18°C
log annual income per capita × 100




                                                                                                                       .04
                                                                                                                                                                    18-21°C
                                     -2
                                                                                                                       .03
                                                                                                                                                                    21-24°C

                                     -4                                                 >30°C                          .08
                                                                                                                                                                    24-27°C
                                                         >30°C                                                          .3
                                     -6                                                                                                                             27-30°C

                                                                                                                        .8
                                                                                                                                                                    >30°C
                                     -8
                                          0                50             100    0               50              100           0              50             100
                                      Count of days in temperature bin           Count of days in temperature bin            Count of days in temperature bin
                                                 (per year)                                 (per year)                                  (per year)


Figure 8: Comparison of the estimated effect of hot temperature days using an approach
that assumes constant marginal effects of days in each temperature bin (H = 1, left) and an
approach that allows income to be a cubic function of the count of days in each temperature
bin (H = 3, middle). Histograms (right) display the empirical distribution of of counts in
each temperature bin across all county-years in our sample. Temperature bin colors are
fixed across all three panels.


at its average count of days in that bin (its climate), with small variations in that count
(weather) contributing to our estimate of the local slope of the corresponding curve at that
position. For reference, the right-most panel displays empirical probability distributions
over the count of days in each temperature bin across our sample of county-years, using the
same color scheme as the center and left panels.
                                     In the constant marginal effects model (left-most panel of Figure 8), annual income
declines linearly in the count of days within each warm or hot temperature bin, with slopes
that are equal to the constant marginal effects in Figure 4. In the full adaptation model
(middle panel of Figure 8) the marginal effects of warm temperatures (15-18◦ C and 18-
21◦ C) are less negative for small counts of days, becoming more negative as counts of days
increase, while the marginal effect of very hot temperatures (27-30◦ C and > 30◦ C) are most
negative for small counts of days. For the “middle-hot” temperature bins (21-24◦ C and
24-27◦ C ) the marginal effects of additional days appear to be essentially constant.
                                     For the 27-30◦ C bin, the convexity is modest, with the first day in this bin reducing
annual incomes by 0.096%, the tenth day reducing income by 0.081%, and the thirtieth
day reducing income by 0.054%. Because almost all county-years experience fewer than



                                                                                                   28
ten days in this category, the in-sample response remains well-approximated by a linear
function. Only for the very hottest bin, where temperatures exceed 30◦ C, does curvature
in the value function have such a large effect that the affine approximation is poor. Having
one such hot day lowers annual income by 0.181% (recall that the average day contributes
roughly 0.274% to annual income); the tenth hot day a year lowers annual income by only
0.125% and the thirtieth lowers income by a still smaller 0.039%. It is worth noting that
over 70% of county-years in our sample have only one or zero days in this bin (right panel of
Figure 8), and only very hot regions of the country have a large number of days with such
high temperatures.29 The flattening out of the value function indicates that these areas
make large adaptive allocations in b∗ such that hot days have limited marginal impact.
       To our knowledge, this estimate of the non-affine 16-dimensional value function rep-
resents the first characterization of the market value of temperature, accounting for all
benefits and costs of adaptive adjustments captured by the market. Importantly, our re-
sults reveal that, for most regions in C currently populated by modern US counties, the
constant marginal effects model is a strikingly good approximation of the curved surface
described by the complete adaptation model. This insight, which we could not have as-
sumed ex ante, is powerful because it allows us to more confidently exploit the constant
marginal effects model when exploring additional heterogeneity in the data, simplifying our
analysis and description of the value function. However, the adaptive responses captured
by curvature in the value function become increasingly relevant as populations move into
regions of C that contain large numbers of hot and very hot days, such as in our projection
of future climate changes impacts. Thus, if marginal effects are assumed to be constant in
these simulations, we will mis-estimate the total effect of warming the climate, which we
demonstrate in Section 7.2.
Note on the sign of forecast bias A “folk theorem” salient in the climate-economics
literature states that climate change projections using econometric estimates that assume
constant marginal effects of temperature represent an “upper bound” for the damage from
warming, since un-modeled adaptations will cause the actual marginal damages from warm-
ing to be smaller. Figure 8 demonstrates that this idea originates from correct theoretical
intuition, in the sense that populations with many hot days adapt to them, but the rea-
soning is incomplete when applied to regression analyses. Focusing on the response to very
hot (> 30◦ C) days for simplicity, we see that the constant marginal effects model does
over-estimate the marginal damage from additional warming relative to the full adaptation
model for highly adapted populations with many (e.g. 40) very hot days—this is consistent
with the intuition of the “folk theorem.” However, the constant marginal effects model also
  29
    There are extremely few county-year observations with more than 50 days above 30◦ C, causing the slope
of the surface above this cutoff to not be statistically different from zero.



                                                   29
under-estimates the marginal damage of warming for cooler and poorly adapted populations
that presently have few very hot days (e.g. 1). The slope of the fully adapted response is
actually steeper at one day above 30◦ C (middle panel) than the constant marginal effects es-
timate (left panel). Because the constant marginal effects model recovers the pooled average
treatment effect in the sample, many cooler locations—which in the US represent the vast
majority of counties—are assigned marginal effects that are too small in magnitude. Thus,
as these numerous counties with very few hot days warm up, they initially descend down
the fully adapted curve much more rapidly than they would descend down the constant
marginal effects line. As we demonstrate in Section 7.2, because most economic activity
in the present-day US occurs in these relatively cool counties, fully accounting for adapta-
tion causes the projected losses from warming to increase relative to projections that use a
constant marginal effects model. The error in the “folk theorem” originates from failing to
account for the influence of historical adaptive behaviors, which are conceptually identical
to the future adaptations it assumes will occur but are already present in modern data.

6     Mechanisms
Next, we try to explore some of the mechanisms that underlie the results presented above
using two strategies. First, we explore the response of different sectors, since sectoral PPFs
may respond to temperature. Second, we stratify counties based on the extent to which
they have made prior investments in durable assets that are thought to be substitutes for
temperature in the economy, namely air-conditioning and urban infrastructure.
6.1    Farm, non-farm, and manufacturing income
In the US, high daily temperatures are known to reduce yields of major crops (Schlenker
and Roberts, 2009)30 as well as to reduce labor productivity among farm workers (Stevens,
2017) and labor supply among workers exposed to outdoor temperatures (Graff Zivin and
Neidell, 2014), which includes manufacturing workers. These responses will necessarily
alter a county’s PPF and thus could, in principle, explain our main finding. However,
these studies alone are not conclusive. If local or regional prices change with temperature,
perhaps in response to concurrent changes in aggregate demand, then changes in production
quantities might not translate into changes in revenue. We cannot observe local prices or
aggregate demand directly, but we can investigate whether temperature-dependence of the
PFF may be contributing to the overall effect of temperature on income by separately
examining its agricultural and non-agricultural components.
    To examine how crop losses contribute to our main result, we repeat our analysis with
log (revenue from crop sales per capita) as the dependent variable. The response function,
  30
     Also see Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994); Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher (2005); Deschênes
and Greenstone (2007); Fisher et al. (2012); Burke and Emerick (2016).



                                                  30
                                                              Income from crops                                                                                       Non-farm income


        Log annual crop income per capita ×100
                                                                                                                                                             0.02
                                                      0.2




                                                                                                                                Log annual non-farm income
                                                                                                                                      per capita × 100
                                                        0                                                                                                       0


                                                      -0.2
                                                                                                                                                             -0.02

                                                      -0.4
                                                                                                                                                             -0.04

                                                      -0.6


                                                              All farm income                                                                                        Non-farm income × manufacturing share
        Annual all farm income per capita (dollars)




                                                       10                                                                                                     0.1




                                                                                                                      Log annual non-farm income
                                                                                                                       per capita × 100 interacted
                                                                                                                       with manufacturing share
                                                        0                                                                                                       0



                                                      -10                                                                                                     -0.1



                                                      -20                                                                                                     -0.2



                                                      -30
                                                                        Daily Temperatures in Fahrenheit                                                                        Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

                                                              15    25       35     45    55     65      75     85                                                   15     25          35       45        55        65    75    85

                                                             -10   -5       0     5   10     15    20      25   >30                                                  -10   -5       0        5        10        15    20    25   >30
                                                                         Daily Temperatures in Celsius                                                                           Daily temperatures in Celsius


Figure 9: The marginal effect of daily average temperature on log income from crops per
capita, net farm income per capita (in levels), log non-farm income per capita, and log
non-farm income per capita interacted with county-level measures of manufacturing income
share (U.S. Census Bureau, 1969-2011).


shown in the top left of Figure 9, exhibits steep declines when daily average temperatures
rise above 27◦ C. This structure is quantitatively similar to the yield response estimated by
Schlenker and Roberts (2009) (see Appendix Figure A6 and the accompanying discussion
for a detailed comparison). Our results suggest that higher crop prices do not meaningfully
offset yield losses caused by high temperatures, perhaps because regional crop markets are
well-integrated and local yield losses do not substantively alter prices. Thus, reductions
in county crop yields as estimated by Schlenker and Roberts (2009) translate essentially
one-for-one into revenue reductions.
      In the bottom left panel of Figure 9, we examine how net farm income per capita in
levels31 responds to daily temperature and estimate that it declines $21.07 for each day
above 30◦ C. The structure of the response differs somewhat from that of crop income: we
observe a fall in net farm income starting at temperatures around 20◦ C. We lack the data
 31
      Net farm income is not analyzed in logs because many observations are negative.



                                                                                                                      31
to test mechanisms that could explain these differences at lower temperatures. However,
the observed structure is broadly consistent with the labor productivity response discussed
below and in Stevens (2017). Alternatively, farmers may be increasing expenditure on
inputs to combat the negative impacts of moderate temperatures on yields. Finally, it is
also possible that other productive factors, such as livestock, respond negatively to these
temperatures.
   We examine the role of temperature in the generation of non-farm income by using log
non-farm income per capita as the dependent variable (top right of Figure 9). Non-farm
income is relatively flat (albeit noisy) at low temperatures and then declines systematically
at temperatures above 15◦ C, the same breakpoint observed for total income. However, the
percentage effect on non-farm income is smaller in magnitude. For example, temperatures
at 25◦ C lower annual non-farm income by only 0.021% relative to 15◦ C, whereas the anal-
ogous loss of annual total income is 0.058%. These non-farm income estimates are broadly
consistent with the labor supply response documented by Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)
(see Appendix for a detailed comparison) as well as with non-agricultural labor productivity
responses from factories and lab experiments (e.g. Parsons, 2014).
   Finally, in part motivated by a century of experiments that implicate temperature in
influencing manufacturing worker productivity (Huntington, 1922; Parsons, 2014), we esti-
mate how the marginal effect of temperature on non-farm income evolves with changes in a
county’s manufacturing share. Specifically, we use County Business Patterns (U.S. Census
Bureau, 1969-2011) to calculate the ratio of manufacturing payroll to total payroll (in 2011
dollars) over the time period 1969–2011. We then add an interaction term between each
temperature bin and manufacturing payroll share to our baseline specification to identify a
component of temperature-related non-farm income variation that projects systematically
onto the spatial distribution of manufacturing. The interacted effects, shown in the bottom
right of Figure 9, indicate an inverted-U shaped relationship between manufacturing income
and daily temperature that peaks around 9-12◦ C (48.2-53.6◦ F) and declines roughly 1% per
1◦ C of warming, the estimated effect of temperature if all non-farm payroll were in manu-
facturing. These results indicate that the net negative effects of cold or hot temperatures
on non-farm income tend to increase with a county’s average manufacturing share, perhaps
due to previously documented effects on the manufacturing PPF via labor productivity.
Notably, the lower optimum could also in part be driven by the effects of temperature on
non-labor factors or on factor reallocations within or across industries.
6.2   Evidence of specific substitutes for climate in production
A complementary strategy for understanding the determinants of the marginal product of
temperature is to examine how allocation decisions embodied by b influence the observed
marginal product. If populations adjust b∗ in response to their temperature distribution


                                             32
while maximizing production, then some factors in b must be effective substitutes for certain
dimensions of C. Optimizing populations will substitute human-made capital for “natural
capital” (Hartwick, 1977; Solow, 1991), where natural capital in this context are dimensions
of Ci .
       To that end, we look for empirical evidence of such behavior by examining how the
marginal product of temperature changes based on the allocation of specific factors thought
to be substitutes for climate.32 Specifically, we consider the effectiveness of two potential
substitutes to climate in the production process: air conditioning and urbanization. The
potential of the former to substitute for climate is intuitive. Urbanization is a more complex
phenomenon that is surely not driven purely or even primarily by the desire to adapt to
climate. Nonetheless, urbanization is likely to alter the effects of climate on the production
process by altering the organization, density, and composition of economic activity in such
a manner that it becomes less affected by temperature (Kahn, 2013; Deschênes et al., 2011).
Air conditioning We classify the counties in our sample into three groups based on resi-
dential air conditioning (AC) penetration rates reported in the 1980 Census:33 (1) 60% or
less, (2) 60–80%, and (3) 80% or more. The last group consists almost exclusively of counties
in Florida, Kansas, Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Texas. We then estimate a version of Equa-
tion 17 where we interact indicators for each of these three groups with contemporaneous
temperature and precipitation bins.
       The results for total income per capita, farm income per capita, and non-farm income
per capita are shown in Figure 10. Counties with AC penetration rates below 60% and
60%-80% show similar susceptibility to high temperatures with respect to total income,
both to each other and to the pooled sample (Panels A-B). Counties with the highest AC
penetration rates, on the other hand, appear to be half as susceptible to such temperatures,
although these estimates are noisier (Panel C).
       The next six panels show separate results for farm and non-farm income. Farm income
responses vary somewhat across these groupings (Panel D-E), but all decline at hot tem-
peratures regardless of AC penetration, presumably because AC does not directly benefit
agriculture. By contrast, non-farm income in counties with the highest AC penetration
exhibit essentially no response temperature (Panel I), while counties with lower AC pene-
tration experience declines in non-farm income with higher temperatures (Panels G-H).
Urbanization Next, we classify counties in our sample as “urban” if a majority of their
population lived in an urban area in 2010, as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau.34 41%
  32
     This exercise examines the gradient of the value function when specific elements in b are held fixed.
  33
     This is last complete cross-sectional survey of AC ownership in the US. See Barreca et al. (2016) for a
detailed discussion.
  34
     To our knowledge, this statistic is not available in earlier years.



                                                    33
                                                  ≤ 60% Residential                   60-80% Residential                    ≥ 80% Residential
                                               air conditioning in 1980             air conditioning in 1980             air conditioning in 1980
                                        0.1
                                               A                                    B                                    C
           Log annual total income
               per capita × 100
                                          0




                                        -0.1

                                         20
                                               D                                    E                                    F
           Annual farm income
           per capita (dollars)




                                          0




                                        -20
           Log annual nonfarm income




                                       0.05
                                               G                                    H                                    I
                per capita × 100




                                          0




                                       -0.05


                                                        Daily temperature (℉)                Daily temperature (℉)                Daily temperature (℉)
                                                   25          45     65      85        25         45     65       85        25        45      65       85

                                                         0      10     20     >30            0       10     20     >30            0       10     20     >30
                                                        Daily temperature (℃)                Daily temperature (℃)                Daily temperature (℃)


Figure 10: Estimated effects on various income measures by 1980 residential air conditioning
penetration, as reported by the 1980 Census. Dashed lines correspond to the pooled estimate
from Figure 4. Results for all subsamples (within a single row) are jointly estimated. Shaded
areas are 95% confidence intervals.


of U.S. counties are “urban” by this definition. As with AC penetration, we interact the
contemporaneous temperature and precipitation bins with urban/rural indicators to esti-
mate two value functions: one that applies to urban counties and one that applies to all
other counties. The results for log total income per capita are shown in Figure 11. Rural
counties are slightly more susceptible than average to the hottest temperatures, although
the differences are not statistically significant (left panel). By contrast, point estimates for
urban areas suggest a lower susceptibility to heat (center panel).
   Additionally, we experiment with an “ultra-urban” category for counties with population
density above the 90th percentile (averaged over the sample). Counties at the top of the
population density distribution also exhibit income losses at warm and hot temperature
(right panel), although effects at the highest temperatures are somewhat reduced.

                                                                                             34
                                   0.1                             Rural                             Urban                      Ultra-urban
                                                      (≤ 50% population                  (> 50% population               (> 90th percentile



         Log annual total income
                                                    lives in urban area)               lives in urban area)             population density)



             per capita × 100       0




                               -0.1
                                              Daily temperature (℉)             Daily temperature (℉)              Daily temperature (℉)
                                         25          45     65      85     25         45     65       85      25        45      65       85

                                               0      10     20     >30         0       10     20     >30          0       10     20     >30
                                              Daily temperature (℃)             Daily temperature (℃)              Daily temperature (℃)


Figure 11: Effect of temperature on income by urbanization status. Results for left and
center panels are jointly estimated. Results for right panel are jointly estimated with coun-
ties below the 90th percentile of population density (not shown). Shaded areas are 95%
confidence intervals. Dashed lines correspond to the pooled estimate from Figure 4.


    Overall, our results suggest that AC penetration is a more important predictor of income
sensitivity to heat than urbanization, although both matter. Because allocation of resources
toward AC is primarily a direct response to warmer temperatures, the costs and benefits of
such allocations will be implicitly captured by the “full adaptation model” that allows the
value function to curve. In the full adaptation model, the reduction of income-sensitivity
with AC adoption is captured by the reduction in marginal effects for hot locations (re-
call Figure 8), to the extent that these investments are driven by climatic conditions. It
is less obvious that the influence of urbanization is explicitly captured in the previously
estimated “full adaptation” value function. Rather, our main estimates simply reflect av-
erage treatment effects integrated over the current (uncorrelated) spatial distribution of
urbanization and climates. Thus, to account for the effects of all endogenous adaptations
to temperature—including AC—as well as for the influence of urbanization in our valua-
tions of the current and future climate (below), we estimate a “full adaptation” version of
the value function that contains seperate curved surfaces for both urban and non-urban
counties.

7    Valuing current and future climates
The stability of our estimates for expected income suggests that most, if not all, county-
level economies lie on a coherent V (C) surface offset by a county-specific constant µi ,
which captures all other county-specific factors. By applying our estimates for the marginal
                    \
product of climate dVdC
                      (C)
                          along a line integral through the climate space C (Equation 15),
we can trace out a non-marginal change in income for county i if the climate were displaced
from an initial value Ci1 to a alternative climate Ci2 , net of all adaptive adjustments in b∗i



                                                                                  35
(which we do not need to observe directly) along the path:
                                                Z   Ci2    \
                                                          dV (C)
                                        ∆Yi =                    dC,
                                                  Ci1      dC

where either Ci1 or Ci2 is the current climate and the other is the counterfactual.
       We compute ∆Y for two counterfactual climates. First, we consider how much current
daily temperature distributions contribute to current production by displacing the climate
of a single benchmark county (Ci1 = C0 ), which provides a common starting point, to the
actual observed climate of each county (Ci2 = Ci ). Second, we gradually distort the current
climate of each county along a “business as usual” climate change scenario and compute
how its productivity changes (relative to its historic climate) through 2100. Throughout, we
use estimates from the autoregressive model. As a robustness check, we have replicated our
valuation of the future climate replacing the autoregressive term by 9 additional weather
lags, as in Figure 5. These loss estimates, available upon request, are generally larger.
7.1      Contribution of temperature to current production
To understand how current temperatures contribute to cross-sectional productivity patterns,
                                              \
we integrate our fully non-linear estimate of dVdC
                                                 (C)
                                                     from the benchmark historical climate
of Lebanon, Kansas (C0 ) to the historical climate of each US county (Ci ), both averaged
over 1968-1990. We choose Lebanon simply because it is the geographic centroid of the
country, making the results of this comparison easy to visualize; the relative contributions
of temperature climates to counties’ economies do not depend on the benchmark county.35
       The left panel in Figure 12 depicts the difference in income between each county and
Lebanon, KS (marked with a black circle) that is attributable to differences in daily tem-
perature distributions. Colors represent the income change a county would exhibit as the
climate of Lebanon is smoothly transitioned to the climate of each county in our pooled
“full adaptation” model. Thus, the map depicts the “height” of the value function evaluated
at historical climates across the country, after all county-specific differences (µi ) and adap-
tive adjustments (b∗ ) have been accounted for. Note that while the underlying model uses
only marginal within-county variation in daily temperature distributions, it yields clear and
sensible non-marginal between-county differences regarding the value of their climates. The
white band of counties, stretching through the corn belt, south of Appalachia, and up to the
Mid-Atlantic states, indicates temperature climates that are similar in economic value to
Lebanon. South of this band, the value of climate declines as the number of low-productivity
hot days increases, with locations along the Gulf Coast losing more than $1000 per capita
(2011 dollars) in annual income, relative to Lebanon. Note that these values fully account
  35
    The choice of benchmark county is unimportant because it is a constant of integration that is differenced
out in cross-county comparisons of ∆Yi .


                                                     36
Figure 12: Value of historical county climates relative to the climate of Lebanon, Kansas
(black circle). The left map uses the third-degree polynomial pooled model. The right map
uses a third-degree polynomial model interacted with a county’s urban status.


for the curvature in V (C), which includes changes in the marginal effect of additional hot
days due to adaptation. North of the white zero-band, counties earn higher incomes due to
their climate, largely due to the reduction or elimination of hot days, with the climate of
locations along the Pacific, Rockies, Great Lakes, and New England generating $500-1000
or more per capita annually.36
    The right panel of of Figure 12 shows an analogous calculation, but one that conditions
the value of the climate on whether a county is urban or not. Using this approach, regional
patterns are largely unchanged, but, consistent with Figure 11, urban locations exhibit
a more muted version of regional patterns. The distribution of urban counties does not
appear systematically correlated with climatic conditions, so we find it useful to think of
this installed urban capital as being determined by some orthogonal optimization that we
do not observe. The pooled model (left panel) can thus be considered the a priori valuation
of each county’s climate if the urban-rural status of each county were unknown, whereas the
stratified model (right panel) is a valuation where the status of current urban investments
is known in advance.
7.2    Production distortions due to future warming
Next, we use 44 different climate change scenarios from Hsiang et al. (2017), constructed to
emulate the probability distribution of global climate sensitivities, to project how output
will change due to future warming in RCP8.5 (“business as usual”) relative to a coun-
  36
     As discussed earlier in footnote 28, accounting for the dynamic effects of these income losses would
increase their magnitude by a factor of 5.



                                                   37
terfactual where temperatures remain at historical levels. For each county, the scenarios
report the expected number of days in each 1-degree-Celsius temperature bin in 2080-2099.
We aggregate this distribution to the 3-degree temperature bins used in our estimates and
use the empirical 1969-1990 distribution of temperatures in each county as the no-climate-
change counterfactual. We assume that warming begins in 1991, is linear in the number of
days in each temperature bin, and converges to the 2080-2099 distribution in 2090 since it
is the midpoint of the interval. This approach smoothly and realistically transitions daily
temperature distributions while maintaining a total count of 365 days in each year of the
projection. We use three discount rates (1%, 3%, and 5%) to probe the sensitivity of the
projections to this important parameter and calculate the net present value (NPV) of lost
income relative to the no-climate-change scenario. We multiply the per-capita estimates by
the county’s actual (t ≤ 2011) or projected population (t > 2011), assuming county-specific
linear population growth.
   We apply the warming projections to the constant marginal effects model and the full
adaptation model, in both cases pooling all counties together. These two simulations allow
us to see the effect of accounting for adaptation costs and benefits. To account for the
estimated substitutability of climate and current urbanization, which is not correlated with
the temperature and thus not accounted for in the full adaptation model, we also create
projections using the full adaptation model interacted with an urban indicator and current
patterns of urbanization are held fixed into the future.
   The spatial distribution of NPV for the median climate trajectory (in terms of the total
income loss) is shown in the first column of panels in Figure 13. The units are billions of
2011 dollars. Rows indicate the specification used to estimate the value function. Here,
we only display the 3% discount rate case. Spatial patterns are essentially unchanged
with different discount rates, although magnitudes become more exaggerated or muted.
Without accounting for non-linearity or heterogeneity (linear model), the largest aggregate
losses from climate change appear concentrated in the Southwest and the Northeast (dark
red). Some Northern states and many counties in Florida also suffer large losses, and
very few counties see income gains (light and dark blue). However, once we allow the
value function to be curved (full adaptation model), more counties, especially in Texas, are
projected to experience income gains as a result of climate change; allowing for urban-rural
heterogeneity produces yet more gains in urban counties in Gulf Coast states. Consistent
with the earlier discussion of the erroneous “folk theorem,” allowing for curvature in the
value function increases damage projections for initially cool counties, such as the Northeast
and Midwest. This occurs because the value function for these counties becomes steeper
when the relatively flat marginal effects of Southern states are no longer pooled with these
cooler locations (recall Figure 8). Because economic production is more heavily concentrated


                                             38
39
     Figure 13: Outcome variable specified above each column. Projections in the rightmost column combine estimates from models
     specified by row headings with 44 model projections for 2080-2099 from Hsiang et al. (2017). Maps show the spatial distribution
     of the net present value of income losses for the median climate projection, as measured by the estimated impact in 2099.
Table 1: Probability distribution of the net present value of national income
losses due to “business as usual” climate change (RCP8.5) through the year
2099

                                      (1)                 (2)                 (3)
            Discount rate:            1%                  3%                  5%

                                        Panel A: constant marginal effects model,
                                                    no heterogeneity

            10th percentile          -43.54              -18.93             -13.55
            25th percentile          -37.44              -16.33              -11.7
            Median                   -31.52               -13.7               -9.8
            75th percentile           -26.5               -11.5              -8.22
            90th percentile          -22.19               -9.61              -6.86

                                         Panel B: “full adaptation” cubic model,
                                                    no heterogeneity

            10th percentile          -60.41              -25.37             -18.17
            25th percentile          -46.44              -20.94             -15.43
            Median                   -38.96              -17.87              -13.3
            75th percentile          -31.48              -15.55             -11.61
            90th percentile          -26.01              -11.98              -8.82

                                         Panel C: “full adaptation” cubic model,
                                                urban-rural heterogeneity

            10th percentile          -27.32              -10.36              -7.15
            25th percentile          -18.26                -7.9              -5.79
            Median                   -13.47               -6.74              -5.16
            75th percentile          -10.62               -5.35               -4.1
            90th percentile           -9.11               -4.65              -3.51

            Discount rate shown above each column. Values are in trillions of US 2011 dollars.


in the North, allowing for adaptation by letting marginal damages vary by climate has the
net effect of increasing total national income losses.
   In contrast, projected changes in farm income (second column of panels in Figure 13)
are extremely similar across the three sets of estimates—consistent with our finding and
the findings of others that some adaptation technologies, such as AC, do not play a major
role in agriculture (e.g. Roberts and Schlenker, 2011; Burke and Emerick, 2016). Very few
counties are projected to gain agricultural income as a result of climate change. The largest
losses are again concentrated in the Southwest, Northeast, and Florida. Comparing the two


                                                 40
columns, we see that while farm income losses contribute to total income losses, they do not
fully explain their magnitude, especially once heterogeneity and non-linearity are accounted
for. Non-agricultural losses thus play a major role in the projected reductions in economic
output, consistent with prior country-level results (Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015).
   The third column of Figure 13 shows how aggregate income losses (as a percent of annual
income) evolve over time across the 44 climate projections. By definition, income losses are
zero in 1990. In the linear model, losses grow linearly between 1991 and 2099 and range from
3.8% to 12.2% of the no-climate-change counterfactual income in 2099. The median scenario
predicts income losses of 6.3% in 2099. Both projections based on cubic estimates (with and
without urban-rural heterogeneity) display non-linear and non-monotonic patterns and a
wider distribution of projected income losses by 2099. Without accounting for urban-rural
heterogeneity, 2099 losses range from 4.4% to 36% of income (median is 8.0%). Accounting
for such heterogeneity reduces the magnitude of the lower and upper bound of losses to
0.98% and 31%, respectively, and shifts the median to 3.4%.
   In Table 1 we present a summary of the distribution of the NPV of aggregate income
losses across all 44 climate projections using each of the three models for the value function
and three different annual discount rates (1%, 3%, and 5%). Units are in trillions of US
2011 dollars. Panel A shows estimates using the constant marginal effects model. With a
3% discount rate, the median NPV of income loss is $13.7 trillion (2011 dollars). At the
10th percentile of the distribution, losses are almost $19 trillion, and at the 90th percentile
losses are estimated at $9.6 trillion (higher percentiles are more positive). The NPV of
losses is more than two times larger when we use a discount rate of 1% rather than 3%.
Conversely, using a rate of 5% yields losses that are about one-quarter to one-third lower.
   Accounting for adaptation by allowing for a cubic relationship between income and the
number of days in a temperature bin (Panel B) increases income loss estimates. As discussed
above, this occurs because the marginal effects of warming for the high temperature bins
are negatively correlated with counties’ overall economic output. However, adding urban-
rural heterogeneity while still allowing for a cubic relationship (Panel C) reduces projected
losses, yielding the smallest loss estimates. This adjustment substantially reduces total costs
because economic activity is concentrated in urban counties, and allowing for heterogeneity
reduces marginal damage from warming in these counties. Specifically, the median NPV
of income losses is $6.7 trillion at a 3% discount rate and ranges from $4.7 trillion at the
90th percentile to $10 trillion at the 10th percentile. Varying the discount rate affects the
estimates in Panels B and C similarly to Panel A.




                                              41
8         Discussion
Previous analyses of how an economy is influenced by its climate have struggled to simulta-
neously account for unobservable factors that differ across locations and the overall impact,
net of costs, of adaptive adjustments. Here we developed a general reformulation of the
problem that delivers both with respect to the role of the climate in economic production.
Applying this approach to estimate the role of daily temperature distributions for market
output in the modern US, we recover the marginal product of climate and demonstrate how
it can be integrated to recover the overall impact of non-marginal climate changes.
         There are several limitations to our analysis. First, our results depend on competative
markets being efficient in the long run, following Arrow and Debreu (1954). For example,
we assume agents have perfect information about the climate they inhabit, that capital
can be rented at annualized costs, and that if there are profitable opportunities they will
be seized. Without these assumptions, our Envelope Theorem result, which depends on
firms optimizing and markets clearing, may no longer hold exactly. Future work should
examine how market distortions, imperfect information, and the incomplete rationality of
decision-makers may alter these findings.
         It is also important to note that our estimates capture only the impact of shifting
temperature distributions. Any present or future influence of other climatic factors—such
as storm frequencies, sea levels, or drought—are omitted. In principle, it is straightforward
to extend this approach to additional dimensions of the climate, something we view as an
avenue for future work.
         We also assume that disturbances due to weather are “small” such that they do not
move the economy “too far” from its equilibrium. This assumption guarantees that the
Envelope Theorem holds, and its validity depends on the spatial and temporal scale of
analysis as well as how weather and climate relate to the economy. We chose to demonstrate
our approach using annual distributions of daily temperature, described with temperature
bins, in part because perturbing an annual temperature distributions by shifting a few
days from one bin to the next is plausibly a “small” perturbation in an otherwise large
space of possible temperature distributions.37 This notion is confirmed by our finding
that shifting individual days results in only fractional and temporary changes in annual
percentages of income. Yet this assumption might not necessarily hold for all dimensions
of climate—for example, hurricanes and mega-droughts may not be sufficiently “small”
economic perturbations for our approach to be applicable (Hornbeck, 2012; Deryugina,
Kawano, and Levitt, forthcoming).
         Importantly, our results do not represent welfare effects. Our focus is characterizing the
    37
         The size of this space, in terms of dimension, can be controlled by using more or fewer bins.



                                                         42
contribution of the temperature climate to aggregate economic production, as captured by
total market revenue. Other analyses consider the economic value of the climate in welfare
terms (e.g. by using an Integrated Assessment Model) and/or account for non-market
effects, such as increasing economic inequality, degraded ecosystems, higher crime, or the
loss of life (Anthoff, Hepburn, and Tol, 2009; Hsiang et al., 2017). These factors may be
substantially affected by the temperature climate but are not accounted for in the present
analysis beyond any influence they have on the structure of the PPF or aggregate demand.
   One of the contributions of our analysis is to account for all of the allocative adjustments
made within a macroeconomy to cope with a change in the same county’s climate. Our em-
pirical implementation focuses on a large number of “small” macroeconomies, US counties,
within which a large number of possible allocations exist. There is, however, interest in
allocative adjustments across larger spatial scales, such as the reallocation of production or
labor (via migration) across regions (Desmet and Rossi-Hansberg, 2015; Costinot, Donald-
son, and Smith, 2016; Dingel, Hsiang, and Meng, 2017; Desmet et al., 2017). Our theoretical
analysis is also directly relevant for these larger scales, as the domain of the macroeconomy
under consideration can be expanded to contain a larger region with no other adjustment
needed (e.g. Burke, Hsiang, and Miguel, 2015).
   Finally, it is crucial to acknowledge that future, unknowable technological innovations
that may affect the marginal product of climate are unlikely to be captured in our em-
pirical analysis. Theoretically, new technologies can be incorporated into our framework
by increasing the dimensionality of B to allow for allocations towards a new type of tech-
nology (which has infinite cost prior to discovery). However, it is not possible for us to
empirically explore the structure of the value function in the subspace of B corresponding
to a not-yet-existent technology. Nonetheless, future innovations might be captured to the
extent that they are represented in the present marketplace. For example, valuations of
assets (e.g. stocks, land values) reflect market beliefs about the future trajectory of tech-
nology and affect allocation decisions within the present market. Additional work should
explore the extent to which current allocations may be informative about the path of future
technologies and their potential role in altering the marginal product of climate.

References
Anthoff, David, Cameron Hepburn, and Richard SJ Tol. 2009. “Equity weighting and the
  marginal damage costs of climate change.” Ecological Economics 68 (3):836–849.
Aroonruengsawat, Anin and Maximilian Auffhammer. 2011. “Impacts of climate change
  on residential electricity consumption: evidence from billing data.” In The Economics of
  climate change: Adaptations past and present. University of Chicago Press, 311–342.
Arrow, Kenneth J and Gerard Debreu. 1954. “Existence of an equilibrium for a competitive
  economy.” Econometrica :265–290.
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Patrick Baylis, and Catherine H Hausman. 2017. “Climate change


                                             43
  is projected to have severe impacts on the frequency and intensity of peak electricity
  demand across the United States.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .
Auffhammer, Maximilian, Solomon Hsiang, Wolfram Schlenker, and Adam Sobel. 2013.
  “Using weather data and climate model output in economic analyses of climate change.”
  Review of Environmental Economics and Policy 7 (2):181–198.
Barreca, Alan, Karen Clay, Olivier Deschênes, Michael Greenstone, and Joseph S. Shapiro.
  2016. “Adapting to Climate Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-
  Mortality Relationship over the Twentieth Century.” Journal of Political Economy .
Burke, Marshall, John Dykema, David B Lobell, Edward Miguel, and Shanker Satyanath.
  2015. “Incorporating Climate Uncertainty into Estimates of Climate Change Impacts.”
  Review of Economics and Statistics .
Burke, Marshall and Kyle Emerick. 2016. “Adaptation to Climate Change: Evidence from
  US Agriculture.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 8 (3):106–40.
Burke, Marshall, Solomon Hsiang, and Edward Miguel. 2015. “Global non-linear effect of
  temperature on economic production.” Nature 527 (7577):235–239.
Cameron, A Colin, Jonah B Gelbach, and Douglas L Miller. 2011. “Robust inference with
  multiway clustering.” Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 29 (2).
Carleton, Tamma A and Solomon M Hsiang. 2016. “Social and economic impacts of cli-
  mate.” Science 353 (6304):aad9837.
Costinot, Arnaud, Dave Donaldson, and Cory Smith. 2016. “Evolving comparative advan-
  tage and the impact of climate change in agricultural markets: Evidence from 1.7 million
  fields around the world.” Journal of Political Economy 124 (1):205–248.
Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. “Temperature Shocks and
  Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century.” American Economic Journal:
  Macroeconomics 4 (3):66–95.
———. 2013. “What Do We Learn from the Weather? The New Climate-Economy Liter-
  ature.” Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.
Deryugina, T. 2017. “The Fiscal Cost of Hurricanes: Disaster Aid Versus Social Insurance.”
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy .
Deryugina, Tatyana, Laura Kawano, and Steven Levitt. forthcoming. “The Economic Im-
  pact of Hurricane Katrina on its Victims: Evidence from Individual Tax Returns.” Amer-
  ican Economic Journal: Applied Economics .
Deschênes, Olivier, Robin Burgess, David Donaldson, and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Cli-
  mate Change and Mortality in India.” Mimeo .
Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone. 2007. “The Economic Impacts of Climate
  Change: Evidence from Agricultural Output and Random Fluctuations in Weather.”
  American Economic Review 97:354–385.
Deschênes, Olivier and Michael Greenstone. 2011. “Climate Change, Mortality, and Adap-
  tation: Evidence from Annual Fluctuations in Weather in the US.” American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 3 (4):152–85.
Desmet, Klaus, Robert Kopp, David Nagy, Michael Oppenheimer, and Estban Rossi-
  Hansberg. 2017. “Dynamic Geography of the Population and Economic Response to
  Sea Level Rise.” Mimeo .
Desmet, Klaus and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. 2015. “On the spatial economic impact of
  global warming.” Journal of Urban Economics 88:16–37.
Dingel, Jonathan, Solomon Hsiang, and Kyle Meng. 2017. “The Spatial Structure of En-
  dowments, Trade, and Inequality: Evidence from the Global Climate.” Mimeo .
Fisher, Anthony C, W Michael Hanemann, Michael J Roberts, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2012.
  “The economic impacts of climate change: evidence from agricultural output and random
  fluctuations in weather: comment.” The American Economic Review 102 (7):3749–3760.


                                           44
Graff Zivin, Joshua and Matthew Neidell. 2014. “Temperature and the allocation of time:
  Implications for climate change.” Journal of Labor Economics 32 (1):1–26.
Guo, Christopher and Christopher Costello. 2013. “The value of adaption: Climate change
  and timberland management.” J. of Env Econ and Management 65 (3):452–468.
Hartwick, John M. 1977. “Intergenerational equity and the investing of rents from ex-
  haustible resources.” The American Economic Review :972–974.
Healy, Andrew and Neil Malhotra. 2009. “Myopic Voters and Natural Disaster Policy.”
  American Political Science Review 103 (03):387–406.
Hornbeck, Richard. 2012. “The Enduring Impact of the American Dust Bowl: Short-and
  Long-Run Adjustments to Environmental Catastrophe.” The American Economic Review
  102 (4):1477–1507.
Houser, Trevor, Robert Kopp, Solomon Hsiang, Michael Delgado, Amir Jina, Kate Larsen,
  Michael Mastrandrea, Shashank Mohan, Robert Muir-Wood, DJ Rasmussen, James Ris-
  ing, and Paul Wilson. 2015. American Climate Prospectus: Economic Risks in the United
  States. Columbia University Press.
Hsiang, Solomon. 2010. “Temperatures and Cyclones strongly associated with economic
  production in the Caribbean and Central America.” Proceedings of the National Academy
  of Sciences 107 (35):15367–15372.
———. 2016. “Climate econometrics.” Annual Rev of Resource Econ 8:43–75.
Hsiang, Solomon, Robert Kopp, Amir Jina, James Rising, Michael Delgado, Shashank
  Mohan, DJ Rasmussen, Robert Muir-Wood, Paul Wilson, Michael Oppenheimer, Kate
  Larsen, and Trevor Houser. 2017. “Estimating economic damage from climate change in
  the United States.” Science 356 (6345):1362–1369.
Hsiang, Solomon and Daiju Narita. 2012. “Adaptation to Cyclone Risk: Evidence from the
  Global Cross-Section.” Climate Change Economics 3 (2).
Hsiang, Solomon M and Marshall Burke. 2014. “Climate, conflict, and social stability: what
  does the evidence say?” Climatic Change 123 (1):39–55.
Huntington, Ellsworth. 1922. Civilization and climate. Yale University Press.
Kahn, M. 2013. Climatopolis: how our cities will thrive in the hotter future. Basic Books.
Kelly, David L, Charles D Kolstad, and Glenn T Mitchell. 2005. “Adjustment costs from
  environmental change.” Journal of Environmental Econ and Management 50 (3):468–495.
Koopmans, Tjalling C. 1957. “Allocation of resources and the price system.” In Three
  Essays on The State of Economic Science, chap. 1. Oxford: McGraw-Hill, 4–40.
Mackworth, Norman H. 1946. “Effects of Heat on Wireless Telegraphy Operators Hearing
  and Recording Morse Messages.” British Journal of Industrial Medicine 3:143–158.
Mendelsohn, Robert, William D. Nordhaus, and Daigee Shaw. 1994. “The Impact of Global
  Warming on Agriculture: A Ricardian Analysis.” The American Economic Rev :753–771.
Nickell, Stephen. 1981. “Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects.” Econometrica :1417–
  1426.
Parsons, Ken. 2014. Human thermal environments: the effects of hot, moderate, and cold
  environments on human health, comfort, and performance. CRC press.
Roberts, Michael J. and Wolfram Schlenker. 2011. The Evolution of Heat Tolerance of
  Corn: Implications for Climate Change. University of Chicago Press, 225–251.
Schlenker, W, W Hanemann, and A Fisher. 2005. “Will U.S. Agriculture Really Benefit
  from Global Warming? Accounting for Irrigation in the Hedonic Approach.” American
  Economic Review 95 (1):395–406.
Schlenker, Wolfram, W Michael Hanemann, and Anthony C Fisher. 2006. “The impact of
  global warming on US agriculture: an econometric analysis of optimal growing condi-
  tions.” Review of Economics and statistics 88 (1):113–125.
Schlenker, Wolfram and Michael Roberts. 2009. “Nonlinear temperature effects indicate


                                           45
  severe damages to U.S. crop yields under climate change.” Proceedings of the National
  Academy of Sciences 106 (37):15594–15598.
Schlenker, Wolfram, Michael J Roberts, and David B Lobell. 2013. “US maize adaptability.”
  Nature Climate Change 3 (8):690–691.
Seppanen, Olli, William J Fisk, and QH Lei. 2006. “Effect of temperature on task perfor-
  mance in office environment.” Tech. rep., Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
Solow, Robert. 1991. “Sustainability: an economist’s perspective.” In Economics of the
  Environment, edited by Robert Stavins. W. W. Norton & Company.
Stevens, Andrew. 2017. “Temperature, Wages, and Agricultural Labor Productivity.” .
U.S. Census Bureau. 1969-2011. “County Business Patterns.” Available from https://
  www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp/data.html.




                                           46
Appendix (For Online Publication)
This appendix supplements the main text with the following six sections:

   • A1 - Relationship of this formulation to prior work

   • A2 - Example value function in a two-dimensional climate

   • A3 - Data Appendix

   • A4 - Additional features of the economic response to temperatures

   • A5 - Quantitative comparison of agricultural and non-agricultural effects
      on the PPF

   • A6 - Point estimates for key results

A1      Relationship of this formulation to prior work
Seminal analysis by Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994) attempted to directly estimate
Equation 8 in a cross-sectional nonlinear regression of farm profits on a vector Ĉ that
captured average seasonal temperatures and rainfall. This approach essentially specifies that
average temperatures and rainfall are sufficient statistics to reconstruct, through application
of ψ(.), the full distribution of actual weather c relevant to farm value. If, conditional on
observable characteristics included in the regression (such as soil quality), farms are identical
and only the first moments of temperature and rainfall are relevant to output, then this
approach will recover the shape of V (C) net of all adaptation costs and benefits.
   Schlenker, Hanemann, and Fisher (2006) expanded on this cross-sectional approach by
adopting a more sophisticated structure for ψ(.), whereby degree-days above and below two
specified temperature cutoffs are considered sufficient statistics Ĉ for estimation of V (C).
   Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) raise the concern that that different farm units may
not be comparable, even conditional on observable traits, leading to potential bias in these
earlier regression frameworks. To circumvent this issue, they propose to use a within-
unit panel regression approach that differences out any constant unobserved heterogeneity
between farm units. To implement this, the authors assume Ĉ = cit and then estimate
a version of Equation 8 exploiting random variation in cit . In their implementation, the
authors used first moments in temperature and rainfall to summarize weather, analogous
to Mendelsohn, Nordhaus, and Shaw (1994). A concern raised by later authors was that
endogenous responses to climate changes captured by re-optimization of b∗ (C) would not
be captured in this framework, since farmers can differentiate between temporary changes
in cit and long-term changes in C.


                                               1
   Schlenker and Roberts (2009) and Deschênes and Greenstone (2011) expanded on the
approach of Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) by adopting sophisticated structures for
ψ(.) to capture nonlinear responses of crop yields and human mortality, respectively, to
temperature. These contributions did not directly address adjustments of b∗ (C).
   Analyses by Aroonruengsawat and Auffhammer (2011), Hsiang and Narita (2012), and
Barreca et al. (2016), along with others, built on these contributions by accounting for
some re-optimization of b∗ (C) in a panel framework where the partial effect of cit on the
outcome, in an analog to Equation 8, is estimated directly, allowing this effect to vary as a
function of C—thereby capturing some influence of b∗ (C) by proxy. While this approach
is able to document the presence of adaptive behaviors, it has now been recognized that it
cannot fully capture changes in V (C) because the costs of adjusting factors b is unobserved
by the econometrician (Houser et al., 2015).
   Dell, Jones, and Olken (2012) and Burke and Emerick (2016) also expand on the ap-
proach of Deschênes and Greenstone (2007) by using a long (multi-year) period of obser-
vation t when constructing Ĉ = cit , arguing that the period is sufficiently long that b∗ (C)
would have plausibly adjusted. Neither analysis recovers evidence of such adjustment, con-
cluding that such adjustments are absent. However, even if evidence of adjustment had
been found, it would not be possible to evaluate the costs (and thus net benefits) of these
adaptations.
   Thus, a systematic challenge to evaluating the economic value of climate has been the
inability to simultaneously account for unobservable heterogeneity while also accounting for
adaptive re-optimization of b∗ in a manner that fully accounts for both costs and benefits
(Hsiang, 2016). We solve this challenge in a single framework by carefully constructing the
appropriate ψ(.), allowing for nonlinear adaptation at all points in the distribution of fx (.),
and restricting our analysis to an optimized outcome where short-run marginal changes in
cit exactly identify the marginal effect of long-run changes in C.

A2      Example value function in a two-dimensional climate
We extend the graphical depiction of the value function along a North-South road with
a one-dimensional climate (K = 1, developed in Section 3 and shown in Figure 2) to a
two-dimensional climate (K = 2). We continue to have only one dimension of adaptation
(N = 1). Expansion of the climate space by one dimension is useful for developing intuition
for how this approach generalizes as the dimensionality of C increases. Our actual empirical
implementation for the US explores a 16-dimensional climate with unknown N , making it
more difficult to visualize.
   Consider a ψ(.) such that the probability distribution of daily temperatures in a year is
summarized by a three-bin histogram, shown in Panel A of Figure A1. C1 is the expected



                                               2
              A) Climatological distribution                           B) Income maximization via adaptation
               described by two variables                              conditional on two-dimensional climate
                                                                                                                              Y(C1,C2, b)

                                                                                                                b1 =b*
                                                                     V(C1,C2) = Y(C1,C2 b*(C1,C2 ))

                               C2        C3 =
Probability




                                      1- C1 - C2

                                                   Y(C1,C2,b1)
                   C1
                                                                                                      b2 = b*
                                                   Y(C1,C2,b2)



                                                                 b
                                                                                                                                      C1
                        Daily Temperature
                                                                                                          C2
                                                   Y(C1,C2,bn)
                                                                                                                    C3 = 1- C1 - C2


Figure A1: Application of the Envelope Theorem to valuing climate. (A) An example climate defined by
a three temperature bin histogram, where the probability distribution of outcomes is fully defined by the
mass in two bins (C1 and C2 ). (B) Translucent surfaces are production surfaces over the space (C1 , C2 )
for different values of the control variable b. Production maximizes b = b∗ (C1 , C2 ), such that the opaque
triangle (outlined in blue) is the maximum output for each climate position after adaptation, defining the
value function V (C1 , C2 ). Black surfaces highlight regions of V where two individual surfaces represent the
maximized quantities and are exactly tangent to V (i.e. via the Envelope Theorem).


fraction of days with temperature below a cutoff T̄ . C2 is the expected fraction of days with
temperature above T̄ and below a second cutoff temperature T̄¯. C is the expected fraction            3
of days with temperature above T̄¯ and is fully determined by the first two dimensions of
the climate since C3 = 1 − C1 − C2 . The climate vector is therefore C = (C1 , C2 ). The
space of possible climates is then the unit 2-simplex:

                                     C = {(C1 , C2 ) | C1 , C2 ∈ [0, 1], C1 + C2 ∈ [0, 1]}.

Let there remain only one dimension of possible adaptive adjustment b = b.
              Depicting Y (C, b) = Y (C1 , C2 , b) now requires four dimensions. Panel B of Figure A1
depicts multiple semi-translucent surfaces, each a function over the 2-simplex C, holding a
value of b fixed. The height of the nth surface at a point (C1 , C2 ) is the level of output the
economy would exhibit for the climate (C1 , C2 ) if b = bn . Optimization of output would
lead to selection of b = b∗ (C1 , C2 ) for each position in C, causing the actual economy to
exhibit production that matched the highest surface at each position, corresponding with
the opaque blue-green curved triangle surface that is outlined in blue. This two-dimensional




                                                                       3
                        Table A1: Summary statistics for key variables

                                                            (1)       (2)      (3)      (4)         (5)
                                                           Mean       Std.     Min      Max         Obs
                                                                      Dev.

 Population                                               111,722    341,233    209    9,889,056   76,646
 Personal income per capita                               26,806      8,438    6,356   136,936     76,646
 Non-farm personal income per capita                      16,710     10,549    2,738   336,356     76,646
 Percent of personal income that is non-farm income        61.67      27.53      8       916       76,646
 Percent of personal income that is wage/salary income     45.16      22.59      9       757       76,646
 Percent of personal income that is farm income             5.24       8.66    -235       77       76,646
 Percent of personal income that is rents                  18.15       5.93      2       123       76,646
 Percent of personal income that is transfers              16.88       6.38      2        65       76,646

 Source: Regional Economic Information Systems. Unit of observation is a county-year. All monetary
 amounts are in 2011 dollars.


surface is the value function

                                V (C1 , C2 ) = Y (C1 , C2 , b∗ (C1 , C2 ))

and it is the two-dimensional analog to the one-dimensional blue ridge-line in Figure 2 of the
main text. This curved triangle is the upper envelope of all the production frontiers across
all values of b, where individual surfaces of Y (C1 , C2 , bn ) are exactly tangent to the value
function for those positions in the climate space (C1 , C2 ) where bn = b∗ , as was described
by Equation 13. For example, the black translucent surface labeled Y (C1 , C2 , b2 ) lies below
V for almost all positions in C, but defines the maximum value obtainable for the small
band labeled b2 = b∗ , where the surfaces are exactly tangent. This tangency is the result
of Equation 13, which allows the shape of the value-function to be measured locally by
exploiting two-dimensional perturbations (ξ1 , ξ2 ) caused by weather without consideration
for any adaptive adjustment of b.

A3      Data Appendix
Here, we discuss our data in more detail. Table A1 presents summary statistics for the key
variables in our sample. Recall that wage and salary data in REIS are largely derived from
employers reporting wage and salary payments for the purposes of unemployment insurance.
There are only five industries that are not fully subject to such reporting requirements:
agriculture, railroads, the military, private education, and religious organizations. Other
data are used to infer wages and salaries in the uncovered portions of these industries.
Typically, an employer will report wage and salary payments by county and by industry,
resulting in very accurate county-level estimates. In a few cases, an employer will file an
unemployment insurance report for the whole state, rather than by county. In that case,


                                                    4
the state total will be allocated to counties based on the industry’s share in each county.
   In the REIS data, total personal income is reported on a place-of-residence basis, while
wage and salary payments and other income components are reported by place of work. The
residence adjustment is made using US Census estimates of worker commuting behavior. As
a result, the components of personal income can sometimes exceed total personal income.
   For agricultural income, there exist states where estimates at the state level are allocated
to counties using weights derived from the Census of Agriculture. For some commodities,
Agricultural Census data are interpolated to create intercensal estimates. Because these
procedures may mask some impacts of weather shocks, our estimates for the effects of
temperature on farm income should be viewed as a lower bound.
   We also obtained data on total transfers from government to individuals from the
REIS, the analysis of which is relegated to the next section of this Appendix. These
transfers include unemployment insurance, which in turn consists primarily of standard
state-administered unemployment insurance schemes, but also includes unemployment com-
pensation for federal employees, railroad workers, and veterans. Government transfers also
include income maintenance (which includes Supplemental Security Income, family assis-
tance, and food stamps), retirement and disability insurance benefits, public medical ben-
efits other than Medicare, Medicare, veterans’ benefits, and federal education and training
assistance. In addition, the United States has an extensive crop insurance program that
has been greatly expanded over the past 30 years. Insurance plans are sold by private
companies, but are heavily regulated and reinsured by the US government. We obtain an-
nual county-level data on crop insurance indemnities for the years 1990–2011. These are
publicly available from the Risk Management Agency of the USDA. Finally, Congress has
also passed numerous ad hoc disaster bills to give aid to farmers who suffered crop losses,
regardless of whether they had insurance. County-level crop-related disaster payments for
the years 1990–2010 are from USDA Farm Services Agency administrative data, obtained
through a Freedom of Information Act request.

A4     Additional features of the economic response to temper-
       atures
Here we consider the marginal effect of daily temperature distributions on earnings, trans-
fers, and the effect of temperature in neighboring counties.
Earnings Earnings make up the majority of personal income. In Figure A2 we display the
effect of daily temperature on earnings per capita in current and prior years. Qualitatively,
the structure of the earnings response is very similar to the total income response in Figure
4, although the magnitudes of the point estimates are larger for earnings. Relative to a day
at 15◦ C (59◦ F), a day at 29◦ C (84.2◦ F) lowers annual earnings by roughly 0.11%. Assuming


                                              5
                                             0.05    Effect of current year                                                                                            Effect of prior year
Log annual total earnings per capita × 100




                                                0




                                             -0.05




                                              -0.1




                                             -0.15                                Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit                                                               Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit

                                                      15      25                                 35        45        55        65       75     85                 15      25         35       45        55        65    75    85

                                                     -10    -5                        0                5        10        15       20    25    >30            -10        -5      0        5        10        15    20    25   >30

                                                                                           Daily temperatures in Celsius                                                          Daily temperatures in Celsius



                      Figure A2: Same as Figure 4 in the main text, except for log total earnings per capita.




                                                                                                  100                                                                     Log earnings per capita
                                                                   Estimated effect as percent
                                                                   of contemporaneous effect




                                                                                                      50




                                                                                                       0




                                                                                                  -50

                                                                                                           0                   2              4                   6                  8                  10
                                                                                                                                                    Lag (years)

                                                                                                                      AR1 response to any income disturbance in year 0
                                                                                                           Distributed lag response to temperature specifically, ten lags per bin:
                                                                                                                      21-24˚C                 24-27˚C                  27-30˚C                >30˚C



                      Figure A3: Same as Figure 5 in the main text, except for log total earnings per capita.




                                                                                                                                                  6
uniform output across 365 days, this estimate suggests that the hotter day results in roughly
40.0% lower daily earnings. This represents a linear decline of daily earnings at a rate of
roughly 2.9%/◦ C above 15◦ C. Similar to total income, we see no systematic response of
earnings to daily temperatures in the prior year, except possibly to very hot days with
average temperatures exceeding 30◦ C.
   Figure A3 shows the structure of temperature lags relative to the AR1 response for log
earnings per capita (analogous to Figure 5 in the main text). As before, we focus on the
top four temperature bins and normalize the contemporaneous effects to 100. The results
are very similar to those for log total income per capita: the temperature effect decays
somewhat faster over time relative to other idiosyncratic income shocks, but overall the lag
structures look fairly similar.
Transfers from government Prior studies have found that federal government trans-
fers increase following natural disasters (Healy and Malhotra, 2009; Deryugina, 2017), but
whether temperature changes lead to a systematic change in the distribution of transfers
from the government generally is unknown. In particular, it is plausible that transfers might
offset some income losses due to temperature such that we do not observe them—if such
masking is occurring it would cause us to under-estimate the marginal product of temper-
ature in our main analysis. To examine whether government transfers might be affecting
our estimates, we obtain multiple types of data on transfers, including various types of
unemployment insurance, Medicare, federal crop insurance, and ad hoc disaster transfers
directed by Congress, as described earlier in the Appendix. Figure A4 shows that daily tem-
peratures have no effect on county-level annual transfers from the government (excluding
crop-related payments) or on county-level spending on public medical benefits. However,
we find evidence that ad hoc crop disaster payments increase as a results of very hot days
(> 30◦ C), while crop insurance payouts increase steeply for days that exceed 27◦ C (80.6◦ F).
The latter estimates suggest that county-level farm income losses would be roughly 25%
higher if crop insurance were not available.
Spatial displacement Our model can be generalized to include information on neigh-
bor’s realizations xi+1,t in the construction of county climate Ci or weather cit , if such
measures are economically relevant to production Y at i. One plausibly important mech-
anism through which this could occur is if economic activity is displaced from one county
into neighboring counties when temperatures change. Thus, we examine whether there is
any evidence for spatial displacement of economic activity across county borders due to
temperature by estimating a spatial lag model where income is regressed on the average
count of county-days in each temperature bin within five 100km-wide annuli surrounding
each county (in addition to all controls and temperature measures in our baseline model).
The results for hot temperature bins, shown in Figure A5, indicate that high temperatures

                                               7
                                    0.15    Annual current transfers                                    Public medical benefits
                                            full sample                                                 full sample

                                     0.1
Log dollars per capita × 100




                                    0.05



                                      0



                               -0.05



                                    -0.1           Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit                            Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
                                            15           35           55            75                  15           35           55            75

                                           -10        0           10           20          >30         -10         0          10           20          >30
                                                    Daily temperatures in Celsius                            Daily temperatures in Celsius

                                     10    Disaster payments                                           Crop insurance indemnities
                                           1990-2010 only                                              1990-2010 only
               Dollars per capita




                                      5




                                      0




                                      -5               Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit                            Daily temperatures in Fahrenheit
                                            15           35             55            75                15           35             55            75

                                           -10          0           10           20              >30   -10          0           10           20          >30
                                                        Daily temperatures in Celsius                               Daily temperatures in Celsius


Figure A4: Top left: the effect of daily average temperatures on log total government
transfers to individuals per capita. Top right: same, but for the subset of transfers that
are public medical benefits. Bottom left: the effect of daily temperatures on ad hoc crop
disaster payments per capita (in levels). Bottom right: the effect of daily temperatures on
crop insurance indemnities per capita.




                                                                                                 8
continue to have a negative effect on own income even when accounting for neighbors’ tem-
perature. Further, we do not recover evidence of spatial displacement. If anything, there
is some evidence that high temperatures in neighboring counties have negative effects on a
county’s own income, either because of negative spillovers across counties that experience
high temperature days or because neighbors’ temperatures are a proxy measure for some
other temporary environmental condition that negatively affects income but is not captured
by our benchmark model, such as the length of hot spells.
      As noted in Section 8 in the main text, one approach for addressing the possibility of any
spatial displacement of economic activity is to increase the spatial-scale of aggregation such
that any displacement remains contained within the macroeconomy under consideration.
The primary drawback of such an approach is that it limits the number of observations
available and the extent to which the data span C. A benefit of such an approach is that at
larger scales of aggregation, the Envelope Theorem will hold with increasing accuracy, as
allocative decisions within the economy become increasingly continuous.38 Theoretically,
there is no reason why the entire world economy could not be utilized as the unit of analysis,
thereby capturing the net effect of all possible spatial displacements.

A5        Quantitative comparison of agricultural and non-agricultural
          effects on the PPF
Here, we compare both the structure and magnitude of farm and non-farm incomes’ re-
sponses to temperature (see Figure 9) to earlier results by Schlenker and Roberts (2009)
and Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014). To facilitate comparison, we reproduce the main results
of both studies in Figure A6 (left and right panel, respectively).
      It is worth noting here that Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) obtain data on the quantity
of labor supplied but cannot observe labor effort, i.e. the productivity of labor supplied.
Almost a century of lab studies indicate that the labor productivity response to temperature
is qualitatively similar in structure to the response reported in Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014)
(Mackworth, 1946; Huntington, 1922; Seppanen, Fisk, and Lei, 2006; Parsons, 2014). Thus,
the total labor effects on income may be larger than the estimates in Graff Zivin and Neidell
(2014) suggest, but the overall structure of the response should be similar.
Crop and Farm Income The decline in crop income explains a significant share (but
not all) of our main result for total income: Figure 9 indicated that a 30◦ C day reduces
annual crop income by 0.523% but lowers total income by only 0.076%. This large decline in
crop income is broadly consistent with the magnitude of changes reported by Schlenker and
Roberts (2009), although a direct comparison is difficult because of the difference in how
temperature effects are measured. The estimated effect in Schlenker and Roberts (2009) is
 38
      We thank Michael Roberts for pointing this out.


                                                        9
  A                                      Spatial lag annuli                                   B                              Effect of an additional day at 24−27ºC
                                           (radii in km)
                                                                                                                0.06



                                              400−500                                                           0.04

                                              300−400

                                              200−300                                                           0.02




                                                                                            log points x 100
                   40N                        100−200

                                               0−100                                                              0
    Latitude




                                                                                                               −0.02


                                                                                                               −0.04


                                                                                                               −0.06
                   30N
                                           100W                               90W                                      Own    0−100   100−200    200−300   300−400    400−500
                                                               Longitude                                                                Spatial lag (km)



  C                              Effect of an additional day at 27−30ºC                       D                              Effect of an additional day above 30ºC

                    0.06                                                                                        0.06


                    0.04                                                                                        0.04


                    0.02                                                                                        0.02
log points x 100




                                                                                            log points x 100




                      0                                                                                           0


                   −0.02                                                                                       −0.02


                   −0.04                                                                                       −0.04


                   −0.06                                                                                       −0.06

                           Own   0−100    100−200      200−300     300−400   400−500                                   Own    0−100   100−200    200−300   300−400    400−500
                                            Spatial lag (km)                                                                            Spatial lag (km)



Figure A5: (A) Example of annuli used to construct spatial lags, relative to Stafford,
Kansas (black). (B) Effect on i of each additional day at 24-27◦ C for i and 24-27◦ C days
experienced by j’s at various distances from i. (C) Same but for 27-30◦ C . (D) Same but
for > 30◦ C . All effects in (B)-(D) are estimated simultaneously, along with own effects for
lower temperatures and all controls.




                                                                                       10
                          Crop yields                                                                                      Labor supply (high exposure occupations)
                     0
                                                                                                                      50




                                                                                   Daily high risk labor supplied
                                     maize
 Log crop yield




                  -0.02              soy
                                     cotton                                                                            0




                                                                                             (minutes)
                  -0.04

                                                                                                                     -50
                  -0.06
                               Reproduced from                                                                                  Reproduced from
                  -0.08        Schlenker & Roberts (PNAS, 2009)                                                     -100        Graff Zivin & Neidell (JLE, 2013)

                          0      5       10   15     20    25     30    35   40                                             0      5     10   15   20    25     30    35   40
                                       Hourly Temperatures in Celsius                                                             Daily maximum temperatures in Celsius


Figure A6: Left: Log annual crop yields vs. temperature during growing season for three
major crops, reproduced from Schlenker and Roberts (2009). Yield effects are depicted as
the effect of 24 hours at exact temperatures. Right: Change in minutes of labor supplied
per day for high-risk workers vs daily maximum temperature, reproduced from Graff Zivin
and Neidell (2014). High-risk workers are defined as workers who are likely exposed to
outdoor temperatures (includes manufacturing). Compare to Figure 9 in the main text.


the yield effect of 24 hours at each exact temperature. Because 24 hours at 35◦ C reduces
annual yields by roughly 0.03 log points (an approximate average across the three crops
Schlenker and Roberts (2009) study), one hour at 35◦ C should reduce annual yields by
roughly                       0.03
                               24     = 0.00125 log points. A day with average temperature of 29◦ C might have
roughly one hour at this higher temperature during the day’s peak temperature, and we
estimate that such a day would cause crop income to decline by 0.00187 log points. Thus,
while we cannot make a perfect comparison between these two sets of results, this back-
of-the-envelope calculation is consistent with the hypothesis that high-temperature yield
declines cause a decline in income that is not offset by rising prices.
                  The slightly higher breakpoint of 29-32◦ C in Schlenker and Roberts (2009) and its
steeper decline is likely because the authors use hourly temperature, whereas our analysis
uses daily averages. Because days with 24-hour average temperatures of 27◦ C are likely to
have some hours above 29◦ C, we would expect to observe declines on days with average
temperatures of 27◦ C in our analysis, even if crop yields do not deteriorate until the hourly
temperature reaches 29◦ C. Thus, we interpret our results in Figure 9 as consistent with the
crop yield response reported by Schlenker and Roberts (2009).
Non-Farm Income Our estimated effect of temperature on non-farm income is roughly
four times larger than what one might expect based only on previous labor supply results,
which is consistent with the notion that unmeasured labor productivity effects are com-
parable or larger in magnitude to documented labor supply effects. According to Figure
9 in the main text, a day with an average temperature of 25◦ C causes annual non-farm


                                                                                  11
income to fall by 0.000213 log points, which corresponds to a loss of 7.8% of an average
day’s non-farm output ( 0.000213
                         1/365 = 0.078), relative to the optimum temperature. Maximum
temperatures on such a day might reach low 30’s or even 35◦ C. Based on results reported
by Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014), daily maximum temperatures in this range might result
in a roughly 30-minute drop in labor supply, or 6.5% of the average 7.67 hour workday
among workers who spending a significant amount of time working outdoors. Because these
thermally-vulnerable workers — termed “high risk” in Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) —
constitute 28% of the national workforce (Houser et al. (2015)), a randomly selected worker
would on average supply 1.8% less work on this hot day, which is roughly one fourth of the
7.8% loss of non-farm income that we document.
   As with the crop yield response, the breakpoint documented by Graff Zivin and Neidell
(2014) (∼25◦ C) is a higher temperature than what we observe in non-farm income (15◦ C).
This difference is likely due in part to Graff Zivin and Neidell (2014) using daily maximum
temperature rather than daily average temperature as we do—although the 10◦ C difference
might be too large relative to normal diurnal temperature variations to be fully explained
by this fact alone.39 It is possible that changes in the quality of labor, i.e. the intensive
margin, are responsible for this lower turning point: lab studies summarized in Seppanen,
Fisk, and Lei (2006) and Parsons (2014) indicate that productivity begins to decline at
slightly lower temperatures (∼21-22◦ C). Finally, we also observe that the point estimate for
non-farm income increases in the hottest temperature bin. However, this point estimate is
noisy and is neither statistically different from zero nor from the negative estimate at the
adjacent temperature bin.

A6      Point estimates for key results
The table below present select point estimates for our main models (columns 1-3), for a
model where the dependent variable is log earnings per capita (column 4) and for a model
where we do not apply the log transformation to total income per capita (column 5). All
other estimates are available upon request.
  39
     The average difference between the daily average and maximum temperatures in our sample is about
6.5◦ C. A difference of 10◦ C is slightly above the 90th percentile in that distribution.




                                                 12
                          Table A2: The effect of temperature on income

                       (1)                (2)                (3)               (4)                (5)

                    Personal         Farm income          Non-farm           Earnings          Personal
                  income (log),                            earnings         (log)×100           income
                      ×100                                (log)×100


 above 30◦ C        -0.076***          -21.01***             -0.0009        -0.123***         -22.19***
                      (0.013)             (3.14)            (0.0104)          (0.020)            (3.47)
 27 to 30◦ C        -0.065***          -15.34***           -0.0159**        -0.109***         -18.46***
                      (0.011)             (2.40)            (0.0065)          (0.017)            (2.88)
 24 to 27◦ C        -0.058***          -11.82***          -0.0213***        -0.087***         -15.65***
                      (0.010)             (2.30)            (0.0059)          (0.016)            (2.71)
 21 to 24◦ C        -0.029***           -6.43***           -0.0119**        -0.039***          -7.54***
                      (0.009)             (1.99)            (0.0054)          (0.014)            (2.38)
 18 to 21◦ C        -0.031***           -5.77***           -0.0118**        -0.038***          -8.40***
                      (0.009)             (1.99)            (0.0053)          (0.014)            (2.48)
 15 to 18◦ C           -0.011              -2.06             -0.0041           -0.007            -3.58*
                      (0.008)             (1.75)            (0.0052)          (0.013)            (2.12)
 9 to 12◦ C            -0.004              -1.47            -0.0086*           -0.002             -0.92
                      (0.008)             (1.75)            (0.0051)          (0.012)            (2.19)
 6 to 9◦ C             -0.000              -0.17            -0.0094*           0.008              -1.66
                      (0.008)             (1.70)            (0.0053)          (0.012)            (2.25)
 3 to 6◦ C             -0.007              -1.86              0.0010           -0.009             -3.12
                      (0.009)             (1.95)            (0.0057)          (0.013)            (2.46)
 0 to 3◦ C             -0.012              -3.18             -0.0042           -0.018             -3.93
                      (0.009)             (1.98)            (0.0060)          (0.015)            (2.60)
 -3 to 0◦ C           -0.020*            -4.44**          -0.0174***         -0.039**           -5.50**
                      (0.010)             (2.24)            (0.0065)          (0.016)            (2.79)
 -6 to -3◦ C        -0.032***            -6.58**              0.0003          -0.035*         -10.42***
                      (0.012)             (2.65)            (0.0079)          (0.018)            (3.28)
 -9 to -6◦ C         -0.027**              -3.90             -0.0010           -0.019           -7.86**
                      (0.012)             (2.91)            (0.0088)          (0.020)            (3.55)
 -12 to -9◦ C          -0.014              -2.48             -0.0108           -0.024             -2.59
                      (0.017)             (3.61)            (0.0100)          (0.026)            (4.62)
 -15 to -12◦ C          0.013              3.50               0.0172           0.001              5.17
                      (0.027)             (6.38)            (0.0140)          (0.044)            (7.32)
 below -15◦ C           0.023              8.59              -0.0112           0.038              7.10
                      (0.027)             (6.36)            (0.0096)          (0.042)            (7.01)
 Observations         76,576            76,576             76,576            76,573             76,576
 R-squared            0.587              0.26              0.8534             0.618              0.70


Significance levels: * 10 percent, ** 5 percent, *** 1 percent. Standard errors (in parentheses) clustered by
county and by state-year. All outcomes are in dollars per capita, with columns indicating whether a log
transformation was applied. Controls include year and county fixed effects, lagged weather variables and
the lagged dependent variable. Omitted category is 12-15◦ C.




                                                     13
