                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  VENTURE CAPITAL INVESTMENTS AND MERGER AND ACQUISITION ACTIVITY
                         AROUND THE WORLD

                                     Gordon M. Phillips
                                      Alexei Zhdanov

                                     Working Paper 24082
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24082


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 2017




We thank Tom Blaisdell, Laurent Fresard, Karl Lins, Merih Sevilir and seminar participants at
the University of Hong Kong, HKUST, Indiana University and Michigan State University for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Gordon M. Phillips and Alexei Zhdanov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Venture Capital Investments and Merger and Acquisition Activity Around the World
Gordon M. Phillips and Alexei Zhdanov
NBER Working Paper No. 24082
November 2017
JEL No. G3,G34,L12,O3,O31,O34

                                         ABSTRACT

We examine the relation between venture capital (VC) investments and mergers and acquisitions
(M&A) activity around the world. We find evidence of a strong positive association between VC
investments and lagged M&A activity, consistent with the hypothesis that an active M&A market
provides viable exit opportunities for VC companies and therefore incentivizes them to engage in
more deals. We also explore the effects of country-level pro-takeover legislation passed
internationally (positive shocks), and US state-level antitakeover business combination laws
(negative shocks), on VC activity. We find significant post-law changes in VC activity. VC
activity intensifies after enactment of country-level takeover friendly legislation and decreases
following passage of state antitakeover laws in the U.S.


Gordon M. Phillips
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com

Alexei Zhdanov
Penn State University
State College, PA 16802
auz15@psu.edu
1. Introduction

       Venture capital funding is important to many small innovative firms, allowing them to
survive and prosper. In this paper, we study the interaction of the merger market with venture
capital in a sample of 48 countries around the world. The impact of mergers on innovation
overall is a large topic of debate. Many government agencies and academic scholars worry that
the M&A market may hinder the incentives for innovation.1 In particular, the Department
of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission have challenged many mergers based on the
concern that mergers destroy the incentives to innovate. In a recent paper, Gilbert and
Green (2015) show that between 2004 and 2014, 33.2 % of mergers were challenged due
to alleged harm to innovation. Furthermore, starting in 2010, the DOJ and FTC formally
and explicitly addressed innovation in their merger guidelines.2 Waller and Sag (2015) also
emphasize the importance of considering post-merger incentives for future innovation, but
argue that a merger can decrease incentives to innovate by removing the threat of outside
disruption.

       We argue that active M&A markets promote innovation investments and make it easier for
venture capitalists to monetize their investment by selling their portfolio companies to poten-
tial acquirers. We examine VC investments following M&A activity and also VC investments
subsequent to passage of pro-takeover and anti-takeover legislation. While mergers of firms
that are horizontally competing may indeed reduce innovation, general policies where a large
firm is prevented from buying a smaller firm may have deleterious effects on the ex ante incen-
tives to conduct R&D by the smaller firm, as has been emphasized by Phillips and Zhdanov
(2013). This argument is further supported by Bena and Li (2014), who show that large com-
panies with low R&D expenditures are more likely to be acquirers, and argue that synergies
obtained from combining innovation capabilities are important drivers of acquisitions.

       We begin our analysis by examining how VC investments over the period of 1985 to 2014
respond to changes in M&A activity, while controlling for other potential determinants of VC
   1
     See Schulz (2007) for a literature review on mergers and innovation.
   2
    These challenges existed in previous periods as well. Gilbert (2007) gives summary statistics that show
that in 2000-2003, 38% of the mergers challenged in the U.S. were challenged due to alleged harm to innovation.

                                                      1
activity. Our results confirm that there exists a strong positive association between activity
in M&A markets and subsequent investments by VC firms. We then look deeper into the
dynamics of VC and M&A activities and perform additional tests to understand the relation
between VC and M&A activity. To begin, we follow Harford (2005) and construct merger
wave indicators for both VC and M&A markets. For this purpose, we take the total number
of deals in a country-industry and simulate 1000 deal distributions by randomly assigning
deals over our time period of 1985-2014. We then calculate the highest two-year transaction
concentration from each of the 1000 draws. If the actual number of transactions in a two year
period exceeds the 95th percentile from these simulated distributions, that period is identified
as a wave. We then examine the joint timing of VC and M&A waves and find that an M&A
wave is a strong predictor of a future VC wave in the same country-industry.

   While there is a strong correlation between VC activity and lagged M&A activity, it is
important to recognize that both VC investments and M&A activity are likely to be driven
by common demand shocks and technological changes. We partially address the potential
endogeneity concern that both types of activity can be simultaneously driven by the same
exogenous economic shocks in three different ways. First, we instrument cross-border M&A
activity with local currency depreciations. Following Erel, Liao, and Weisbach (2012) we
argue that a weaker currency makes local companies potentially cheaper acquisition targets
for foreign investors and hence is likely to have a positive effect on cross-border M&A activity.
On the other hand, domestic VC investments may not be affected by the strength of local
currency if a currency depreciation is a sign of weakened economic activity. We therefore use
local currency depreciation as an instrument for cross-border M&A activity. Our results show
that the cross-border M&A intensity instrumented this way is a strong predictor of future
domestic VC deals consistent with an active M&A market, translating into more potential
exit opportunities for VC investors.

   Second, we take advantage of changes to M&A legislation both at a country level as well
as at a state level in the United States. Country-level pro-takeover legislation was passed in
various countries in our sample in different years with the intention to make M&A markets

                                               2
more attractive. These law changes serve as a natural ground to study the effect of positive
shocks to M&A markets on subsequent activity by VC firms. On the contrary, US based
state-level antitakeover business combination laws provide an opportunity to study the effect
of negative shocks to the feasibility of takeovers.

       We follow Lel and Miller (2015) in the examination of the effects of pro-takeover interna-
tional legislation on firm policies. They focus on managerial discipline and find that following
the enactment of country pro-takeover laws, poorly performing firms experience more frequent
takeovers and have an increased propensity to replace underperforming CEOs.3 They also ver-
ify that country takeover-friendly laws indeed spur more M&A activity in the country. Our
focus is the effect of pro-takeover laws on VC markets. Using a difference-in-difference ap-
proach at the country-industry level we investigate the impact of takeover-friendly legislation
on subsequent VC investments.

       This analysis compares VC investments in countries that are subject to change in takeover
legislation with VC activity in countries that have no such change. In our tests, we control for
time-invariant country and industry characteristics by including country and industry fixed
effects. Time-varying economic conditions that have a potential effect on VC investments
are controlled for by year fixed effects. Our evidence shows increases in VC activity after
pro-takeover laws. VC activity grows by about 40-50% more from pre-law periods to post-law
periods in countries that enact pro-takeover laws versus those that do not. This evidence pro-
vides support for our hypothesis that M&A and VC markets are connected and improvements
in M&A legislation spill over to VC markets by creating more viable exit opportunities for
VC firms.

       Third, we shift our focus to the US and examine the effect of state-level anti-takeover
business combination laws on VC investments in states that enact such laws. These laws
impose a moratorium on certain kinds of transactions (e.g., asset sales, mergers) between a
   3
      See also Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002) on the effect of insider trading laws and their enforcement
around the world, Iliev et al (2015) on the effect of international laws (including M&A laws) on shareholder
voting and corporate governance, and Lins, Servaes, and Tufano (2010) for an international study of the use
of lines of credit versus cash.

                                                     3
large shareholder and the firm for a period usually ranging between three and five years after
the shareholder’s stake passes a pre-specified (minority) threshold. These laws are in place in
28 U.S. States in our sample and were passed between 1985 and 1991. We argue that there are
multiple channels through which the business combination laws might affect VC investments.
First, while intended to protect shareholders from hostile takeovers, business combination laws
can potentially increase the cost to the acquiring firm and have a negative effect on M&A
markets in general. Second, we argue that takeovers (including hostile ones) can result in
more firm creation and hence VC funding as entrepreneurial employees leave to found new
start-up companies. In a context of corporate bankruptcy, Babina (2016) shows that employer
financial distress accelerates the exit of employees to create start-ups. Atanassov (2013) shows
that antitakeover laws have a negative effect on firm’s innovation as measured by patent grants
and citations.

       To study the relation between business combination laws and VC activity, we again employ
a difference-in-difference methodology and examine the difference in VC deal intensity in the
years following an enactment of an antitakeover law in states that pass a law (treatment
states) versus those that did not (control states). Consistent with our hypothesis, our results
show that both the level and growth of VC intensity declines in treatment states relative to
control states after passage of business combination laws.

       Overall, our results emphasize the importance of M&A markets for the investment activ-
ities of VC firms. As many start-ups rely on VC funding4 and venture capitalists rely more
on exits through acquisitions versus IPOs, our results suggest that active M&A markets have
important ex ante incentive effects for generating entrepreneurship and growth. We focus on
the ex ante incentive effects but as a matter of practice actual exits via mergers and trade
sales represent almost 6x the incidence of IPOs.5 Our results are consistent with an active
M&A market providing incentives for venture capitalists to engage in more deals.
   4
      See also Hellman and Puri (2002) who show that involvement of VC firms enhances the professionalization
of start-ups.
    5
      Using Prequin data which has data on exits, we find that mergers and trade sales represent 76.61% of
exits versus 13.74% via IPOs. The balance of actual exits were through sales to other GPs or management,
private placements and recapitalizations.

                                                     4
   Our paper examines the joint dynamics of M&A and VC activities and is therefore related
to both the merger literatures and the VC literatures. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first paper that studies the joint dynamics of both M&A and VC transactions. We
go beyond just US-based evidence to provide international evidence on time varying VC and
M&A markets. Gompers and Lerner (2004) provide extensive evidence of time-variability of
VC investments as well as fund flows to VC firms. Gompers, Kovner, Lerner and Scharfstein
(2008) examine the relation between changes in public market signals and VC activity and
document wave-like patterns of VC activity in the US. These papers focus solely on the US
and do not examine the link between VC activity and acquisition activity. Robinson and
Sensoy (2016) examine the cyclicality of cash flows and performance in private equity and VC
markets. Lerner, Schoar, Sokolinksi, and Wilson (2016) study the activity of angel investors in
21 countries. Dittmar and Dittmar (2008) study the joint relation between share repurchases,
equity issuance, and mergers. Lyandres, Zhdanov, and Hsieh (2013) present a theory and
evidence of the joint dynamics of IPO and M&A activities. Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani
(2010) and Hovakimian and Hutton (2010) examine various motives for potential relation
between M&A and IPO waves. Our analysis extends the literature by moving beyond US
data to examine a sample of 48 different countries around the world. We also study the link
between M&A and VC activity. Furthermore, we take advantage of the natural shocks to M&A
markets, both positive (country takeover laws) and negative (US state business combination
laws) and study what happens to subsequent VC activity.

   The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data sources
and the main variables that we use in our analysis. In section 3 we develop our main hypothe-
ses. Section 4 examines the link between M&A and VC markets in a regressions framework,
and also by using an instrumental variable approach while instrumenting cross-border M&A
activity with the strength of the currency in the target country. In that section we also
analyze the joint dynamics of VC and M&A waves. In section 5 we study the effects of coun-
try takeover law initiations on subsequent investments by VC firms. Section 6 examines the
response of VC investments to state antitakeover laws in the US. Section 7 concludes.

                                              5
2. Data and Variables

   We combine data from four major sources. Data on venture capital transactions are ob-
tained from Thomson Reuters Venture Expert. VC data is very limited before the mid 1980s,
and we therefore start our sample in 1985. To ensure that we have a reasonable number
of firms in a country for our cross-sectional country-level tests, we drop countries with less
than 100 total VC deals recorded in Venture Expert. We follow Gompers et al (2008) and
define VC deals at the VC firm - portfolio company level. This approach results in multiple
observations if several VC firms invest in a particular company (in our sample there are on av-
erage around two VC firms per investment). We restrict our sample to Venture Capital Deals,
defined by Venture Expert as “Venture capital investments that include startup/seed, early,
expansion, and later stage deals, or any non venture stage investments made by traditional
venture focused firms.” M&A transaction data come from the Security Data Corporation’s
(SDC) Mergers and Corporate Transaction database and includes all deals (domestic and
cross-border) announced and completed between 1985 and 2014. Similarly to Erel, Liao, and
Weisbach (2012) we exclude LBOs, spinoffs, re-capitalizations, self-tender offers, exchange
offers, repurchases, partial equity stakes, acquisitions of remaining interest, privatizations, as
well as deals in which the target or the acquirer is a government agency. In our main tests
we consider investments in a single portfolio company on the same date as a single VC deal,
even if there are multiple VC firms involved. Our results hold if we treat these investments
by multiple VC firms as multiple deals (see Table A.3 in the appendix). Because we use IPO
activity as a control variable in some of our tests, we obtain IPO data also from Security Data
Corporation. Table 1 presents the distribution of M&A and VC deals by country.




       Insert Table 1 Here


   Following Gompers et al. (2008), we also consider unique VC deals by excluding any
follow-up financing rounds so every venture capital firm - portfolio company pair appears only

                                                6
once in the sample of unique deals. Note that based on this definition the number of unique
deals can be both higher and lower than the number of deals (depending on how many VC
firms participate in a single deal and also on the number of financing rounds.) As follows from
Table 1, while the majority of VC deals involves financing of US-based companies (about
60% in our sample of unique deals), there is still substantial VC activity outside of the US,
in particular in Canada, developed European countries (UK, France, Germany) as well as
some emerging Asian markets (China, South Korea). Our resulting dataset contains 201,010
venture capital deals, 226,896 unique VC deals (one deal per venture capital firm - portfolio
company pair) and 397,871 takeover transactions. On the M&A side the US is again not
surprisingly the country with the largest number of deals in our dataset (in excess of 187,000
deals or 47.1% of all deals), followed by the UK (12.4%), Canada (5.7%), Germany (4.7%)
and France (4.6%).

   We collect accounting data for international (US) companies from Worldscope (Compustat)
and return data from Datastream (CRSP). While our main variables of interest are related to
the dynamics of VC investments, we need these accounting data to construct various control
variables that are known to potentially affect M&A and VC activities. We also use the number
of public firms in the Worldscope database as a scaling factor in some measures of M&A and
VC intensities that we use. Our joint public firm dataset spans 66,213 firms across 48 countries.
Of these firms, 24,466 firms are in the US. (Followed by 5,100 firms in Japan and 4,333 firms
in the UK). While COMPUSTAT offers comprehensive coverage of public firms throughout
our sample, consistent Worldscope coverage for developed countries starts in 1990s and does
not start until the early 2000s for many emerging countries (e.g. China.)

   Figure 1 plots the aggregate numbers of VC and M&A deals in the US and in the rest of
the world, by year (Panel A). Panel B of figure 1 further breaks down the international VC
and M&A activity into those in developed and emerging countries, as classified by MSCI. In
both panels, in addition to total VC deals we also present unique VC deals, constructed as




                                               7
described above.


       Insert Figure 1 Here



   As follows from Figure 1, VC activity (as measured by the numbers of both total and
unique deals) exhibits similar time patterns in the US and internationally, with a clear peak
around the 2000 dotcom bubble and subsequent flattening out with an additional peak in the
pre-crisis period and a decline corresponding to the 2008 financial crisis.

   We use SIC2 codes to group firms into industries, resulting in 77 industries. Given the
structure of our data, this industry breakdown provides the optimal degree of coarseness
of the distribution of VC deals by country-industries. There is still, however, substantial
variation in the number of deals within an industry across different countries. To further
reduce noise in our estimation, we exclude country-industry-years with less than three VC
deals in our dataset. As expected, some industries have higher populations of entrepreneurial
firms and attract more attention from VC firms than others, so the resulting distribution
of deals by industries is skewed. The industries with the highest numbers of deals in our
sample are “Business Services,” “Electronic and Other Electric Equipment,” and “Chemical &
Allied Products” (including pharmaceutical products). The industries with least VC deals are
public administration and utilities industries as well as “Tobacco Products” and “Museums,
Botanical, Zoological Gardens.” There is also variation in VC activity within industries over
time. For example, the number of unique deals in the US “Business Services” industry (sic
code 73) grows from 1,123 in 1996 to 3,599 in 2000 (the year when the dot-com bubble burst)
and then goes down to 1,477 in 2003. We formally analyze the presence of waves in VC and
M&A markets and their joint dynamics in section 4.2 below.

   Transaction values are very often missing in Venture Expert and we therefore follow Gom-
pers (2008) and use the number of deals to measure M&A and VC intensities. In particular, we
use two alternative measures of VC and M&A activities. Our first measure captures the level


                                               8
of those activities and is defined as the total number of deals in a country (or country-industry)
scaled by the total number of public firms in that country (country-industry):


      DEALS leveli.j,t = N (Dealsi,j,t )/N (Public Firmsi,j,t ).                              (1)


In equation (1) Dealsi,j,t is the number of VC (M&A) deals in country i, industry j in year t
while Public Firmsi,j,t is the number of public firms available in Worldscope (for international
data) or CRSP (for US data) in the same country-industry-year. In addition to the measures
expressed in levels, we also use the growth in numbers of VC and M&A deals defined as the
percentage change in the number of deals from one year to the next in the same country-
industry:

                               N (Dealsi,j,t )
      DEALS changei,j,t =                       − 1.                                          (2)
                              N (Dealsi,j,t−1 )

In our empirical analysis below we apply these measures to total VC deals, unique VC deals,
as well as M&A transactions.



3. Interaction of M&A and VC Activity


   In this section we describe the main hypotheses we will test in this paper. Our main
objective in this paper is to shed light on the interaction between VC and M&A markets. We
argue that exit through an acquisition provides a viable means for VC firms to monetize their
investments in portfolio companies. We focus on the ex ante incentive effects but actual exits
(not including firms that failed or which no exit data can be found) via mergers and trade
sales represent almost 6x the incidence of IPOs. Using Prequin data which has data on exits,
we find that mergers and trade sales represent 76.61% of exits versus 13.74% via IPOs. The
balance of actual exits were through sales to other GPs or management, private placements
and recapitalizations.



                                                  9
   We argue that venture capitalists are more likely to initiate new investments when the
M&A market heats up and there are more M&A deals. Active M&A markets transpire into
more viable exit opportunities. The challenge is that we recognize that for demand and
technological reasons, these two markets may be very related and thus VC investments may
respond to these demand and technological changes. We are attempting to identify the channel
where VC investors look at the potential for exit from the M&A market and in particular from
related strategic buyers. The first hypothesis we examine does not attempt to discern why
these markets may be related. The second and third hypotheses and associated tests attempt
to isolate the M&A exit channel as a potential motivation for VC investors.

Hypothesis 1: There is a positive association between VC investments and lagged M&A
activity.


   While it is useful to establish a relation between M&A and VC markets, a potential con-
cern is that these two types of activity are driven by common economic shocks - both demand
and technological. Thus, rather than VC deals responding to improvements in M&A markets,
both types of activity might be responding to some changes in the underlying economic en-
vironment. We address this issue by using lags in our regression specifications and including
time and country fixed effects in our regressions. We also perform three additional types of
tests. First, we identify waves in both M&A and VC markets as periods of abnormally high
activity in those markets and study the relation between those two types of waves. The details
on this procedure are presented in section 4.2 below. Second, we use an instrumental variable
approach and instrument cross-border M&A activity with local currency depreciation. In
the second stage, we examine the relation between domestic VC activity and instrumented
cross-border M&A activity.

   Third, to further isolate the M&A exit channel, we also exploit exogenous shocks to M&A
markets. We take advantage of both positive and negative shocks to takeover legislation.
On the positive side, we focus on the staggered enactment of country-level takeover laws.
Such laws are intended to simplify the takeover process and make country legislation more

                                             10
takeover friendly and therefore induce more M&A activity in the future. As Lel and Miller
(2015) argue, legal changes associated with country M&A laws are significant, because they
are passed to foster takeover activity by reducing barriers to M&A transactions and the legal
framework applicable to such transactions. However, there is no obvious direct causation
between enactment of takeover laws and VC activity. Still, we expect that such laws would
have an indirect positive effect on VC investments, as venture capitalists rationally expect
the takeover market to heat up following the passage of takeover laws and provide them with
more exit opportunities. This conjecture is summarized in Hypothesis 2.

Hypothesis 2: VC activity intensifies following the passage of country takeover laws.

   On the negative side, we exploit shocks to takeover legislation in the form of state anti-
takeover business combination laws in the US. We believe that business combination laws are
exogenous to VC activity because they are most likely outside of control of VC firms and also
because they are often lobbied for by specific companies. These laws impose a three to five
year moratorium on certain types of transactions, such as mergers, divestitures, consolida-
tions, share exchanges, leases, transfers, liquidations, dissolutions, and asset sales between the
firm and a large shareholder whose stake in the firm passes a pre-specified threshold. While
their focus is on hostile takeovers, state business combination laws can negatively affect the
M&A markets in general and therefore make potential exit of VC investors through an acqui-
sition less viable. Furthermore, takeovers (both friendly and hostile) might create incentives
for entrepreneurial employees to leave and start their own firms that require funding by VC
companies. An antitakeover law would negatively affect such entrepreneurial activity. We
therefore expect VC activity in a state that passes an antitakeover law to cool down following
enactment of that law.

Hypothesis 3: There is a reduction in VC activity following enactment of state antitakeover
laws.

   The key comparison here is to compare states which pass an antitakeover law in a particular
year with states which do not pass an antitakeover law in the same year. The staggered

                                               11
implementation of the antitakeover laws was used by Bertrand and Mullainathan (2003) and
recently by Giroud and Mueller (2010).



4. VC investments and M&A activity

4.1. Regressions of VC activity


   We first look at the joint dynamics of M&A and VC markets by computing contempora-
neous and lagged correlations between measures of M&A and VC activities. Because IPOs
represent an alternative exit channel for VC investors, we also include measures of IPO activ-
ity in our analysis. We use the measures of M&A, VC, and IPO intensities expressed in both
levels and changes, as specified by equations (1) and (2). Following Gompers et al (2008),
we construct a measure of unique VC deals (by excluding any follow up financing rounds
from the same VC firm in the same portfolio company). Table 2 reports correlations at the
country-industry level. Panel A presents results for percentage changes in the numbers of
deals, while panel B reports correlations between VC, M&A, and IPO transactions scaled by
the number of public firms in the country-industry.


       Insert Table 2 Here


The results in Table 2 show that there is a strong positive and statistically significant correla-
tion between VC activity and both contemporaneous and lagged M&A activity. Correlations
are positive and significant for measures expressed in levels as well as in changes. For example,
contemporaneous (lagged) correlations between percentage growth in VC and M&A deals are
0.094 and 0.051, while similar correlations between the numbers of deals are 0.540 and 0.345,
respectively. Negative correlations between contemporaneous and lagged changes in the num-
ber of deals (-0.195 for VC deals and -0.138 for M&A transactions) are mechanically driven
by scaling our growth measures by the lagged number of deals. Thus, preliminary correlation-
based evidence strongly suggests that M&A and VC markets are not independent and there

                                               12
is a strong association between the two markets. Note also, that correlations between current
VC and lagged M&A activities are higher than those between current M&A and lagged VC
activities, suggesting that in general M&A markets tend to lead. Furthermore, coefficients
on lagged M&A measures are higher than those on lagged IPO measures (in addition, the
correlation between VC growth and lagged IPO growth is insignificant).

   To further investigate the joint dynamics of VC and M&A investments, we turn our analysis
to multivariate tests of the determinants of VC activity. In particular, we adopt the following
empirical specification:


      V Ci,j,t = α + βM Ai,j,t−1 + δXi,j,t−1 + vt + εi,j,t ,                                (3)



   where V Ci,j,t is a measure of VC activity in country i and industry j in year t, M Ai,j,t−1
is a measure of M&A activity in country i and industry j in year t − 1, and Xi,j,t−1 is a vector
of control variables. Year fixed effects are included to absorb the potential impact of global
time-varying economic conditions. To control for serial correlation, we cluster the standard
errors at the country-industry level.

   Following Gompers et al (2008), we use industry lagged CAPEX scaled by total assets (from
all public firms with data available in Worldscope /Compustat) and lagged industry median
market-to-book ratio as control variables. As they argue, both public market valuations as well
as perceived investment opportunities as measured by the market-to-book ratio might trigger
response from venture capitalists. Because IPO markets provide an alternative exit channel
for VC investors, we also include lagged measures of IPO activity as additional controls.

   Table 3 displays results from these VC regressions. In Panel A we use the growth-based
measure of VC activity defined in (2) as the dependent variable. In Panel B the dependent
variable is based on the level of VC activity as defined in (1). Our main independent variable
of interest, lagged M&A activity, is constructed accordingly in terms of changes in Panel A
and in terms of levels in Panel B. In both panels, specifications (1) to (4) are based on all


                                                   13
VC deals, while specifications (5) to (8) include unique VC deals only. Because there are
potentially large variations in lagged M&A growth, we average M&A growth over the last
three years and use it as a dependent variable in Panel C.


       Insert Table 3 Here


Results in Table 3 clearly indicate a positive association between various measures of VC in-
tensity and lagged M&A activity, consistent with our main hypothesis that an active takeover
market provides more viable exit opportunities for venture capitalists and induces more invest-
ment by VC firms. Coefficients on lagged M&A activity are positive and highly statistically
significant in all but the last specification in column (8). Columns (4) and (8) have fewer
observations as these specifications include the change in IPOs and some countries have had
no IPOs and we thus exclude these countries. Coefficients in regressions that include all deals
have similar magnitude than those in regressions with only unique deals, suggesting that im-
provements in the M&A market not only result in more funding of new projects by VC firms,
but also induce more follow-up investments by VC firms in their existing portfolio companies.
Consistent with Gompers et al (2008), who interpret market-to-book ratio as a public signal
about an industry’s investment opportunities, we find a positive association between lagged
industry market-to-book ratios and VC activity. Coefficients on industry market-to-book are
positive and significant for level-based measures of VC intensity in Panel B and also significant
in some specifications in Panel C that uses three year M&A growth as a regressor. Note that
unlike lagged M&A intensity, lagged IPO intensity, while positive, is statistically insignificant
in all specifications.

   In the appendix (Table A1) we replicate results in Table 3 while excluding US deals. Table
A1 shows that the results in Table 3 are not driven solely by US firms, but similar relations
between VC and M&A intensities are found in foreign countries as well. While coefficients on
lagged growth in M&A deals in panel A slightly decline in magnitude and lose significance
in some specifications when excluding US data, the corresponding coefficients for level-based


                                               14
measures are highly significant in regressions on international data.

       We also conduct additional robustness tests regarding the relation between M&A and VC
investments. We show in the appendix in Table A.3 that our results still hold if we treat
investments by multiple VC firms as multiple deals. In Table A.4, we consider whether our
results are driven by M&A exits providing capital to new VC funds, and exclude first time
funds as these VC firms may potentially be funded by M&A exits. The positive relation
between M&A deals and VC investments still remains.

       Overall, the results in Table 3 provide further evidence that M&A and VC markets are
interrelated and there is a positive association between VC activity and lagged M&A intensity,
consistent with Hypothesis 1.


4.2. Analysis of VC and M&A waves


       There is a large literature that argues that many corporate types of activity are spread
unevenly over time in wave-like patterns.6 There is also research that focuses on the re-
lation between various corporate event waves. In particular, Dittmar and Dittmar (2008)
study repurchases, equity issuance, and mergers and their response to GDP growth. Rau
and Stouraitis (2011) examine the timing patterns of IPOs, SEOs, cash and stock financed
acquisitions, as well as stock repurchases. Lyandres, Zhdanov, and Hsieh (2013) present a
theory and evidence of the joint dynamics of IPO and M&A activities. Celikyurt, Sevilir, and
Shivdasani (2010) and Hovakimian and Hutton (2010) examine various motives for potential
relation between M&A and IPO waves.

       In this section we follow this literature and complement our results in section 4.1 by
identifying waves in both VC and M&A markets and studying their joint time patterns. For
the sake of completeness, we construct IPO waves as well. In doing so we follow Harford (2005)
and construct wave indicators for VC, M&A, and IPO intensities in the following way. We
   6
    See, for example, Gompers et al (2008) for cyclicality of VC investments and Harford (2005) for analysis of
merger waves in the US, Pastor and Veronesi (2005) for analysis of IPO waves , Harford (2005) and Maksimovic,
Phillips and Yang (2013) for merger waves.


                                                      15
first take the total number of deals in a country-industry and simulate 1,000 deal distributions
by randomly assigning deals over time. We then calculate the highest two-year transaction
concentration from each of the 1,000 draws and compare it to the actual concentration in the
data. If the actual number of transactions in a two year period exceeds the 95th percentile
from these simulated distributions, that period is identified as a wave. To make this analysis
meaningful, we remove country-industries with less than 50 total deals and also remove those
with time span between the first and last deal of less than 10 years in our data.

   This procedure results in a sample of 7,799 country-industry years of VC activity, of which
1,168 years are identified as belonging to a wave, and 6,631 being outside of a wave. Activity
in M&A markets appears less volatile with only 865 country-industry years identified as wave
years. The wave-like pattern of VC activities appears to materialize in most countries in our
sample, however with some variation. Among countries with at least 200 industry-years in
our dataset, the ones with the highest percentage of waves are Sweden, South Korea, China,
and the United States (with overall percentage of wave years between 19.2% and 20.5%) while
the countries with the most stable VC market as measured by the presence of waves are
Italy, Netherlands, and Japan (percentage of wave years between 9.2% and 10.9%). There is
also considerable variation in the formation of waves in different industries (aggregated across
countries). Business Services, Oil and Gas Extraction, and Electronic Equipment Industries
have the most variability of VC activity as measured by the percentage of wave years, while
Hotels, Furniture and Fixtures, and Home Furniture, Furnishings, And Equipment Stores
have the least variability (among industries with at least 100 country-years).

   To examine the relation between M&A and VC waves, we use a logistic regression speci-
fication akin to that in (3) whereby the dependent variable is a dummy for a VC wave in a
country-industry in a given year, and the main explanatory variable is a lagged M&A wave
dummy in the same country-industry. As before, we include year fixed effects and cluster
standard errors by country-industry. We also include an industry’s lagged median market-
to-book ratio, lagged median CAPEX scaled by total assets, and lagged IPO wave dummy
as control variables. Because we identify VC waves as periods of abnormally high two-year

                                              16
VC activity, there is a positive serial correlation in VC wave dummies, and we therefore also
include the lagged VC wave dummy as an additional control variable.


       Insert Table 4 Here


The results from these tests are presented in Table 4. As follows from this table, there is
a strong positive association between contemporaneous and lagged VC waves. These results
persist when including the lagged IPO wave variable. More importantly, coefficients on the
lagged M&A wave dummy are also positive and highly significantly related to the probability
of a VC wave. Unconditionally, an M&A wave in the previous year implies a probability of
about 45% of having a VC wave in the next year. Conditional on observing a VC wave in the
previous year, the existence of an M&A wave in that year increases the probability of having
a VC wave in the current year as well by about 19%. Note that the predictive ability of lagged
IPO waves is much weaker. The coefficients on the lagged IPO wave dummy are lower and
statistically only marginally insignificant. In the appendix, we replicate this analysis while
excluding US deals and find very similar results (see Table A2).

   This evidence suggests that while there is clustering across time in both VC and M&A
markets, VC and M&A waves tend to occur around the same time and past M&A waves are
a strong predictor of future VC waves. This result yields additional support for hypothesis 1
and further highlights the connectedness of M&A and VC markets.


4.3. Instrumenting cross-border M&A activity with currency depreciation


   While results in sections 4.1 and 4.2 strongly suggest that more active M&A markets lead
to intensified VC activity in the future, a potential concern is that both types of activity
might be simultaneously driven by an exogenous economic shock. We alleviate this concern
by including time fixed effects in our regressions and also lagging M&A activity. To further
mitigate this potential endogeneity concern, we follow an instrumental variable approach and



                                             17
instrument cross-border M&A activity by depreciation of the local currency in the target
country.

   Erel, Liao, and Weisbach (2012) examine the determinants of cross-border mergers and
find, among other things, that the change in the exchange rate between the acquirer and target
countries’ currencies prior to the merger is positively related to the probability of a merger.
When the local currency in the target nation depreciates relative to that of the acquirer’s
nation, an acquisition becomes a more attractive deal from the valuation perspective. We
therefore argue that a weaker currency makes local companies potentially cheaper acquisition
targets for foreign acquirers and hence is likely to have a positive effect on cross-border M&A
activity. On the other hand, domestic VC investments are unlikely to be directly affected by
the strength of local currency, because when local currency depreciates, local VC companies
become subject to the same valuation shock. Hence, we argue that local currency depreciation
is likely exogenous to domestic VC activity and we use a two-stage instrumental variable
approach that uses local currency depreciation as an instrument for cross-border M&A activity
in the first stage. In the second stage we then regress our measure of VC intensity given by 1
on the measure of cross-border M&A activity instrumented this way.

   We obtain local currency rates for the 48 countries in our dataset from Thompson Reuters
Datastream. In our tests we include year fixed effects to account for potential exogenous
shocks that might affect both VC investments and M&A deals. We also cluster standard
errors at the country level to control for potential serial correlation in residuals. Because
cross-border M&A activity might be sensitive to the GDP growth in the target country, we
include it as a control variable. As in (3) we include lagged median market-to-book ratio and
lagged median investment in the target country as additional controls. In this exercise we do
not focus on a particular acquirer country but argue that local currency depreciation is likely
to attract more transactions from foreign acquirers in general. We therefore proxy for the
local currency weakness by its depreciation relative to the United States dollar in the previous
three years. As before, we examine the effect of instrumented cross-border M&A activity on



                                              18
measures of VC intensity based on both total and unique VC deals.


       Insert Table 5 Here


The results from these tests are presented in Table 5. As expected, the three-year currency
depreciation in the target country is positively and significantly related to the volume of
cross-border M&A transactions. Furthermore, the instrumented cross-border M&A activity
is positive and significant when used to predict the total volume of domestic VC deals in the
target country (column 2 in Table 5) as well as the volume of unique VC deals (column 3 in
Table 5).

   These results are consistent with our main premise that an increase in M&A activity spurs
more investment by VC firms as they sense better odds of a viable exit through an acquisition
in the future. While weakening local currency has no direct effect on domestic VC deals, it
does provides valuation incentives for foreign acquirers to engage in more M&A deals that in
turn have a positive effect on the VC market.



5. The effect of country takeover laws on VC activity


   To further examine the effect of M&A markets on the incentives of venture capitalists to
engage in new deals and to further alleviate potential endogeneity concerns, we take advantage
of the natural variation in takeover legislation and in the general friendliness of M&A markets
in different countries. In particular, we exploit an exogenous shock to takeover legislation in
the form of staggered initiation of takeover acts. Takeover acts are laws passed specifically to
foster takeover activity by reducing barriers to mergers and acquisition transactions. As Lel
and Miller (2015) state, “They (country takeover laws) are aimed at reducing informational
uncertainties regarding the legal framework applicable to M&A transactions, thus simplifying
the application of various laws in connection with M&A transactions and streamlining M&A
procedures.” We already control for potential endogeneity issues in various ways in section

                                              19
4. The country-level takeover laws provide a natural way to further alleviate these potential
endogeneity concerns as long as they are passed by countries and are not driven by the VC
industry. Lel and Miller (2015) study the effect of takeover laws on managerial discipline and
CEO turnover. They find that following the passage of takeover laws, poorly performing firms
experience more frequent takeovers and the propensity to replace poorly performing CEOs
increases. Importantly for our analysis, they also found that the merger intensity increased
after initiation of M&A laws and particularly so for cross-border M&A transactions. We focus
on the role of takeover laws in stimulating VC activity. As M&A conditions improve following
enactment of those laws in different countries, we expect more investment by VC firms in
those countries as they sense more viable exit opportunities through a takeover.

   Table 6 shows the list of countries in our data that passed a takeover law sometime during
the time span of our sample. Unfortunately, many developed countries passed a takeover law
before 1985 (when our VC dataset starts), rendering enactment of such laws inadequate for
our analysis. Some other countries (e.g. France and China) have not yet passed a takeover
law.

   While different across countries, the takeover laws have provisions aimed at simplifying
M&A transactions and fostering acquisition activity. For example, the 2002 Merger and Ac-
quisition Act in Taiwan provided some general amendments to the Company Act to simplify
the M&A process, introduced more types of mergers including cash-out mergers and cross-
border mergers, as well as provided some tax incentives to neutralize the transaction costs
associated with M&A deals. The Merger Act passed in 2004 in Switzerland regulates the
civil law aspects of mergers in a broad comprehensive framework, significantly facilitating
acquisition deals, which used to be governed by Swiss corporate law and had to be carried out
through a series of complicated transactions, often triggering unfavorable tax consequences
and formal liquidation procedures. In the case of Germany, the 2002 Takeover Act introduced
formal provisions governing acquisition of publicly traded companies. As Strelow and Wild-
berger (2002) argue, prior to the passage of the act, takeovers of public companies had not



                                             20
often been considered an option worth pursuing. Table A.7 provides additional details about
the specific features of takeover laws in different countries.


       Insert Table 6 Here


To capture the effect of takeover laws on VC activity, we adopt a difference-in-difference
methodology and define a POSTLAW dummy that indicates whether or not the country has
a takeover law by year t. We set the POSTLAW dummy to one in the years following the
enactment of takeover law in a country and set it to zero in the years before the enactment
year and in all years in countries with no takeover law. Our empirical specification has the
following form:


      V Ci,j,t = α + βP OST LAWi,t + δXi,j,t−1 + vt + ηi + ζj + εi,j,t ,                       (4)


   where V Ci,j,t is a measure of VC activity in country i and industry j in year t as in 1,
P OST LAWi,t indicates whether a takeover law had been passed in country i by year t−1, and
Xi,j,t−1 is a vector of control variables. We include year fixed effects vt to absorb the potential
impact of global time-varying economic conditions. We also include country ηi and industry
ζj fixed effects to account for potential exogenous drivers of VC activity at the country and
industry level. To control for potential serial correlation in residuals, we cluster the standard
errors at the country-industry level. As in our tests in section 4 we include median industry
market-to-book ratio and median industry investment as control variables. In addition we
also include median industry size and industry concentration as measured by the Herfindahl-
Hirschman index constructed from sales. It is possible that VC investors find industries with a
higher population of small firms potentially more attractive. It is also possible their investment
decisions are sensitive to an industry’s competitive structure. In addition, we also include two
time dummy variables that indicate years one and two prior to the enactment of takeover laws
to see if there is any time-trend in VC activity in pre-takeover law years. Finding such a trend
would potentially undermine the causal relation between takeover laws and VC intensity.

                                                21
   The empirical specification in 4 allows us to gauge the incremental effect of takeover
law adoption on VC activity in countries that passed a takeover law (treatment countries)
relative to those that did not (control countries). Furthermore, because different countries pass
takeover laws at different times, the same country can act as both a treatment (if it already
passed a law) and a control (if it did not). Performing this analysis at the industry level
allows us to control for industry-level variables potentially related to the level of VC activity.
Furthermore, industry fixed effects control for industry-specific unobservable differences.

   The results from these tests are presented in Table 7. Panel A presents results for the
measure of VC activity based on the total number of deals, while in panel B the dependent
variable includes only unique VC deals.


       Insert Table 7 Here


The results in Table 7 demonstrate that enactment of takeover laws has a favorable effect on
subsequent VC activity in the country. Coefficients on the P OST LAW dummy are positive
and significant in most specifications (and marginally significant in the others). This effect is
common to the measures of VC activity based on both total and unique deals. Economically,
the effect of P OST LAW dummy on VC activity is high - depending on the specification, a
passage of a takeover law in a country leads to a 40%-50% increase in the VC intensity relative
to countries that have not passed a takeover law. Overall these results render strong support
for Hypothesis 2.

   In addition, the results indicate that there are more takeover deals in industries with a
smaller median size and more concentrated industries. Coefficients on the two P RELAW
dummies are insignificant, suggesting that there is no evidence of a trend in VC activity in
the two years prior to enactment of takeover laws.

   Overall, the results in Table 7 demonstrate a positive response of VC investments to
a positive shock to M&A markets in the form of takeover law enactment and yield strong
support for hypothesis 2.

                                               22
6. VC activity and state antitakeover laws


   While country-level takeover laws provide a natural setting to test for the effect of positive
exogenous shocks to M&A markets on venture capital investments, in this section we also take
advantage of the state level shocks to M&A environment in the US. In particular, we focus
on state antitakeover laws in the US and their effect on VC activity.

   State business combination laws impose a moratorium on certain kinds of transactions
(e.g., asset sales, mergers) between a large shareholder and the firm for a period usually rang-
ing between three and five years after the shareholder’s stake passes a pre-specified (minority)
threshold. We argue that there are multiple channels through which the business combina-
tion laws might affect VC investments. First, while intended to protect shareholders from
hostile takeovers, business combination laws can potentially increase the cost to the acquiring
firm and therefore have a negative effect on M&A markets in general. Second, we argue that
takeovers (including hostile ones) can result in more firm creation and hence VC funding as
entrepreneurial employees leave to found new start-up companies. In a context of corporate
bankruptcy, Babina (2016) shows that employer financial distress accelerates the exit of em-
ployees to create start-ups. Atanassov (2013) shows that antitakeover laws have a negative
effect on a firm’s innovation as measured by patent grants and citations. Phillips and Zhdanov
(2013) show that an active acquisition market creates more incentives for entrepreneurs to in-
novate.

   Atanassov (2013) studies the effect of state business combination antitakeover laws on
innovation and finds a significant decline in the number of patents and citations per patent
for firms incorporated in states that pass antitakeover laws relative to firms incorporated
in states that do not. This is consistent with Phillips and Zhdanov (2013) who argue that
there is a positive association between firms’ innovation incentives and the friendliness of
M&A markets. In this section we extend his analysis by focusing on the effect of business
combination antitakeover laws on VC investments in portfolio companies domiciled in the



                                              23
states that pass those laws. We expect that the general connectedness of M&A and VC
markets should lead to fewer VC deals in such states for the reasons discussed above.

   We follow Atanassov (2013) in constructing a sample of state antitakeover laws. The dates
of these laws are summarized in Table 8. Out of the 50 states and the District of Columbia, 28
states passed an antitakeover law at some point in time. Other states never passed a business
combination law. Most states passed those laws in late 1980s, with New York being the first
state in our sample that passed a law (in 1985), and Nevada and Oklahoma being the last
(both states passed antitakeover laws in 1991).

   We believe that business combination laws are exogenous to VC activity because they
are most likely outside of control of VC firms and also because they are often lobbied for
by a specific company. For example, as pointed out by Romano (1987), in Connecticut the
antitakeover law was promoted by Aetna, while in Arizona it was lobbied for by Greyhound.

   We start our analysis by aggregating VC deals in US-based portfolio companies by state,
resulting in a sample of 1,726 state-years. There is considerable dispersion in the VC activity
across the states. Not surprisingly, states with most VC deals in our sample are California
and Massachusetts (40,054 and 11,678 deals, respectively), followed by New York (6,746 deals)
and Texas (5,917 deals), while the states with least deals are Alaska and Wyoming (4 and 14
deals, respectively). As before, to reduce the noise in the computation of the growth in VC
deals, we remove state-year observations with less than five deals. This further reduces our
sample to 1,126 state-years.

   To formally test for the effect of business combination laws on subsequent VC intensity,
we define a P OST LAW dummy, which we set equal to one in the years following the year of
the law enactment in a state and set it to zero in the years prior to the enactment year. As in
the previous section, we use a difference-in-difference methodology and estimate the following
regression model:


     V Ci,t = α + βP OST LAWi,t + δXi,t−1 + vt + εi,t ,                                     (5)

                                              24
where V Ci,t is a measure of VC activity in state i in year t, Xi,t−1 is a vector of (lagged) control
variables (aggregated at the state level), and vt are year fixed effects included to control for
aggregate shocks to VC markets. We cluster standard errors by state to control for potential
serial correlation in residuals. We use two measures of VC intensity - based on levels as in (1)
and based on changes as in (2). Because in this section we are interested in the dynamics of
VC deals at the state level, we measure growth in VC deals also at the state level.

   Results from the state-level regressions of VC activity on the postlaw dummy are presented
in Table 9. In Panel A we use our VC growth measure defined in (2) as the dependent variable.
In Panel B the dependent variable is based on the level of VC activity as defined in (1). In
both panels, regression specifications (1) and (3) use the percentage growth in all VC deals in
the state as the dependent variable, while Specifications (2) and (4) include only unique VC
deals.


         Insert Table 9 Here


The results in Table 9 demonstrate that VC activity indeed slows down following enactments
of state business combination laws in states that pass a law relative to those that do not.
Coefficients on the P OST LAW dummy are negative and statistically significant in most
specifications when controlling for size and pre-law dummies. The effect is also economically
large. For example, the number of deals scaled by the number of public firms in the state
declines by about 27% in post anti-takeover years in states that enact an antitakeover law
relative to those that do not enact such a law.

   Overall, consistent with our hypothesis 3, we see a negative association between enactment
of state-level antitakeover business combination laws in the US and subsequent VC activity.
This provides further evidence on the connectedness of M&A and VC markets.




                                                 25
7. Robustness


   We perform a battery of checks to confirm the robustness of our main results from Tables
3-5 of the paper. In the interest of space these results are reported in the appendix.


7.1. Excluding US deals


   A considerable chunk of our data comes from VC deals in the United States. In order to
examine whether our results are not driven primarily by the US deals, we perform the same
analysis as in Table 3 while excluding US VC transactions. The results from these international
tests are reported in Table A.1. These results are consistent with our main results reported
in Table 3. Coefficients on lagged M&A activity are highly statistically significant in most
specifications (marginally significant in some). The magnitude of coefficients is also similar
(and slightly higher for non-US data).

   We also replicate our analysis of VC waves while excluding US transactions. The results
from these tests are presented in Table A.2 and are very similar to the main results reported
in Table 4. Lagged M&A waves are still a strong and highly significant predictor of VC waves.
In contrast, coefficients on the lagged IPO, while positive, are statistically insignificant.


7.2. Alternative deal definition


   In our main tests we consider investments by multiple VC firms in the same portfolio
company on the same date as a single deal. To check the robustness of our results to this
definition we replicate our main tests while treating investments by multiple VC firms as
multiple deals (so we can see multiple deals for the same portfolio company on a single date).
The results are presented in Table A.3 and show the robustness of our main results to this
alternative definition of VC deals. Coefficients on lagged M&A activity are positive and highly
statistically significant in all specifications, both in level-based and change-based regressions.




                                                26
7.3. Excluding new funds


   One potential concern might be that prior exits via M&A may release capital that flows
into new VC funds, leading to a positive relation between VC activity and past M&A activity
that we document. To alleviate this concern we repeat our analysis while excluding any funds
that first appear in our database within one year prior to the transaction. The results from
this test are reported in Table A.4 and are consistent with our main results.


7.4. Instrumenting M&A activity with changes in the local treasury rates


   In this paper we address the potential endogeneity problem in various ways by including
time fixed effects, instrumenting cross-border M&A with local currency depreciations, and
taking advantage of shocks to M&A legislation both at a country level as well as at a state level
in the US. In this appendix we follow an additional approach to address potential endogeneity.
We argue that M&A markets rely to a large extent on credit markets (Harford, 2005) and
therefore M&A activity is likely to slow down when credit market conditions deteriorate. On
the other hand, there is no obvious direct link between credit markets and VC activity. We
therefore use a two-stage instrumental variable approach. In the first stage, we instrument
M&A activity with a change in the local treasury rate. In the second stage we regress our
measures of VC intensity on lagged instrumented M&A.

   We obtain local short-term treasury rates for the 48 countries in our dataset from Thomp-
son Reuters Datastream. As in Table 5, we include year fixed effects and cluster standard
errors at the country level. We also include GDP growth, lagged median market-to-book
ratio, and lagged median investment in the target country as controls. The results from this
IV approach are presented in Table A.5. As expected, there is a negative relation between
changes in local treasury rates and M&A activity. As credit market condition tighten, M&A
activity slows down. Furthermore, the instrumented M&A activity is positive and significant
in regressions with both total and unique VC deals.



                                               27
7.5. Including horizontal mergers only


   It is conceivable that horizontal mergers (that involve a target and an acquirer from the
same industry) are more relevant for VC professionals as they typically seek to sell out to a
firm in the same line of business. For this reason we replicate our main results while including
only takeover transactions in which the target and the aquirer belong to the same 2-digit
SIC industry. The results from these tests are reported in Table A.6 and are generally very
similar to our base case results in Table 3. Coefficients on lagged changes in M&A activity
are similar in magnitude (and statistically significant in most specifications) while coefficients
on lagged levels of M&A activity are higher (and also highly statisitcally significant), due to
fewer horizontal takeovers.



8. Conclusions


   We study how venture capital investments are related to past M&A activity around the
world. Our paper is the first to study the relation between VC and M&A markets. We show
that there is a strong positive association between venture capital and lagged M&A activity
around the world. We argue that growth in M&A deals in a country is likely to attract more
investments by VC firms as venture capitalists anticipate more viable future exit opportunities
via a takeover. Consistent with this intuition, we first demonstrate a strong positive relation
between VC activity and lagged M&A intensity. We reinforce this evidence by instrumenting
cross-border M&A intensity with the currency depreciation in the target country, and show
that instrumented M&A activity is associated with subsequent VC activity. We also examine
the time patterns of VC and merger waves and document a strong association between the
VC activity and merger waves.

   We further show that takeover legislation has a subsequent impact on VC activity to
further isolate the M&A channel on VC activity. We exploit legislative changes to the ability
and costs of undertaking M&A both internationally and in the U.S. We take advantage of

                                               28
both positive and negative changes to the ability to undertake takeovers through government
legislation. We examine pro-takeover legislation internationally and state-level anti-takeover
legislation in the U.S. on subsequent VC activity. Following Lel and Miller (2015), we argue
that an enactment of a country pro-takeover law represents a positive shock to M&A activity.
On the other hand, the passage of a state antitakeover law in the US can be interpreted a
negative shock that is likely to reduce M&A activity in that state. We show that subsequent
VC activity responds to both types of shocks. First, the passage of a pro-takeover law in a
country is associated with more subsequent VC deals in that country, while the enactment
of a business combination antitakeover law in the US has a negative effect on subsequent VC
investment.

   Overall, our results highlight the importance of M&A markets for the incentive to engage
in VC. As many start-ups rely on VC funding and venture capitalists rely on acquisitions for
subsequent exits, our results suggest that an active M&A market is important for generating
entrepreneurship and growth.




                                             29
References

Atanassov, J., 2013, “Do Hostile Takeovers Stifle Innovation? Evidence from Antitakeover
    Legislation and Corporate Patenting,” Journal of Finance 68, 1097-1131.

Babina, T., 2017, “Destructive Creation at Work: How Financial Distress Spurs Entrepreneur-
    ship,” Columbia University Working Paper 68, 1097-1131.

Baum, H., 2006, “Takeover Law in the EU and Germany: Comparative Analysis of a Regu-
   latory Model,” University of Tokyo Journal of Law and Politics 3, 60-72.

Bena, J. and K. Li, 2014, “Corporate Innovations and Mergers and Acquisitions,” Journal
    of Finance 69, 1923-1960.

Bertrand, M. and S. Mullainathan, 2003, “Enjoying the Quiet Life? Corporate Governance
    and Managerial Preferences,” Journal of Political Economy 111(5), pp.1043-1075.

Bhattacharya, U. and H. Daouk, 2002, “The World Price of Insider Trading,” Journal of
    Finance 57(1), pp.75-108.

Celikyurt, U., M. Sevilir, and A. Shivdasani, 2010, “Going Public to Acquire: The Acquisi-
     tion Motive in IPOs,” Journal of Financial Economics 96, 4531-4552.

Dittmar, A. and R. Dittmar, 2008, “The Timing of Financing Decisions: An Examination
    of the Correlation in Financing Waves,” Journal of Financial Economics 90, 59-83.

Erel, I., R.Liao, and M. Weisbach, 2012, “Determinants of Cross-Border Mergers and Acqui-
     sitions,” Journal of Finance 67, 1045-1082.

Gilbert, R., 2007, “Competition and Innovation,” in Wayne D. Collins (ed.), Issues in Com-
    petition Law and Policy, ABA Section of Antitrust Law.

Gilbert, R. and H. Greene, 2015, “Merging Innovation into Antitrust Agency Enforcement
    of the Clayton Act,” forthcoming in Berkeley Technology Law Journal.

Giroud, X. and H. M. Mueller, 2010, “Does Corporate Governance Matter in Competitive
    Industries?” Journal of Financial Economics 95(3), 312-331.

Gompers, P. and J. Lerner, 2004, “The Venture Capital Cycle,” MIT Press Cambridge, MA
   and London.

Gompers, P., A. Kovner, J. Lerner, and David Scharfstein, 2008, “Venture Capital Investment
   Cycles: The Impact of Public Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics 87, 1-23.

Hall, B. H., 1999, “Mergers and R&D Revisited,” Working Paper, University of California
     at Berkeley.

Hellman, T. and M. Puri, 2002, “Venture Capital and the Professionalization of Start-up
    Firms: Empirical Evidence ” Journal of Finance 57, 169-197.

                                           30
Hovakimian, A. and I. Hutton, 2010, “Merger-motivated IPOs,” Financial Management 39,
    1547-1573.

Harford, J., 2005, “What Drives Merger Waves?” Journal of Financial Economics 77, 529-
    560.

Hecker, D., 1999, “High-Technology Employment: A Broader View,” Monthly Labor Review
    122, 18-28.

Iliev, P., K. Lins, D. Miller, and L. Roth, 2015, “Shareholder Voting and Corporate Gover-
     nance Around the World ” Review of Financial Studies, 28, 2167-2202.

Lel, U. and D. Miller, 2011, “Does Takeover Activity Cause Managerial Discipline? Evidence
     from International M&A Laws,” Review of Financial Studies 28, 1588-1622.

Lerner, J., A. Schoar, S. Sokolinski, and K. Wilson, 2016, “The Globalization of Angel
    Investments: Evidence Across Countries ” Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Lins, K., H. Servaes, and P. Tufano, 2010, “What Drives Corporate liquidity? An Interna-
     tional Survey of Cash Holdings and Lines of Credit ” Journal of Financial Economics,
     98(1), 160-176.

Maksimovic, V., G. Phillips, and L. Yang, 2013, “Private and Public Merger Waves,” Journal
   of Finance 68, 2177-2217.

Nenova, T., 2006, “Takeover Laws and Financial Development, ” Working Paper No. 4029,
    World Bank Policy Research.

Phillips, G. and A. Zhdanov, 2013, “R&D and the Incentives from Merger and Acquisition
     Activity,” Review of Financial Studies 26, 34-78.

Poch, Peter, 1998, “Finally Takeover Rules in Austria,” Mimeo, Ortner Pch Foramitti, Aus-
    tria

Raghavendra , R. and A. Stouraitis, 2011, “Patterns in the Timing of Corporate Event
   Waves,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 46, 209-246.

Robinson, D. and B. Sensoy, 2016, “Cyclicality, Performance Measurement, and Cash Flow
    Liquidity in Private Equity, ” Journal of Financial Economics 122, 521-543.

Romano, R., 1999, “The Political Economy of Takeover Statutes,” Virginia Law Review 73,
   111-199.

Rossi, F., 2012, “The Creation of Value for Shareholders in Tender Offers: An Empirical
    Investigation on the Italian Stock Market,” China-USA Business Review 11, 1330-1343.

Schulz, N., 2007, “Review of the Literature on the Impact of Mergers on Innovation,” working
    paper, University of Wuerzburg.


                                            31
Seru, A., 2104, “Firm Boundaries Matter: Evidence from Conglomerates and R&D Activity,”
    Journal of Financial Economics 111, 381-405.

Strelow , M. and J. Wildberger, 2002, “The New German Takeover Act,” Journal of Private
     Equity 5, 53-56.

Waller , S. and M. Sag, 2015, “Promoting Innovation,” Iowa Law Review 100, 2223-2247.




                                         32
                                                 Figure 1
                                  VC and M&A activities in the US and abroad

This figure presents the numbers of VC deals (both total and unique) and the numbers of M&A deals over time.
Graphs of VC activities are presented for deals in the US, the rest of the world, and separately in developed markets
(as classified by MSCI, excluding US) and emerging/frontier markets.




Panel A: VC and M&A activities in the US and the rest of the world




Panel B: VC and M&A activities in developed (ex-US) and emerging/frontier markets




                                                         33
                                                   Table 1
                                            Descriptive statistics


Table 1 presents the numbers of all VC deals, and takeover transactions by country. The sample period is 1985-2014.



                    Country            Number of VC       Number        of   Number of M&A
                                       deals              unique VC deals    deals

                    Argentina          128                160                495
                    Australia          2355               1832               13178
                    Austria            534                592                970
                    Belgium            923                1163               1934
                    Bermuda            99                 84                 86
                    Brazil             772                835                2645
                    Canada             15512              12595              22608
                    China              8241               11475              9513
                    Czech Republic     139                117                184
                    Denmark            1180               1116               2436
                    Egypt              59                 69                 81
                    Finland            1947               1683               2726
                    France             7142               9328               18297
                    Germany            5092               6566               18663
                    Hong Kong          471                565                2787
                    Hungary            214                195                307
                    India              3758               4101               4136
                    Indonesia          112                160                235
                    Ireland            1037               1198               1030
                    Israel             1848               2653               703
                    Italy              940                1046               5298
                    Japan              1744               2338               12835
                    Kenya              820                98                 28
                    Luxembourg         90                 92                 142
                    Malaysia           190                214                2157
                    Mexico             117                141                411
                    Morocco            48                 49                 41
                    Netherlands        1601               1641               5683
                    New Zealand        240                233                1147
                    Nigeria            98                 104                48
                    Norway             775                746                2143
                    Poland             547                437                1138
                    Portugal           569                459                548
                    Romania            135                118                230
                    Russia             581                684                4056
                    Singapore          713                904                1699
                    South Africa       171                194                966
                    South Korea        4053               4247               2866
                    Spain              1600               1843               6744
                    Sweden             2618               2623               5920
                    Switzerland        961                1212               2759
                    Taiwan             509                624                413
                    Thailand           145                155                233
                    Turkey             93                 108                460
                    United Kingdom     9289               10030              49217
                    United States      121338             139846             187709
                    Utd. Arab Em.      89                 110                215
                    Vietnam            111                113                111

                    Total              201010             226896             397871


                                                        34
                                                   Table 2
                       Contemporaneous and lagged correlations of VC and M&A activities.


Table 2 reports contemporaneous and lagged correlations between VC, M&A, and IPO activities. % change in VC deals /%
change in M&A deals /% change in IPO deals is the difference between the number of VC /M&A /IPO deals in the current
and previous years divided by the total number of deals in the previous year. Scaled VC deals /Scaled M&A deals /Scaled
IPO deals is the number of VC /M&A /IPO deals divided by the total number of public firms in the same industry-year in
the Worldscope (for international companies) and Compustat (for US companies) databases.

    Panel A. Percentage growth in deals.


                                           %          %          %           %           %         %         %         %
                                           change     change     change      change      change    change    change    change
                                           in    VC   in    VC   in unique   in unique   in M&A    in M&A    in IPO    in IPO
                                           deals      deals      VC deals    VC deals    deals     deals     deals     deals
                                                      (t-1)                  (t-1)                 (t-1)               (t-1)

    % change in VC deals                   1.000

    % change in VC deals (t-1)             -0.195     1.000
                                           (0.000)
    % change in unique VC deals            0.708      -0.159     1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)
    % change in unique VC deals (t-1)      -0.105     0.738      -0.194      1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
    % change in MA deals                   0.094      0.039      0.089       0.018       1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.005)    (0.000)     (0.201)
    % change in MA deals (t-1)             0.051      0.092      0.061       0.086       -0.138    1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.001)     (0.000)     (0.000)
    % change in IPO deals                  0.079      -0.016     0.092       -0.032      0.052     -0.012    1.000
                                           (0.001)    (0.516)    (0.000)     (0.190)     (0.025)   (0.608)
    % change in IPO deals (t-1)            0.028      0.085      0.009       0.089       0.074     0.083     -0.144    1.000
                                           (0.252)    (0.000)    (0.701)     (0.000)     (0.001)   (0.001)   (0.000)



    Panel B. Number of deals.


                                           Scaled     Scaled     Scaled      Scaled      Scaled    Scaled    Scaled    Scaled
                                           VC deals   VC deals   unique      unique      M&A       M&A       IPO       IPO
                                                      (t-1)      VC deals    VC deals    deals     deals     deals     deals(t-
                                                                             (t-1)                 (t-1)               1)

    Scaled VC deals                        1.000

    Scaled VC deals (t-1)                  0.601      1.000
                                           (0.000)
    Scaled unique VC deals                 0.973      0.557      1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)
    Scaled unique VC deals (t-1)           0.594      0.975      0.590       1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
    Scaled M&A deals                       0.540      0.276      0.543       0.285       1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)
    Scaled M&A deals (t-1)                 0.345      0.571      0.353       0.576       0.606     1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
    Scaled IPO deals                       0.314      0.336      0.305       0.334       0.322     0.307     1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)
    Scaled IPO deals(t-1)                  0.276      0.314      0.254       0.306       0.196     0.327     0.675     1.000
                                           (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)   (0.000)   (0.000)




                                                                   35
                                                     Table 3
                                   Industry-level regressions of VC intensity.


Table A3 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on lagged M&A intensity. % change in VC deals is the
difference between the numbers of VC deals in the current and previous years divided by the number of deals in the previous
year. % change in M&A deals (t-1) is lagged percentage growth in the number of M&A transactions. Industry Capex/TA
(t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-Book (t-1) is lagged industry market-to-book
ratio. % change in unique VC deals is the percentage growth in the number of unique VC deals. Scaled VC deals (Scaled
M&A deals) is the number of VC (M&A) deals divided by the total number of public firms in the same industry-year in the
Worldscope (for international companies) and Compustat (for US companies) databases. Standard errors are clustered by
country-industry, year fixed effects are included.


 Panel A. Dependent variable - growth in VC deals.

                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                  %           %          %          %          %          %          %          %
                                  change      change     change     change     change     change     change     change
                                  in VC       in VC      in VC      in VC      in         in         in         in
                                  deals       deals      deals      deals      unique     unique     unique     unique
                                                                               VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                               deals      deals      deals      deals

 % change in M&A deals (t-1)      0.042**     0.050**    0.051**    0.109**    0.086***   0.088***   0.088***   0.062
                                  (0.017)     (0.021)    (0.022)    (0.042)    (0.026)    (0.029)    (0.029)    (0.055)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      0.236      0.741      0.262                 0.616**    0.616**    0.349
                                              (0.231)    (0.686)    (1.038)               (0.286)    (0.286)    (1.587)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.001***   0.015                                       0.037
                                                         (0.001)    (0.023)                                     (0.023)
 % change in IPOs (t-1)                                             0.016                                       0.013
                                                                    (0.022)                                     (0.030)
 Observations                     5,589       5,113      5,039      1,611      5,310      4,867      4,867      1,585
 R-squared                        0.061       0.058      0.059      0.088      0.045      0.046      0.046      0.097
 Year fixed effects               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


 Panel B. Dependent variable - number of deals scaled by the number of public firms

                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                  Scaled      Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled
                                  VC          VC         VC         VC         unique     unique     unique     unique
                                  deals       deals      deals      deals      VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                               deals      deals      deals      deals

 Scaled M&A deals (t-1)           0.223***    0.222***   0.194***   0.130*     0.278***   0.278***   0.239***   0.174*
                                  (0.056)     (0.056)    (0.056)    (0.072)    (0.070)    (0.071)    (0.068)    (0.089)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      2.841      2.291      0.165                 2.099      1.490      0.033
                                              (1.959)    (1.953)    (2.508)               (2.051)    (2.039)    (2.811)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.156**    0.297**                          0.242***   0.475***
                                                         (0.060)    (0.135)                          (0.078)    (0.171)
 Scaled IPO deals (t-1)                                             0.272                                       0.265
                                                                    (0.222)                                     (0.219)
 Observations                     4,897       4,878      4,838      2,172      4,814      4,796      4,759      2,150
 R-squared                        0.125       0.127      0.121      0.174      0.135      0.136      0.136      0.190
 Year fixed effects               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


                                                            36
Panel C. Using past 3-year growth in M&A deals.

                                       (1)          (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)
                                     %            %           %          %         %          %         %          % change
                                     change       change      change     change    change     change    change     in unique
                                     in VC        in VC       in VC      in VC     in         in        in         VC deals
                                     deals        deals       deals      deals     unique     unique    unique
                                                                                   VC         VC        VC
                                                                                   deals      deals     deals

lagged 3 year % change in MA deals   0.089***     0.089***    0.087***   0.054     0.081***   0.070**   0.067**    0.103**
                                     (0.021)      (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.036)   (0.031)    (0.028)   (0.028)    (0.044)
Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                           0.489       0.628      -0.714               0.019     0.204      -1.809***
                                                  (0.511)     (0.524)    (0.484)              (0.711)   (0.725)    (0.557)
Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                                 0.001***   0.022                          0.005***   0.041*
                                                              (0.000)    (0.021)                        (0.000)    (0.024)
% change in IPOs (t-1)                                                   -0.002                                    0.017
                                                                         (0.029)                                   (0.036)
Observations                         4,248        4,004       3,977      1,439     4,079      3,848     3,822      1,416
R-squared                            0.055        0.052       0.053      0.090     0.042      0.042     0.046      0.117
Year fixed effects                   Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes




                                                             37
                                                Table 4
                                    Waves in VC and M&A activities.


Table 4 reports results from logistic regressions of the VC wave dummies on lagged M&A and IPO wave dummies.
Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-Book (t-1) is lagged
industry market-to-book ratio. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry, year and country fixed effects
are included. See Section 4 for details on construction of VC, M&A, and IPO waves.




                                    (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
                                  VC        VC         VC         VC        VC         VC         VC        VC
                                  wave      wave       wave       wave      wave       wave       wave      wave

 Lagged M&A wave                  0.481*** 0.191*** 0.260*** 0.480*** 0.188*** 0.481*** 0.189*** 0.269***
                                  (0.031)  (0.026)  (0.039)  (0.057)  (0.044)  (0.057)  (0.044)  (0.030)
 Lagged VC wave                             0.575*** 0.651***               0.573***              0.573*** 0.652***
                                            (0.021)  (0.023)                (0.033)               (0.034)  (0.032)
 Lagged IPO wave                                       0.081*                                               0.091*
                                                       (0.045)                                              (0.052)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                                          -0.000    0.142      0.053      0.204     0.234
                                                                  (0.305)   (0.169)    (0.344)    (0.222)   (0.277)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                                                         -0.001     0.000     0.004
                                                                                       (0.003)    (0.002)   (0.007)
 Observations                     4,301     4,301      2,145      4,025     4,025      3,984      3,984     1,982
 Year fixed effects               Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes
 Country fixed effects            Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes        Yes        Yes       Yes




                                                      38
                                              Table 5
                      Instrumenting cross-border M&A with the exchange rate


Table 5 reports results from two-stage IV regressions. In the first stage we instrument cross-border M&A deals
(scaled by the number of public firms) by the lagged 3-year change in the exchange rate. In the second stage with
predict domestic VC deals with lagged instrumented CB M&A deals. Year fixed effects are included, standard
errors are clustered by country.


                                                            (1)          (2)           (3)
                                                     Scaled CB     Scaled VC     Scaled
                                                     M&A deals     deals         unique VC
                                                                                 deals

                   3-year change in exchange rate    2.562***
                                                     (0.719)
                   Median market-to-book             -0.002        0.974*        0.903*
                                                     (0.001)       (0.544)       (0.485)
                   Median Investment                 9.927         -30.196*      -28.012*
                                                     (14.387)      (16.722)      (15.135)
                   GDP growth                        0.169***      0.085         0.066
                                                     (0.060)       (0.060)       (0.048)
                   Instrumented CB M&A, lagged                     0.821***      0.747**
                                                                   (0.300)       (0.282)
                   Observations                      697           596           593
                   R-squared                         0.121         0.200         0.208
                   Year fixed effects                Yes           Yes           Yes




                                                       39
                                                 Table 6
                                      Countries with takeover laws


Table 6 reports the list of countries that passed a takeover law between 1980 and 2011.



                                         Country      Year of takeover law

                                      Austria         1998
                                      Belgium         1989
                                      Germany         2002
                                      Finland         1989
                                      India           1997
                                      Indonesia       1998
                                      Italy           1992
                                      Ireland         1997
                                      Malaysia        1998
                                      New Zealand     1993
                                      Spain           1991
                                      Sweden          1991
                                      Switzerland     2004
                                      South Africa    1991
                                      Taiwan          2002




                                                       40
                                                      Table 7
                                         VC regressions and takeover laws


Table 7 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on the POSTLAW dummy. POSTLAW dummy is set to
one if there was a takeover law in the country before, and to zero otherwise. Sales HHI (t-1) is lagged Herfindahl index
constructed from sales. Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-
Book (t-1) is lagged industry market-to-book ratio. Median industry size (t-1) is the lagged median industry size. Prelaw
t(-1) dummy is set to one in the year preceding the takeover law year and to zero otherwise. Prelaw t(-2) dummy is set
to one in the year two years prior to the takeover law year and to zero otherwise. Country, industry, and year fixed effects
included. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry.


         Panel A. All VC deals.

                                             (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)
                                          Scaled       Scaled       Scaled      Scaled      Scaled       Scaled
                                          VC deals     VC deals     VC deals    VC deals    VC deals     VC deals

         Postlaw dummy                    0.501*       0.463***     0.514***    0.656**     0.505***     0.564***
                                          (0.258)      (0.169)      (0.183)     (0.277)     (0.175)      (0.186)
         Sales HHI (t-1)                                            1.238***                             1.239***
                                                                    (0.284)                              (0.284)
         Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                       2.883        2.984                   2.891        2.994
                                                       (3.443)      (3.406)                 (3.445)      (3.408)
         Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                 0.020        0.018                   0.020        0.018
                                                       (0.030)      (0.028)                 (0.030)      (0.028)
         Median industry size (t-1)                    0.038        0.083*                  0.038        0.083*
                                                       (0.046)      (0.045)                 (0.046)      (0.045)
         Prelaw t(-1) dummy                                                     0.358       0.129        0.133
                                                                                (0.261)     (0.163)      (0.181)
         Prelaw t(-2) dummy                                                     0.464       0.108        0.149
                                                                                (0.305)     (0.144)      (0.152)
         Observations                     4,865        3,870        3,870       4,865       3,870        3,870
         R-squared                        0.250        0.282        0.288       0.250       0.282        0.288
         Year fixed effects               Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
         Country fixed effects            Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
         Industry fixed effects           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes




                                                               41
Panel B. Only unique VC deals.

                                    (1)        (2)          (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                                 Scaled     Scaled       Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled
                                 unique     unique       unique     unique     unique     unique
                                 VC deals   VC deals     VC deals   VC deals   VC deals   VC deals

Postlaw dummy                    0.697**    0.551**      0.607**    0.818***   0.586***   0.660***
                                 (0.307)    (0.225)      (0.240)    (0.316)    (0.225)    (0.238)
Sales HHI (t-1)                                          1.236***                         1.237***
                                                         (0.304)                          (0.305)
Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                     2.497        2.499                 2.502      2.506
                                            (3.423)      (3.396)               (3.425)    (3.398)
Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)               0.022        0.021                 0.022      0.021
                                            (0.019)      (0.018)               (0.019)    (0.018)
Medium industry size (t-1)                  0.038        0.084*                0.038      0.084*
                                            (0.047)      (0.045)               (0.047)    (0.045)
Prelaw t(-1) dummy                                                  0.168      0.107      0.132
                                                                    (0.293)    (0.195)    (0.206)
Prelaw t(-2) dummy                                                  0.488      0.102      0.176
                                                                    (0.334)    (0.174)    (0.172)
Observations                     5,535      4,308        4,308      5,535      4,308      4,308
R-squared                        0.239      0.278        0.283      0.239      0.278      0.283
Year fixed effects               Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Country fixed effects            Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes
Industry fixed effects           Yes        Yes          Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes




                                                    42
                                                    Table 8
                                  State antitakeover business combination laws


Table 8 presents the years of enactment of business combination laws by state.

                                                State            Year of law enactment

                                         Alabama                 -
                                         Alaska                  -
                                         Arizona                 1987
                                         Arkansas                -
                                         California              -
                                         Colorado                -
                                         Connecticut             1989
                                         District of Columbia    -
                                         Delaware                1988
                                         Florida                 -
                                         Georgia                 1988
                                         Hawaii                  -
                                         Idaho                   1988
                                         Illinois                1989
                                         Indiana                 -
                                         Iowa                    -
                                         Kansas                  -
                                         Kentucky                1987
                                         Louisiana               -
                                         Maine                   1988
                                         Maryland                1989
                                         Massachusetts           1989
                                         Michigan                1989
                                         Minnesota               1987
                                         Mississippi             -
                                         Missouri                1986
                                         Montana                 -
                                         Nebraska                1988
                                         Nevada                  1991
                                         New Hampshire
                                         New Jersey              1986
                                         New Mexico              -
                                         New York                1985
                                         North Carolina          -
                                         North Dakota            -
                                         Ohio                    1990
                                         Oklahoma                1991
                                         Oregon                  -
                                         Pennsylvania            1989
                                         Rhode Island            1990
                                         South Carolina          1988
                                         South Dakota            1990
                                         Tennessee               1988
                                         Texas                   -
                                         Utah                    -
                                         Vermont                 -
                                         Virginia                1988
                                         Washington              1987
                                         West Virginia           -
                                         Wisconsin               1987
                                         Wyoming                 1989




                                                                43
                                               Table 9
                      State-level regressions on state antitakeover law dummy


Table 9 reports results from state level regressions of VC intensity on the POSTLAW dummy. POSTLAW dummy
is set to 1 in a state after the antitakeover law is enacted. Median CAPEX/TA (t-1) is the lagged median firm
CAPEX scaled by total assets in the state. Median Market-to-Book (t-1) is lagged median market-to-book ratio.
Median size (t-1) is the lagged median firm size. Year fixed effects are included, errors are clustered by state.


 Panel A. Dependent variable number of VC deals scaled by number of public firms in a state.

                                       (1)           (2)              (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)
                                 Scaled VC     Scaled           Scaled VC   Scaled        Scaled VC     Scaled
                                 deals         unique VC        deals       unique VC     deals         unique VC
                                               deals                        deals                       deals

 Postlaw dummy                   -0.226*       -0.262*          -0.251**    -0.285**      -0.253**      -0.288**
                                 (0.117)       (0.147)          (0.110)     (0.133)       (0.111)       (0.134)
 Median CAPEX/TA (t-1)                                          -4.737**    -6.500***     -4.745**      -6.510***
                                                                (1.830)     (2.153)       (1.823)       (2.136)
 Median Market-to-Book (t-1)                                    0.196       0.179         0.196         0.180
                                                                (0.213)     (0.323)       (0.213)       (0.324)
 Median Size (t-1)                                              0.000       0.000         0.000         0.000
                                                                (0.000)     (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
 Prelaw t(-1) dummy                                                                       -0.117*       -0.197*
                                                                                          (0.059)       (0.105)
 Prelaw t(-2) dummy                                                                       -0.046        -0.124
                                                                                          (0.061)       (0.116)
 Observations                    1,084         1,083            1,084       1,083         1,084         1,083
 R-squared                       0.296         0.240            0.328       0.276         0.329         0.277
 Year fixed effects              Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes




                                                           44
Panel B. Dependent variable growth in the number of VC deals.

                                    (1)           (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)           (6)
                              % change in   % change in      % change in   % change in   % change in   % change in
                              VC deals      unique VC        VC deals      unique VC     VC deals      unique VC
                                            deals                          deals                       deals

Postlaw dummy                 -0.141**      -0.169**         -0.129**      -0.159**      -0.130**      -0.160**
                              (0.055)       (0.073)          (0.054)       (0.075)       (0.056)       (0.076)
Median CAPEX/TA (t-1)                                        0.413         1.086         0.419         1.088
                                                             (1.445)       (1.783)       (1.448)       (1.779)
Median Market-to-Book (t-1)                                  -0.193**      -0.217        -0.195**      -0.218
                                                             (0.081)       (0.147)       (0.082)       (0.148)
Median Size (t-1)                                            0.000         -0.000        0.000         -0.000
                                                             (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.000)
Prelaw t(-1) dummy                                                                       0.006         -0.019
                                                                                         (0.215)       (0.254)
Prelaw t(-2) dummy                                                                       -0.225        -0.108
                                                                                         (0.144)       (0.150)
Observations                  1,095         1,088            1,095         1,088         1,095         1,088
R-squared                     0.253         0.244            0.263         0.249         0.264         0.249
Year fixed effects            Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes




                                                        45
                                                   Table A1
                          Industry-level regressions of VC intensity on non-US data.


Table A1 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on lagged M&A intensity using international data only
(excluding the US). % change in VC deals is the difference between the numbers of VC deals in the current and previous years
divided by the number of deals in the previous year. % change in M&A deals (t-1) is lagged percentage growth in the number
of M&A transactions. Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-
Book (t-1) is lagged industry market-to-book ratio. % change in unique VC deals is the percentage growth in the number
of unique VC deals. Scaled VC deals (Scaled M&A deals) is the number of VC (M&A) deals divided by the total number of
public firms in the same industry-year in the Worldscope database. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry, year
fixed effects are included.


 Panel A. Dependent variable - growth in VC deals.

                                     (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                   %          %          %          %           %          %          %          %
                                   change     change     change     change      change     change     change     change
                                   in VC      in VC      in VC      in VC       in         in         in         in
                                   deals      deals      deals      deals       unique     unique     unique     unique
                                                                                VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                                deals      deals      deals      deals

 % change in M&A deals (t-1)       0.041*     0.053**    0.055*     0.091*      0.070*     0.069*     0.069*     0.029
                                   (0.022)    (0.027)    (0.028)    (0.052)     (0.036)    (0.041)    (0.041)    (0.061)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      0.493      0.719      -0.012                 0.995      0.995      0.542
                                              (0.842)    (1.037)    (1.638)                (1.194)    (1.194)    (2.529)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.013**    -0.006                                       0.023
                                                         (0.006)    (0.022)                                      (0.026)
 % change in IPOs (t-1)                                             0.013                                        0.017
                                                                    (0.027)                                      (0.039)
 Observations                      3,567      3,207      3,145      877         3,421      3,076      3,076      865
 R-squared                         0.093      0.094      0.097      0.123       0.073      0.076      0.076      0.115
 Year fixed effects                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


 Panel B. Dependent variable - number of deals scaled by the number of public firms.

                                     (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                   Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled      Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled
                                   VC         VC         VC         VC          unique     unique     unique     unique
                                   deals      deals      deals      deals       VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                                deals      deals      deals      deals

 Scaled M&A deals (t-1)            0.313***   0.310***   0.290***   0.202**     0.393***   0.393***   0.357***   0.271***
                                   (0.056)    (0.057)    (0.065)    (0.084)     (0.070)    (0.071)    (0.076)    (0.100)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      2.940      2.433      -0.242                 1.641      1.155      -0.446
                                              (2.831)    (2.879)    (3.735)                (2.937)    (2.945)    (4.140)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.142*     0.278*                            0.244**    0.465**
                                                         (0.076)    (0.156)                           (0.096)    (0.196)
 Scaled IPO deals (t-1)                                             0.209                                        0.181
                                                                    (0.197)                                      (0.177)
 Observations                      2,919      2,905      2,874      1,191       2,890      2,876      2,846      1,183
 R-squared                         0.156      0.158      0.146      0.168       0.171      0.173      0.167      0.193
 Year fixed effects                Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes



                                                            46
                                              Table A2
                             Waves in VC and M&A activities, non-US data.


Table A2 reports results from logistic regressions of the VC wave dummies on lagged M&A and IPO wave dummies
on international data only. Industry Capex/TA is lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-
to-Book (t-1) is lagged industry market-to-book ratio. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry, year and
country fixed effects are included. See Section 4 for details on construction of VC, M&A, and IPO waves.



                                     (1)        (2)          (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)          (8)
                                  VC         VC          VC         VC         VC         VC         VC          VC
                                  wave       wave        wave       wave       wave       wave       wave        wave

 Lagged M&A wave                  0.442***   0.164***    0.224***   0.442***   0.159***   0.443***   0.160***    0.240***
                                  (0.031)    (0.030)     (0.050)    (0.043)    (0.033)    (0.044)    (0.034)     (0.028)
 Lagged VC wave                              0.588***    0.637***              0.586***              0.585***    0.639***
                                             (0.024)     (0.030)               (0.037)               (0.038)     (0.029)
 Lagged IPO wave                                         0.043                                                   0.048
                                                         (0.056)                                                 (0.056)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                                            0.142      0.257      0.259      0.388       0.415
                                                                    0.142      0.257      0.259      0.388       0.415
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                                                            0.000      0.001       0.004
                                                                                          (0.003)    (0.002)     (0.008)
 Observations                     2,672      2,672       1,148      2,444      2,444      2,413      2,413       998
 Year fixed effects               Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes
 Country fixed effects            Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes




                                                        47
                                                Table A3
                               Industry-level regressions of VC intensity.


Table A3 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on lagged M&A intensity while treating in-
vestments by multiple VC firms in the same portfolio company as multiple deals. % change in VC deals is the
difference between the numbers of VC deals in the current and previous years divided by the number of deals in
the previous year. % change in M&A deals (t-1) is lagged percentage growth in the number of M&A transactions.
Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-Book (t-1) is
lagged industry market-to-book ratio. % change in unique VC deals is the percentage growth in the number of
unique VC deals. Scaled VC deals (Scaled M&A deals) is the number of VC (M&A) deals divided by the total
number of public firms in the same industry-year in the Worldscope (for international companies) and Compustat
(for US companies) databases. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry, year fixed effects are included.


          Panel A. Dependent variable - growth in VC deals.

                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                           % change in       % change in      % change in      % change in
                                           VC deals          VC deals         VC deals         VC deals

          % change in M&A deals (t-1)      0.072***          0.071***         0.072***         0.124**
                                           (0.025)           (0.027)          (0.028)          (0.055)
          Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                            0.874**          1.833            1.060
                                                             (0.404)          (1.219)          (2.060)
          Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                                       0.002            0.026
                                                                              (0.001)          (0.023)
          % change in IPOs (t-1)                                                               (0.026)
                                                                                               (0.022)
          Observations                     5,590             5,114            5,040            1,611
          R-squared                        0.043             0.043            0.045            0.083
          Year fixed effects               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes


          Panel B. Dependent variable - number of deals scaled by the number of public firms.

                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)
                                           Scaled      VC    Scaled      VC   Scaled      VC   Scaled      VC
                                           deals             deals            deals            deals

          Scaled M&A deals (t-1)           0.343***          0.343***         0.302***         0.209*
                                           (0.085)           (0.087)          (0.087)          (0.112)
          Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                            2.777            1.709            -0.883
                                                             (2.907)          (2.920)          (3.876)
          Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                                       0.286***         0.542***
                                                                              (0.095)          (0.208)
          Scaled IPO deals (t-1)                                                               0.337
                                                                                               (0.282)
          Observations                     4,897             4,878            4,838            2,172
          R-squared                        0.125             0.127            0.127            0.169
          Year fixed effects               Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes



                                                        48
                                                   Table A4
                       Industry-level regressions of VC intensity, excluding new funds


Table A4 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on lagged M&A intensity while excluding new funds (those
that first appear in our sample within a 12 month window.) % change in VC deals is the difference between the numbers of
VC deals in the current and previous years divided by the number of deals in the previous year. % change in M&A deals (t-1)
is lagged percentage growth in the number of M&A transactions. Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX
scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-Book (t-1) is lagged industry market-to-book ratio. % change in unique VC deals
is the percentage growth in the number of unique VC deals. Scaled VC deals (Scaled M&A deals) is the number of VC (M&A)
deals divided by the total number of public firms in the same industry-year in the Worldscope database. Standard errors are
clustered by country-industry, year fixed effects are included.


 Panel A. Dependent variable - growth in VC deals.

                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                  %           %          %          %          %          %          %          %
                                  change      change     change     change     change     change     change     change
                                  in VC       in VC      in VC      in VC      in         in         in         in
                                  deals       deals      deals      deals      unique     unique     unique     unique
                                                                               VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                               deals      deals      deals      deals

 % change in M&A deals (t-1)      0.070***    0.081***   0.083***   0.129**    0.103***   0.107***   0.107***   0.093
                                  (0.024)     (0.030)    (0.031)    (0.065)    (0.029)    (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.075)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)          (0.024)     (0.030)    (0.031)    (0.065)    (0.029)    (0.033)    (0.033)    (0.075)
                                              (0.233)    (0.779)    (1.129)               (0.282)    (0.282)    (1.728)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.002**    0.039*                                      0.066**
                                                         (0.001)    (0.022)                                     (0.029)
 % change in IPOs (t-1)                                             0.015                                       0.017
                                                                    (0.025)                                     (0.035)
 Observations                     5,117       4,703      4,636      1,533      4,868      4,484      4,484      1,504
 R-squared                        0.067       0.065      0.066      0.088      0.052      0.051      0.051      0.097
 Year fixed effects               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


 Panel B. Dependent variable - number of deals scaled by the number of public firms.

                                     (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
                                  Scaled      Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled
                                  VC          VC         VC         VC         unique     unique     unique     unique
                                  deals       deals      deals      deals      VC         VC         VC         VC
                                                                               deals      deals      deals      deals

 Scaled M&A deals (t-1)           0.196***    0.194***   0.168***   0.116*     0.227***   0.226***   0.194***   0.142**
                                  (0.050)     (0.050)    (0.051)    (0.063)    (0.056)    (0.056)    (0.055)    (0.069)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      2.762      2.115      0.216                 1.916      1.481      0.321
                                              (1.967)    (1.914)    (2.406)               (1.877)    (1.858)    (2.526)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                           0.175***   0.323**                          0.238***   0.445***
                                                         (0.067)    (0.139)                          (0.076)    (0.155)
 Scaled IPO deals (t-1)                                             0.206                                       0.189
                                                                    (0.180)                                     (0.166)
 Observations                     4,495       4,479      4,442      2,036      4,416      4,401      4,367      2,016
 R-squared                        0.122       0.125      0.122      0.175      0.132      0.133      0.138      0.189
 Year fixed effects               Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes


                                                            49
                                                Table A5
                   Instrumenting cross-border M&A with changes in local treasury rates


Table A5 reports results from two-stage IV regressions. In the first stage we instrument cross-border M&A deals (scaled by
the number of public firms) by the change in the local treasury rates. In the second stage with predict domestic VC deals
with lagged instrumented CB M&A deals. Year fixed effects are included, standard errors are clustered by country.


                                                                (1)           (2)           (3)
                                                         Scaled CB      Scaled VC     Scaled
                                                         M&A deals      deals         unique VC
                                                                                      deals

                        Change in risk-free rate         -0.377**
                                                         (0.164)
                        Median market-to-book            0.019***       0.788**       0.670**
                                                         (0.003)        (0.335)       (0.304)
                        Median Investment                6.587          -24.665*      -21.846*
                                                         (41.893)       (12.541)      (10.848)
                        GDP growth                       0.590**        0.200**       0.178**
                                                                        (0.079)       (0.064)
                        Instrumented CB M&A, lagged                     0.212**       0.171**
                                                                        (0.300)       (0.282)
                        Observations                     613            499           495
                        R-squared                        0.131          0.274         0.279
                        Year fixed effects               Yes            Yes           Yes




                                                           50
                                                  Table A6
                Industry-level regressions of VC intensity, including horizontal mergers only


Table A6 reports results from industry regressions of VC intensity on lagged M&A intensity while including horizontal mergers
only. % change in VC deals is the difference between the numbers of VC deals in the current and previous years divided by
the number of deals in the previous year. % change in M&A deals (t-1) is lagged percentage growth in the number of M&A
transactions. Industry Capex/TA (t-1) is the lagged industry CAPEX scaled by total assets. Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)
is lagged industry market-to-book ratio. % change in unique VC deals is the percentage growth in the number of unique VC
deals. Scaled VC deals (Scaled M&A deals) is the number of VC (M&A) deals divided by the total number of public firms in
the same industry-year in the Worldscope database. Standard errors are clustered by country-industry, year fixed effects are
included.


 Panel A. Dependent variable - growth in VC deals.

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                   %          %           %          %          %          %           %          %
                                   change     change      change     change     change     change      change     change
                                   in VC      in VC       in VC      in VC      in         in          in         in
                                   deals      deals       deals      deals      unique     unique      unique     unique
                                                                                VC         VC          VC         VC
                                                                                deals      deals       deals      deals

 % change in M&A deals (t-1)       0.041**    0.040**     0.039**    0.086**    0.062**    0.047**     0.047**    0.062
                                   (0.017)    (0.019)     (0.019)    (0.037)    (0.025)    (0.023)     (0.023)    (0.041)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      0.148       0.434      -0.443                0.436**     0.436**    -0.782
                                              (0.172)     (0.635)    (0.539)               (0.217)     (0.217)    (0.723)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                            0.002**    0.036*                                       0.063***
                                                          (0.001)    (0.020)                                      (0.024)
 % change in IPOs (t-1)                                              0.003                                        -0.000
                                                                     (0.018)                                      (0.026)
 Observations                      4,469      4,247       4,207      1,516      4,275      4,066       4,066      1,495
 R-squared                         0.069      0.067       0.068      0.101      0.056      0.055       0.055      0.115
 Year fixed effects                Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes


 Panel B. Dependent variable - number of deals scaled by the number of public firms

                                      (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                                   Scaled     Scaled      Scaled     Scaled     Scaled     Scaled      Scaled     Scaled
                                   VC         VC          VC         VC         unique     unique      unique     unique
                                   deals      deals       deals      deals      VC         VC          VC         VC
                                                                                deals      deals       deals      deals

 Scaled M&A deals (t-1)            0.345***   0.343***    0.310***   0.279**    0.437***   0.436***    0.387***   0.379**
                                   (0.102)    (0.103)     (0.104)    (0.133)    (0.127)    (0.128)     (0.124)    (0.161)
 Industry Capex/TA (t-1)                      3.268       2.153      0.229                 2.936       1.825      -0.013
                                              (2.182)     (2.112)    (2.711)               (2.344)     (2.280)    (3.019)
 Industry Market-to-Book (t-1)                            0.167**    0.212*                            0.255***   0.352**
                                                          (0.071)    (0.116)                           (0.091)    (0.143)
 Scaled IPO deals (t-1)                                              0.255                                        0.242
                                                                     (0.224)                                      (0.216)
 Observations                      4,128      4,118       4,099      2,003      4,067      4,058       4,039      1,985
 R-squared                         0.111      0.115       0.118      0.177      0.122      0.127       0.138      0.199
 Year fixed effects                Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes        Yes         Yes        Yes



                                                             51
                                                                     Table A7
                                                         Details on country takeover laws




     Country     Year   Name of the law                  Source                   Details


     Austria     1998   Takeover Act                     Lel and Miller (2015)    Introduces for the first time formal rules for acquiring a majority interest in a
                                                                                  company. Also intended to make Austria takeover legislation more transparent
                                                                                  and consistent with that of other major European Countries. Explicit rules
                                                                                  regarding purchase offers involving acquisitions of a controlling participation
                                                                                  in a company. For further details, see, for example, Poch (1998).
     Belgium     1989   Royal Decree of 11/8/1989 and    Lel and Miller (2015),   Specific rules about takeover bids, mandatory offers, and disclosure of share-
                        the law of March 3/2/1989        Nenova (2006)            holder information. Formal provisions for governing mergers and acquisitions.
     Germany     2002   Takeover Act                     Lel and Miller (2015),   Formal provisions for governing acquisitions of publicly traded companies. Un-
                                                         Strelow and Wild-        der the Act, a bidder who has obtained control over a target must make an
                                                         berger (2002), Baum      offer for all of the target outstanding shares, including any preference shares
                                                         (2006)                   (“mandatory offer”). As per Strelow and Wildberger (2002), prior to the pas-
                                                                                  sage of the takeover act, takeovers of public companies had not often been




52
                                                                                  considered worth pursuing.
     Finland     1989   Securities Markets Act of 1989   Lel and Miller (2015)    Relates to the issuance of securities to the public, the transfer and clearing
                                                                                  of securities issued to the public as well as to the arrangement of trading
                                                                                  in securities. Sections 6 and 8 regulate takeover bids, including publication
                                                                                  and communication of the bid, time allowed for acceptance of the bid, and
                                                                                  treatment of competing bids. Section 10 regulates mandatory bids.
     India       1997   Substantial Acquisition     of   Government of India,     Regulates disclosures of shareholding and control in a listed company as well
                        Shares and Takeovers             Ministry of Finance:     as acquisition of shares or voting rights, acquisition of control over a listed
                                                         http://dipam.gov.in/,    company and bail out takeovers.
                                                         Lel and Miller (2015)
     Indonesia   1998   M&A regulations (Gorvern-        Lel and Miller (2015)    Is intended to guard the interests of the target company, its shareholders, and
                        ment regulation No 27/1998),                              employees. Introduces formal requirements for transactions involving acquisi-
                        Presidential Decree No. 96 and                            tion of controlling interest in the target company.
                        No. 118
     Italy       1992   Public Tender     Offer,   Law   Nenova(2006), Lel and    Regulates public tender offers and the transfer of corporate control by giving
                        149/1992                         Miller (2015), Rossi     powers to the Commissione Nazionale per le Societa e la Borsa.
                                                         (2012)
                                             Table A7: Details on country takeover laws – continued




     Country        Year   Name of the law                 Source                  Details


     Malaysia       1998   Code on Takeovers and Mergers   Nenova(2006), Lel and   Regulates mandatory offers, voluntary offers, advisers, acquisition of addi-
                                                           Miller (2015)           tional voting shares, etc. For further details see https://www.sc.com.my/the-
                                                                                   malaysian-code-on-take-overs-and-mergers-1998-the-code/.
     New Zealand    2001   Takeover Code                   Lel and Miller (2015)   Ensures that all shareholders have the opportunity to participate in
                                                                                   changes of control and that all parties to the transaction have a level
                                                                                   playing field.   The rules of the Takeovers Code are intended to en-
                                                                                   sure that shareholders will have all of the information they need and
                                                                                   plenty of time to make their decision about the control-change transaction.
                                                                                   See also http://www.takeovers.govt.nz/assets/Assets-2/Takeovers-Directors-
                                                                                   booklet-linked2a.pdf.
     Spain          1991   Public Takeover Offerings       Lel and Miller (2015)   Regulates disclosure of significant shareholdings in listed companies and ac-
                           (Royal Decree 1197/1991)                                quisitions of shares owned by them.




53
     Sweden         1991   Industry and Commerce Stock     Nenova(2006), Lel and   Regulates disclosure of changes in shareholdings. The disclosure obligation is
                           Exchange Committee Takeover     Miller (2015)           triggered if a holding reaches, exceeds or falls below certain thresholds of the
                           Standard, Financial Instru-                             votes or the number of shares in a company. A company’s acquisition and
                           ments Trading Act                                       transfer of its own shares shall also be reported if the transaction implies that
                                                                                   the holding reaches, exceeds or falls below any of the thresholds.
     Switzerland    2004   The Merger Act                  Lel and Miller (2015)   Regulates the civil law aspects of mergers in a broad comprehensive frame-
                                                                                   work, significantly facilitating acquisition deals, which used to be governed
                                                                                   by under Swiss corporate law and had to be carried out through a series of
                                                                                   complicated transactions, often triggering unfavorable tax consequences and
                                                                                   formal liquidation procedures.
     South Africa   1991   Code on Takeovers and Mergers   Nenova(2006), Lel and   The Takeover Regulations are largely based on older versions of the UK City
                                                           Miller (2015)           Code on Takeovers and Mergers. The Takeover Regulations are statutory and
                                                                                   are enforced by the courts rather than through self-regulation.
     Taiwan         2002   Business Mergers and Acquisi-   Lel and Miller (2015)   Provides some general amendments to the Company Act to simplify the M&A
                           tions Act                                               process, introduces more types of mergers including cash-out mergers and
                                                                                   cross-border mergers, as well as provides some tax incentives to neutralize
                                                                                   the transaction costs associated with M&A deals.
