                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE L-SHAPED PHILLIPS CURVE:
            THEORETICAL JUSTIFICATION AND EMPIRICAL IMPLICATIONS

                                    Narayana R. Kocherlakota

                                       Working Paper 24086
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24086


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2017




Previous versions of this paper circulated under the title, “Monetary Economies with Bounded
Competition.” This version has a clearer discussion of the role of capacity constraints in the firm
price/wage-setting game. I thank Eunmi Ko for excellent research assistance, I thank
Mariacristina deNardi, Greg Kaplan, Matteo Maggiori, and participants in seminars at Chicago-
Booth, Cornell University, the European Central Bank, the London School of Economics,
Northwestern University, and University College-London for valuable comments, and I thank
Ivan Werning, whose criticism of an earlier paper (Kocherlakota 2016a) spurred me to write this
one. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

The author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this research. Further
information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24086.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Narayana R. Kocherlakota. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The L-Shaped Phillips Curve: Theoretical Justification and Empirical Implications
Narayana R. Kocherlakota
NBER Working Paper No. 24086
November 2017
JEL No. E10,E12,E31,E43,E52

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper has two parts. In the first part, I demonstrate that, in the absence of price and wage
bounds, monetary models do not have current equilibria - and so lack predictive content - for a
wide range of possible policy rules and/or beliefs about future equilibrium outcomes. This non-
existence problem disappears in models in which firms face (arbitrarily loose) finite upper bounds
on prices or positive lower bonds on nominal wages. In the second part, I study the properties of a
class of dynamic monetary models with these kinds of bounds on prices/wages. Among other
results, I show that these models imply that the Phillips curve is L-shaped, are consistent with the
existence of permanently inefficiently low output (secular stagnation), and do not imply that
forward guidance is surprisingly effective. I show too that economies with lower nominal wage
floors have even worse equilibrium outcomes in welfare terms. It follows that models with
arbitrarily low but positive nominal wage floors are not well approximated by models without
wage floors.


Narayana R. Kocherlakota
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
202 Harkness Hall
P.O. Box 270156
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
nkocherl@ur.rochester.edu
1     Introduction

This paper has two parts. In the first part, I set forth a class of monetary models in which
prices and wages adjust freely. I demonstrate that these models have an important defect:
it is only possible to ensure existence of equilibrium in a given period by imposing (possibly
tight) restrictions on the set of monetary policy rules and/or (rational beliefs about) future
equilibrium outcomes. It follows that the models are uninformative about what happens if
governments and agents don’t obey those restrictions. I demonstrate that this non-existence
result disappears when firms face a finite upper bound on their price choices and a positive
lower bound on their wage choices (regardless of how loose these bounds are). I conclude
that useful monetary models require a finite price ceiling and a positive wage floor.1
    In the second part, I study the properties of a class of such monetary models. I show
that they have a number of important properties that are distinct from the implications of
conventional models with price-setting and wage-setting frictions. Specifically, I prove the
following results about the models with price/wage bounds:2

    • Whenever there is a negative output gap (output is inefficiently low), the inflation rate
      is equal to its lowest possible level. When the output gap is zero (output is efficient),
      the inflation rate varies. In this sense, the models predict an L-shaped Phillips curve
      that is horizontal when the output gap is negative and vertical when the output gap is
      zero. (The output gap cannot be positive.)

    • The models are consistent with a form of secular stagnation in the sense that, under
      weak conditions, there is a set of equilibria in which the output gap is permanently
      negative.

    • When output is efficient, the output multiplier on government purchases is zero. When
   1
     This argument is reminiscent of Jackson (1992)’s critique of the use of unbounded mechanisms in imple-
mentation theory. (I thank Asen Kochov for pointing out this connection to me.)
   2
     The models are finite horizon and have a set of equilibria that are indexed by final-period (possibly
random) inflation. All of these results are conditional on a particular specification of final period inflation
(which might be interpreted as “anchored” inflation expectations).


                                                      1
         output is inefficiently low, the output multiplier on government purchases is one.

       • The neo-Fisherian logic doesn’t apply: higher nominal interest rules result in lower
         inflation.

       • There is no “forward guidance puzzle”: if interest rate rules obey the Taylor Principle,
         the current impact of forward guidance about future interest rates declines exponen-
         tially with the horizon of the guidance.3

       • Lowering the nominal wage floor makes inefficient equilibrium outcomes even worse in
         a welfare sense.4

In Appendix A, I describe highly accurate numerical solution methods for (the fully nonlinear)
versions of this class of models in which exogenous shocks follow a Markov chain. I apply
these methods in a numerical example that illustrates the (possibly surprising) power of
slightly negative nominal interest rates.5
       The theoretical argument in the first part of the paper justifies the imposition of some
bounds on prices and wages. Of course, the quantitative implications of a model with such
bounds necessarily depend on their magnitudes. But, as described above, the nature of this
dependence is somewhat counter-intuitive. Reducing the nominal wage floor reduces inflation
expectations, raises real interest rates, and (for a given interest rate rule) lowers output. This
logic means that a world with very low nominal wage floors has highly inefficient equilibrium
outcomes and so is not well-approximated by models without price/wage bounds or without
monetary trade.
       We can get some intuition for these apparently counterintuitive results about bounds
through the lens of a simple two-person game, in which player i chooses ai from the interval
   3
     See del Negro, Giannoni (2015) and MacKay, Nakamura, and Steinsson (2016) for a description of the
“forward guidance puzzle” in New Keynesian models.
   4
     The result resembles the “paradox of toil” described by Eggertsson (2010) and the “paradox of flexibility”
described by Eggertsson and Krugman (2012).
   5
     The numerical methods mirror those described in Kocherlakota (2016b).




                                                      2
I. The players’ payo↵s are given by (a1 a2 , a1 a2 ), so that they want their choices to have the
same sign and be as large as possible in absolute value.
   Suppose first that the interval is unbounded, so that I = ( 1, 1). Then, player i has no
best response when player j chooses aj 6= 0. It follows that the unique (pure strategy Nash)
equilibrium in this game is that both players choose 0.
   Now suppose instead that the interval is bounded from above and below, so that I = [b, B]
where b < 0 < B. It is still an equilibrium for both players to choose 0, but it is also an
equilibrium for both players to choose b or for both players to choose B. (Indeed, the latter
two extremal equilibria seem more robust, since the first requires the use of weakly dominated
strategies.) As we increase the absolute value of the bounds, the set of equilibria in the latter
bounded game diverges from the set of equilibria in the former unbounded game. A game
without bounds on players’ action sets need not be a useful approximation to a
game with bounds on action sets, even when those bounds are very loose.
   Why do the implications of monetary models with price/wage bounds di↵er from more
conventional monetary models with nominal frictions (like models with Calvo pricing, Rotem-
berg pricing or menu costs)? The key di↵erence lies in the nature of the inefficiency implied
by the two kinds of models. In conventional models with (only) price-setting frictions, the
allocation is inefficient because agents consume a lot of goods from some firms (with low
prices) and they consume few goods from some firms (with high prices). In the class of mod-
els with price/wage bounds that I study in this paper, the allocation is inefficient because all
firms are producing too little and all households are working too little.
   Relatedly, macroeconomists typically use models with pricing frictions to address ques-
tions about the short run and flexible price models to address questions about the long run.
But a key lesson of this paper is that flexible price models only make sense theoretically if
they incorporate price ceilings and wage floors. These bounds can have a material e↵ect on
the models’ implications even over the longer run and even when they are loose.
   Throughout the paper, I’m agnostic about the source of the nominal wage floors or price


                                               3
ceilings. But I don’t believe that either should be seen as emerging from legal restrictions of
some kind. Rather, it seems clear that, at any point in time, businesses face non-statutory
bounds on their price and wage decisions. The important empirical issue with bounds on
price-setting and wage-setting is not whether they exist, but rather if and when they bind.
       I defer a full discussion of the related literature until Section 5. However, for clarity, it
is important to emphasize that the class of models that I study feature a lower bound on
nominal wages. This bound has distinct implications from the more typical assumption that
real wages are sticky (for prominent examples, see Blanchard and Gali (2007) or Christiano,
Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2016)). In a model with sticky real wages, there is a gap between
the marginal product of labor and the real wage. In a model with flexible prices and a lower
bound on nominal wages, product market competition will eliminate any such gap. (There
is a more related literature about downward nominal wage rigidity, which I will discuss in
Section 5.)
       I close with a final methodological comment. Throughout the paper, I abandon the re-
cursivity/stationarity restrictions that macroeconomists usually impose on equilibria. These
restrictions, as far as I can tell, have no economics behind them. Rather, they are ad hoc
ways to ensure that macroeconomic models are “nice” from the point of view of computation
(and, for some, estimation).
       In contrast (and as in Kocherlakota (2016a)), I use finite horizon models. The upper-
hemicontinuity of equilibrium correspondences with respect to horizon length implies that
these models should have fewer equilibria than their infinite horizon analogs.6 Nonetheless,
the finite horizon models that I study actually exhibit an enormous amount of nominal and
real indeterminacy - indeterminacy which, as will become clear in the next section, plays a
key role in the paper.
   6
   Thus, in monetary models in which money is intrinsically valueless, there are only non-autarkic equilibria
when the horizon is infinite. Similarly, infinitely repeated games may have many more equilibria than occurs
when the same game is repeated a finite number of times.




                                                     4
2     Why Monetary Models Need Bounds on Prices and

      Wages

In this section, I illustrate, through a two-period example, why monetary models need to
include bounds on prices and wages. I first consider a (standard) Walrasian model of mon-
etary exchange. In this model, the government imposes a lump-sum tax in period 2 equal
to the average amount of money outstanding. As a result, essentially any price level is an
equilibrium in period 2. However, the anticipation of many (possibly almost all) of these
period 2 equilibria leads to non-existence of equilibrium in period 1. Put another way, we
have to impose an otherwise artificial restriction on the set of period 2 equilibria to ensure
that we get existence of equilibrium in period 1.
    I should note that there is a key di↵erence between my approach to the definition of
equilibrium and the conventional one. I proceed recursively: I define an equilibrium in
period 2 and then, conditional on any period 2 equilibrium, define an equilibrium in period
1. The more typical approach is to treat period 1 equilibrium and period 2 equilibrium as
(somehow) being determined simultaneously. This approach automatically restricts the set
of equilibrium outcomes in period 2 to be those that are consistent with the existence of
equilibrium in period 1. But this kind of restriction seems hugely problematic - how exactly
is it supposed to be implemented once we get to period 2?
    To better understand the non-existence issue, I switch to a model in which firms compete
strategically by setting prices and wages. I show that, without bounds on the firms’ choices,
the same existence issue emerges as in the Walrasian case. I then add an upper bound to
constrain the firms’ choices of prices and a positive lower bound to constrain their choices
of wages. Given these restrictions, there is an equilibrium in period 1 for any period 2
equilibrium.




                                              5
2.1    Two Period Example Setup

There are two periods and a unit measure of agents who all live for two periods. The agents
maximize the expectation of a cardinal utility function of the form:


                                            u(c1 ) + kc2


where k > 0. Here, c1 is consumption in period 1 and c2 is consumption in period 2. The
utility function u satisfies typical restrictions:


                                         u0 , u00 > 0

                                         limc!0 u0 (c) = 1

                                        limc!1 u0 (c) = 0


   In period 1, the agents are each endowed with N̄ units of time. In period 2, the agents
are each endowed with Y units of consumption. Both consumption and leisure are required
to be non-negative.
   There are J firms that have identical constant returns to scale technologies that transform
a measure n units of time in period 1, n         0, into a measure n consumption goods. The
agents have equal ownership of all firms.
   The symmetric efficient allocation in this environment is easy to compute. Agents have
no utility from leisure and their time can generate useful consumption goods in period 1. So,
it is efficient for each agent to work N̄ unit of times in period 1, consume N̄ units of goods
in period 1, and to consume Y units of goods in period 2.


2.2    Two-Period Walrasian Monetary Equilibrium

I now add money to this model. I treat money as an interest-bearing asset (akin to the
interest-bearing reserves that banks hold with the Federal Reserve). Each person is endowed


                                                 6
with M dollars of money in period 1. The government commits to an interest rate rule: in
period 2, money pays a gross nominal interest rate R(P1 ), where R is a continuous function
of the period 1 price level P1 . In terms of fiscal policy, all agents are required to pay a
lump-sum tax of M R(P1 ) dollars in period 2.
   In period 2, households trade money and goods. Given a period 2 price level P2 , the
generic household’s problem is:


                           maxc2, M2 kc2

                                  s.t.P2 c2 + M2  P2 Y + M10 R(P1⇤ )

                                     M2    M R(P1⇤ )


where P1⇤ is the period 1 price level. (Here, I’m allowing a (measure zero) of households to
hold M10 that di↵ers at least slightly from M. However, the average M10 is equal to the initial
per-capita money-holdings M.) The last constraint is necessary to ensure that the household
has enough money at the end of the period to pay its taxes.
   It is straightforward to show that, for any P2 , it’s optimal for households to set M2 =
M R(P1⇤ ) and to set:
                            c2 = Y + M10 R(P1 )/P2     M R(P1 )/P2

Given these choices, markets clear, because the average of M10 across households equals the
supply of money M. It follows that any positive real P2 is an equilibrium.
   Now, we move back in time to period 1. Suppose the households rationally expect that
the equilibrium period 2 price level P2⇤ will equal the equilibrium period 1 price level P1⇤
multiplied by (an endogenously determined variable) ⇧⇤ . Given these expectations, they
trade in period 1. The households’ problem in period 1 is then:




                                               7
                     (c⇤1 , n⇤1 , c⇤2 , M10⇤ ) 2 argmax(c1 ,n1 ,c2 ,M10 ) u(c1 ) + kc2

                                     s.t.P1⇤ c1 + M10 = W ⇤ n1 + M + J                ⇤


                                         ⇧⇤ P1⇤ c2 = M10 R(P1⇤ )             M R(P1 ) + ⇧⇤ P1⇤ Y

                                         c1 , c2 , n1 , N̄       n1 , M10      0


where P1⇤ is the period 1 price level, and W ⇤ is the period 1 wage (in terms of dollars). The
firms’ problem is:
                                          ⇤
                                              = maxnf P1⇤ nf1               W ⇤ nf1
                                                         1 0



Finally, the market-clearing conditions are:


                                                        c⇤1 = n⇤1

                                                      nf1 ⇤ = n⇤1

                                                        c⇤2 = Y

                                                     M10⇤ = M


It is straightforward to show that:

Proposition 1. Given a monetary policy rule R and an anticipated period 2 gross inflation
rate ⇧⇤ , there exists a period 1 Walrasian monetary equilibrium if and only if there exists
some P1⇤ such that:
                                                                  R(P1⇤ )
                                                u0 (N̄ ) = k
                                                                   ⇧⇤

In any Walrasian monetary equilibrium, the equilibrium allocation is efficient.

Proof. If W ⇤ > P1⇤ , then the firms will choose nf1 ⇤ = 0 while households choose n⇤1 = N̄ , which
violates market-clearing. If W ⇤ < P1⇤ , there is no solution to the firm’s problem. Hence, in
any Walrasian monetary equilibrium, W ⇤ = P1⇤ . Households choose n⇤1 = N̄ and firm profits

                                                             8
 ⇤
     = 0. It follows from market-clearing that:


                                            c⇤1 = N̄

                                            c⇤2 = Y


which means that, in any Walrasian monetary equilibrium, the allocation is efficient.
     However, people will be willing to hold M dollars of money from period 1 to period 2
if and only if the real interest rate paid by money is equal to the shadow real interest rate
associated with the efficient allocation. Mathematically, we need:

                                                      R(P1⇤ )
                                       u0 (N̄ ) = k
                                                       ⇧⇤

which proves the proposition.

     Proposition 1 shows that there is a Walrasian monetary equilibrium if the real interest
rate on money is equal to the efficient real interest rate. That Walrasian equilibrium is
efficient.
     However, there is an existence problem with Walrasian equilibrium. Suppose Rmin 
R(P1 )  Rmax for all P1 , and:


                                      u0 (N̄ )⇧⇤ /k > Rmax                                 (1)

                                      u0 (N̄ )⇧⇤ /k < Rmin


Then, a period 1 Walrasian equilibrium doesn’t exist. The criterion of existence in period
1 imposes a constraint on the interest rate rule and/or what agents believe will happen in
period 2. But this seems highly problematic. Why should we presume that the government
will be informed enough or benevolent enough to choose an interest rate rule that is consistent
with existence of equilibrium? Or that people in period 1 will necessarily believe that people
in the future will value money in a way that is consistent with the existence of equilibrium

                                                  9
today?


2.3       Comments on the Non-Existence Result

In this subsection, I consider the robustness of the above non-existence result to four pertur-
bations of the basic model: other formulations of fiscal policy, the addition of non-interest-
bearing currency with liquidity services, the addition of a physical storage technology, and
the collapse of two-period trade into a single static market.


Fiscal Policy

In the above model, the government levies a period 2 purely nominal lump-sum tax equal to
the average money-holdings in the economy. This fiscal policy makes the period 2 price level
indeterminate. Suppose instead that the government pegs the price of money in period 2
equal to ⇧2 P1 , where P1 is the endogenous period 1 price level and ⇧2 is an exogenous gross
inflation rate. This peg could be accomplished in a number of ways, including a restriction
that specifies period 2 taxes to be M (1 + R(P1 ))/(⇧2 P1 ) units of consumption.7 Such a peg
would eliminate the indeterminacy in period 2 and restrict (rational) period 1 beliefs about
period 2 inflation to be concentrated on ⇧2 .
       Under these kinds of policies, there is still a non-existence problem but its source is tied
to period 2 policy choices, rather than period 2 equilibrium selection. In particular, suppose
that the government specifies ⇧2 and R(P1 ) so that:


                                           u0 (N̄ ) < kR(P1 )/⇧2


for all P1 . Then, there is no period 1 equilibrium and the model is uninformative about the
implications of this (generic) set of policy choices.
   7
     This kind of fiscal policy, in which the government’s intertemporal budget constraint is not satisfied for
all price level processes, is typically termed non-Ricardian (Woodford (1995)).




                                                      10
Currency

The above discussion treats all money as interest-bearing. Of course, in reality, some money
(currency) is non-interest-bearing. and is held because it provides liquidity services over
interest-bearing reserves. We can generalize the above non-existence problem to a model
in which agents can swap (utility-generating) currency in exchange for (interest-bearing)
reserves with the government in the first period.
   In particular, suppose that agents have preferences of the form:


                                   u(c1 ) + kc2 + v(X10 /P2 )


where X10 represents the agent’s (non-interest-bearing) currency-holdings at the end of period
1. Here, v is an increasing and concave function. Suppose too that agents can trade currency
and reserves in period 1 with the government, so that their budget constraint in period 1
looks like:
                                P1 c1 + M10 + X10  W1 n1 + M

and money market-clearing in period 1 is given by:


                                        M10 + X10 = M


As before, the agents have to pay a lump-sum tax equal to average money-holdings at the
end of period 2.
   Suppose that the interest rate rule satisfies:


                                    Rmin  R(P1 )  Rmax


for all P1 . Then, we can generalize the above non-existence result to show that there is no




                                              11
period 1 equilibrium for any period 2 inflation rate ⇧⇤ such that:


                               ⇧⇤ u0 (N̄ ) > max(kRmax , k + v 0 (0))                          (2)

                               ⇧⇤ u0 (N̄ ) < kRmin


   The restriction (2) is a generalization of (1) that takes into account the new possibility
that the agents can give their reserves to the government in exchange for an equivalent dollar
amount of currency. In such an equilibrium, agents set their currency-holdings X10 = M and
their reserve-holdings M10 equal to 0. The nominal interest rate is (1 + v 0 ( P1M⇧⇤ )/k) > R(P1 ).
But, in this case, the nominal interest rate can be no larger than:


                                             (1 + v 0 (0)/k)


Note that the restriction (2) only has bite if v 0 (0) < 1, so that there is a limit to the
willingness of agents to substitute between currency and consumption.


Storage

We can generalize the non-existence result to allow for the presence of a technology that
transforms current consumption into future consumption. In particular, suppose agents can
store x units of consumption in period 1 to generate (1 + )x units of consumption in period
2, for any x   0. I suppose that there exists Sef f > 0 such that:


                                    u0 (N̄     Sef f ) = (1 + )k


so that storage is positive in a Walrasian equilibrium allocation.
   Let R be an interest rate rule that satisfies:


                                     Rmin  R(P1 )  Rmax



                                                   12
for all P1 . We can generalize the non-existence result in the presence of storage by noting
that there is no equilibrium for any period 2 inflation rate ⇧⇤ such that:


                                       (1 + )⇧⇤ > Rmax


or:
                                       (1 + )⇧⇤ < Rmin

The presence of storage guarantees that the real interest rate must equal (1 + ) in an
equilibrium allocation. But this real interest rate could well be inconsistent with agents’
beliefs about the real return to money.


Sequential Trade

Throughout this paper, I model trade as sequential. I see the sequential nature of trade as
being key to the non-existence result.
      Suppose that we were to consider an alternative model in which all trade takes place in
period 1. In this model, in addition to trading period 1 money, period 1 time, and period 1
consumption in the initial period, agents also trade claims to period 2 money and period 2
consumption. Let Q1 be the price of period 2 money in terms of period 1 money and q1 be
the price of period 2 consumption in terms of period 1 money. In this single-period model,
the ability of agents to trade these period 2 claims implies that:


                                      Q1 = 1/R(P1 )

                                       q1 = (k/u0 (N̄ ))/P1


These relative prices imply that inflation from period 1 to period 2 equals:


                               ⇧⇤ = q1 /(P1 Q1 ) = kR(P1 )/u0 (N̄ )



                                               13
   In the one-period model, inflation is now simply the relative price of di↵erent kinds of
claims. In contrast, in the two-period sequential trade model, the period 2 price level is a
variable that is freely determined by people’s collective willingness to exchange goods for
dollars in that period. There is nothing that can be done in period 1 to pin down that free
variable (or period 1 beliefs about it) - and that’s what translates into non-existence.
   Note that the completeness of markets in the one-period model is not the essential in-
gredient that ensures existence. What matters is the absence of re-trading. If agents in
the single-period complete markets economy were to believe that a market for consumption
and dollars will re-open in period 2, then we would face the same non-existence problem as
described earlier.


2.4    Explicit Price and Wage Competition

How can we fix this defect in Walrasian monetary equilibrium? To answer this question, I
turn to a more explicitly strategic model of firm price and wage competition. I begin in this
section by allowing the firms to choose from action sets that are unbounded from above or
away from zero. As above, I assume that households and firms have rational beliefs about
what will transpire in period 2.
   The J firms play a game in period 1 in which they simultaneously choose a wage W, a
price P , and a capacity constraint Ȳ . The capacity constraint simultaneously constrains the
labor hired by the firm (to be no more than Ȳ ) and output produced by the firm (to be no
more than Ȳ ). As we shall see, the capacity constraint choice generates an endogenous link
between household product demand and firm labor demand.
   After observing firm choices, households choose, in a randomly determined sequence, how
many goods to buy from each firm and how much time to supply to each firm. (The sequential
nature of household choice limits the amount of inefficient queueing at any given firm.) In
this second stage, a household’s best labor market response is to supply all of its time to the
capacity-unconstrained firm with the highest (positive) wage, given prior households’ choices.


                                              14
In the product market, a household demands:


                                    u0 1 (kR(P1 )P1min /P2 )


units of consumption in period 1, where P1 is the equilibrium price level in period 1, P1min is
the lowest price set by a capacity-unconstrained firm, and P2 is the commonly known period
2 price level. The household buys that consumption from the capacity-unconstrained firm
that o↵ers the lowest prices, given the choices by prior households.
   In this game, I focus on symmetric equilibria (in which all firms make identical choices). I
further restrict attention to equilibria in which firms’ common production level Ȳ is positive
and their common capacity constraint is equal to Ȳ J/(J         1). This (extra) capacity is
sufficiently large to allow (J   1) non-deviating firms to absorb the labor/output of any
single firm that deviates. At the same time, the extra capacity is small enough to ensure
that a given firm’s residual labor supply is inelastic whenever there is excess aggregate labor
supply.
   I refer to these equilibria as being strategic competitive equilibria. They have the following
properties.
   First, all firms choose W = P1 . If W > P1 , then all firms are making negative profits.
A given firm can gain by setting its capacity constraint to zero. If W < P1 , then a given firm
can gain by raising its capacity constraint a lot, cutting its price slightly (so as to generate
more household demand), and raising its wage slightly (to attract more household labor
supply).
   Second, there is no equilibrium in which labor n⇤1 < N̄ (these variables are per-
household). Suppose that there is such an equilibrium and consider a deviation in which
some firm j cuts its wage W by ✏ (✏ small and positive). This deviation leads households
to supply as much labor as they can to the other (J        1) high-wage firms. But, because of
their capacity constraints, those firms can only use the labor supply of (n⇤1 /N̄ ) households.
Hence, firm j profits by paying the residual households a lower wage (while keeping prices

                                              15
the same).
   Finally, there is no equilibrium in which:

                                                     kR(P1⇤ )
                                       u0 (N̄ ) 6=
                                                       ⇧⇤

where ⇧⇤ is the anticipated equilibrium inflation rate from period 1 to period 2. Suppose
u0 (N̄ ) < kR(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤ . Then, households demand only c1 < N̄ units of consumption, which is
contradicted by the earlier observation that n⇤1 = N̄ in equilibrium.
   In contrast, suppose that u0 (N̄ ) > kR(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤ , and suppose firm j deviates by raising
its price by ✏. The households buy as much output as they can from the firm’s cheaper
competitors. But their capacity constraints imply that those other firms can collectively
produce at most N̄ units of consumption, which is less than what households demand at the
price P1⇤ . Firm j’s price increase allows it to earn positive profits by fulfilling that excess
demand at a higher price than W1⇤ = P1⇤ .
   These three observations imply that the only possible equilibrium outcome is one in which:


                                         n⇤1 = N̄

                                         c⇤1 = N̄

                                     u0 (N̄ ) = kR(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤

                                        P1⇤ = W1⇤

                                         c⇤2 = Y


It is straightforward to verify that this is, in fact, an equilibrium outcome (along with each
firm setting its capacity constraint equal to N̄ /(J 1) and producing N̄ /J). Because W = P1 ,
no firm gains by changing its capacity constraint without also lowering its wage or raising its
price. But if a firm cuts its wage, all households supply their labor to its competitors and
the deviating firm will not be able to hire any workers. Similarly, if a firm raises its product



                                                16
price, all households will buy their goods from its competitors and the deviating firm will
not be able to sell any goods.
   Thus, the set of strategic competitive equilibria is in fact equivalent to the set of Walrasian
monetary equilibria described in the prior subsection. This means that strategic competition
gives rise to efficient outcomes. However, it also means that, just as was true for Walrasian
equilibrium, there is no strategic competitive equilibrium for a wide range of rational beliefs
about period 2 equilibrium and/or government policy rules.


2.5    Price and Wage Bounds

In this subsection, I discuss why we obtained the non-existence result in the prior subsection.
As I did in the introduction, I argue that it is attributable to the openness of the firms’ action
sets. I describe and characterize bounded strategic competitive equilibria.
   Suppose that the period 2 gross inflation rate ⇧⇤ is such that:

                                                     kR(P1 )
                                        u0 (N̄ ) <
                                                       ⇧⇤

for all values of P1 . Then, for any period 1 price level, the households demand less consump-
tion than can be produced if they all work full-time. But we saw in the last subsection it is
impossible for n1 < N̄ in a strategic competitive equilibrium because, regardless of how low
P1 is, firms can increase their profits by cutting wages.
   Similarly, suppose that ⇧⇤ is such that:

                                                     kR(P1 )
                                        u0 (N̄ ) >
                                                       ⇧⇤

for all P1 . Then, for any price level, the households demand more consumption than can be
produced if they all work full-time. But we saw in the last subsection that it is impossible
for this situation to occur in a strategic competitive equilibrium, because, regardless of how
high P1 is, firms can always increase their profits by raising prices.

                                                17
   Thus, the non-existence of period 1 equilibrium, conditional on beliefs about what will
happen in period 2, is attributable to the non-compact nature of the firms’ action sets. The
issue is similar to what occurs in a game between two players who are asked to simultaneously
name two natural numbers, with a prize being awarded to the player who names the higher
number. There is, of course, no equilibrium to this game because a player can always increase
her chance of winning the prize by choosing a (possibly mixed) strategy that stochastically
dominates her initial one. In contrast, suppose we compactify the players’ action sets from
above by requiring their choices to be less than or equal to B. Then, the unique equilibrium
is one in which both players choose B and split the prize.
   This analogy suggests that we can resolve the non-existence problem by adding constraints
to the firms’ action sets. With that in mind, I now consider the same game as in the prior
subsection, except that a firm’s choice of its price is bounded from above by PU B and its
choice of a wage is bounded from below by WLB > 0. As before, I focus on symmetric
equilibria in which the firm production equals their chosen positive capacity. I term such
equilibria bounded strategic competitive equilibria.

Proposition 2. Given a monetary policy rule R, and a period 2 gross inflation rate ⇧⇤ , an
outcome (c⇤1 , n⇤1 , W, P1⇤ ) is part of a bounded strategic competitive equilibrium outcome if and
only if c⇤1 = n⇤1 , W ⇤ = P1⇤ , and one of the three following sets of conditions are satisfied:


                  1. P1⇤ = W LB ; n⇤1 < N̄ ; and u0 (c⇤1 ) = kR(W LB )/⇧⇤

                  2. P1⇤ = P U B ; n⇤1 = N̄ ; and u0 (N̄ ) > kR(P U B )/⇧⇤

                     3. W LB  P1⇤  P U B ; n⇤1 = N̄ ; and u0 (N̄ ) = kR(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤


Proof. I first show that these cases are, in fact, equilibria. Note first that, since W ⇤ = P1⇤ ,
firms are indi↵erent about the level of their capacity constraints if they don’t change prices
or wages.
   In case 1: W ⇤ = W LB , and so no firm can deviate by cutting its wage. Raising its price


                                                 18
means that no customers will demand its goods. It follows that firms can’t find a profitable
deviation.
    In case 2: P1⇤ = P U B . A firm can’t deviate by increasing its price. Lowering its wage
means that it won’t be able to hire any labor. It follows that firms can’t find a profitable
deviation.
    In case 3: There is no profitable deviation for any firm, because a firm loses all of its labor
supply to its competitors if it lowers its wage and loses all product demand to its competitors
if raises its price.
    Are there other equilibria? It is straightforward to show that, in any equilibrium, c⇤1 = n⇤1
and P1⇤ = W ⇤ . Given the gross real return on money (R(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤ ), households demand:


                                       cd1 (P1⇤ ) = u0 1 (kR(P1⇤ )/⇧⇤ )


units of consumption from the firms. Firms set their capacity constraints at cd1 (P1⇤ )/(J       1)
and hire cd1 (P1⇤ )/J units of time.
    Suppose first that demand is low in the sense that cd1 (P1 ) < N̄ . If W ⇤ is also larger
than WLB , then a firm can profit by cutting its wage slightly (and hiring the non-employed
households). So, demand can only be low in an equilibrium if W ⇤ = WLB (case 1).
    Suppose alternatively that demand is high in the sense that cd1 (P1⇤ ) > N̄ . In this case,
firms set their production level at N̄ /J and their capacity constraints at N̄ /(J        1). Bu if
P1⇤ < PU B , then a firm can profit by raising its price slightly (and fulfilling some of the excess
demand). So, demand can only be high in an equilibrium if P1⇤ = PU B (case 2).

    Proposition 2 describes three kinds of bounded strategic competitive equilibria. In all
of them, while they can substitute between consumption and interest-bearing money, the
households end up spending their wage income (W ⇤ n⇤1 ) to buy P1⇤ c⇤1 period 1 goods. Money
plays no substantive role in the economy: households simply hold their initial money-holdings
M into period 2 and then use that money to pay their taxes.


                                                     19
       The first kind of equilibria (case 1) are inefficient, because households consume c⇤1 < N̄
and work n⇤1 < N̄ . The inefficiency cannot be alleviated because firms can’t lower their wages.
The second kind of equilibria (case 2) are efficient (because households consume c⇤1 = N̄ and
work n⇤1 = N̄ ). However, they are efficient with rationing: households systematically would
like to sell their money for more goods from firms than the firms can produce (given their
capacity constraints). The rationing cannot be alleviated because the firms are unable to
adjust their prices upward. The final kind of equilibria (case 3) are efficient without rationing
and correspond to the Walrasian monetary equilibria.8


2.6       Existence of Bounded Strategic Competitive Equilibria

In this subsection, I prove that for any (continuous) interest rate rule R, any period 2 gross
inflation rate ⇧⇤ , for any price upper bound P U B , and for any W LB , there exists a bounded
strategic competitive equilibrium.

Proposition 3. For any continuous interest rate rule R, any period 2 gross inflation rate
⇧⇤ , price upper bound P U B , and nominal wage floor W LB , there exists a bounded strategic
competitive equilibrium.

Proof. If there isn’t an inefficient equilibrium (case 1), then:

                                                          kR(W LB )
                                            u0 (N̄ )
                                                             ⇧⇤

If there isn’t an efficient equilibrium with rationing (case 2), then:


                                                          kR(P U B )
                                             u0 (N̄ ) 
                                                            ⇧⇤
   8
    If households value non-interest-bearing currency, as described in section 2.4, any allocation is inefficient
when the gross nominal interest rate on reserves R exceeds 1 (the gross nominal rate of return paid by
currency).




                                                       20
Since R is continuous, these two inequalities imply via the intermediate value theorem that:

                                                    kR(P1⇤ )
                                       u0 (N̄ ) =
                                                      ⇧⇤

so that there exists at least one efficient equilibrium without rationing.

   There is a bounded strategic competitive equilibrium for all (continuous) interest rate
rules and all ⇧⇤ . Note that the proof of existence is valid regardless of how large P U B is or
how small W LB is.


2.7    Summary

In this section, I illustrated a problem with the concept of Walrasian equilibrium: to obtain
existence in a given period, we need to restrict the set of future equilibrium outcomes. I
showed how to fix this problem by using bounded strategic competitive equilibrium - a notion
of equilibrium which incorporates bounds on firm price-setting and wage-setting.
   Bounded strategic competitive equilibrium outcomes may be inefficient. The essence
of the inefficiency is that households would like to work and consume more. However, a
given household can only trade its labor for consumption via firms that own the means of
production. Those firms can’t profitably expand their scale of operation because they can’t
cut nominal wages.
   It shouldn’t be surprising that the relevant inefficiency involves underproduction, not
overproduction. Underproduction represents mutually beneficial trades not being consum-
mated. This kind of inefficiency is simply a form of incompleteness of markets. In contrast,
overproduction would (somehow) require forcing firms and workers to engage in trades that
are not mutually beneficial.




                                               21
3          Dynamic Equilibrium

In this section, I extend the above definition of equilibrium to a finite horizon economies.
(Henceforth, I use the short-hand term “equilibrium” to refer to a bounded strategic com-
petitive equilibrium.)


3.1         Description of the Economy

Consider a (T + 1) period stochastic version of the above economy, where T is finite but
arbitrarily large. In each period, firms have a technology in which n units of time translates
into n units of output, for any n        0. Agents have no disutility from labor, and are endowed
with N̄t units of time in period t = 1, , ..., T, where {N̄t }Tt=1 is a stochastic process. They
are endowed with a random amount YT +1 units of consumption in the final period (T + 1).
Agents have expected utility, with a time separable cardinal utility function over consumption
processes:
                                             T +1
                                             X
                                                    s
                                                        u(cs ;   s)
                                             s=1

where { s }Ts=1
             +1
                is a stochastic process.
         In terms of monetary policy, money is again an interest-bearing asset. The one-period
nominal interest rate from period (t 1) to period t is given by R(⇡t ; "t ), where ⇡t is the gross
inflation rate from period (t       1) to period t and ("s )Ts=1 is an exogenous stochastic process of
monetary policy shocks. (Without loss of generality, I fix P0 = 1.) I assume that the interest
rate rule R is strictly increasing and continuous in its first argument. In the final period, the
government levies a lump-sum tax equal to the per-capita money supply on each agent.9
         Firms compete in each period t = 1, ..., T by setting prices and wages. Their price choice
in period t is constrained by an upper bound given by ⇡ U B Pt⇤ 1 , where Pt⇤         1   is the period
(t        1) price level. Their wage choice is constrained by a lower bound given by ⇡ LB Wt⇤ 1 .
Since labor productivity is constant over time, this lower bound on nominal wages translates
     9
    More generally, I could allow for taxes in all periods. The results rely on the assumption that the
government’s final period lump-sum tax is equal to the per-capita residual money supply.


                                                        22
into an equivalent lower bound on inflation.10


3.2          Definition of Equilibrium

As in the 2-period economy, the gross inflation rate ⇡T +1 in the final period (T + 1) is
indeterminate. So, the set of equilibria should be seen as being indexed by the (random)
inflation rate ⇡T +1 .
                                                                     T
         Given the exogenous processes {"s ,              s , , N̄s }s=1   and the exogenous period (T + 1) shocks
(   T +1 ,   ⇡T +1 , YT +1 ), an equilibrium is a joint consumption-inflation process (ct , ⇡t )Tt=1 that
satisfies two sets of restrictions. The first is a set of Euler equations:


                   0                             LB              u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 ) 0
                  u (ct ;   t)   = max( R(⇡           ; "t )Et (                 ), u (N̄t ;    t )), t   = 1, .., T   (3)
                                                                       ⇡t+1

where cT +1 = YT +1 . The period t level of consumption is equal to its efficient level N̄t if
inflation is above its lower bound. Otherwise, the period t level of consumption is shaped
by the current marginal utility of future dollars given that period t inflation is at its lower
bound.
         The second set of restrictions describes how inflation is determined subject to its upper
and lower bounds. If inflation is unconstrained by its bounds, then the level of consumption
is efficient. The inflation rate in period t is determined by the interest rate rule so as to
satisfy the Euler equation:

                                                                           u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                                     u0 (N̄t ;   t ) = R(⇡t ; "t )Et (                      )
                                                                                 ⇡t+1

However, there may be no ⇡t in [⇡ LB , ⇡ U B ] such that the Euler equation is satisfied. More
    10
   If labor productivity varied over time, or (in a richer model) mark-ups varied over time, then the lower
bound on inflation would be a stochastic process.




                                                                23
generally, for t = 1, ..., T, the second set of equilibrium restrictions take the form:

                                                           u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                           ⇡t = ⇡ U B if R(⇡ U B ; "t )Et (                  )1                       (4)
                                                          ⇡t+1 u0 (N̄t ; t )
                                                          u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                              = ⇡ LB if R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et (                    ) 1                       (5)
                                                          ⇡t+1 u0 (N̄t ; t )
                                            u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 ) 1
                              = R 1 ( 1 {Et                    } ; "t ) otherwise                      (6)
                                            ⇡t+1 u0 (N̄t ; t )

where cT +1 = YT +1 . Note that, because R is strictly increasing, these restrictions characterize
a unique ⇡t .
   The three cases can be classified much as in the two-period economy discussed in the
prior section. If:

                                                          u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                                     R(⇡ U B ; "t )Et (                      )<1
                                                          ⇡t+1 u0 (N̄t ; t )

the equilibrium exhibits rationing in period t because agents demand more than the maximal
amount that can be produced. In contrast, if:

                                                          u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                                     R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et (                       ) > 1,
                                                          ⇡t+1 u0 (N̄t ; t )

then equilibrium output is inefficiently low in period t.


3.3    Constructing Equilibrium

It is straightforward to apply backward induction to these restrictions (3)-(6) to construct
the set of equilibria. Fix an arbitrary random period (T + 1) gross inflation rate ⇡T +1
and set cT +1 = YT +1 . Then, we can use the period T restrictions (3) to solve for period T
consumption:

                                                                u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 ) 0
                u0 (cT ;   T ) = max( R(⇡
                                          LB
                                             ; "T )ET (                           ), u (N̄T ;   T ))
                                                                      ⇡T +1


                                                          24
And we can use the period T restriction (4) to solve for inflation:

                                                           u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 )
                          ⇡T = ⇡ U B if R(⇡ U B ; "T )ET (                    )1
                                                          u0 (N̄T ; T )⇡T +1
                                                          u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 )
                             = ⇡ LB if R(⇡ LB ; "T )ET ( 0                    ) 1
                                                         u (N̄T ; T )⇡T +1
                                            u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 ) 1
                             = R 1 ( 1 {ET                      } ; "T ) otherwise
                                            ⇡T +1 u0 (N̄T ; T )

There is a unique solution for ⇡T because the interest rate rule R is strictly increasing and
continuous.
    We can then continue using backward induction to construct the full equilibrium (cT , ⇡T )Tt=1 .
In this way, given any (random) terminal inflation ⇡T +1 , there is a unique equilibrium (c, ⇡).
    Note that in any equilibrium of this form, the (identical) households choose never to trade
money and goods. As in the two-period model, money is simply a store of value used to pay
their taxes in the final period. Nonetheless, the opportunity to hold interest-bearing money
can in fact create inefficiencies.


3.4     The Role of the Price/Wage Bounds

What if there were no bounds on prices or wages? In that case, the equilibrium would
necessarily be efficient and inflation would satisfy the restrictions:

                                                1 0
                                      1          u (N̄t ; t )
                             ⇡t = R (          u0 (N̄t+1 ; t+1 )
                                                                   ; "t ), t   = 1, ...(T   1)
                                          Et (       ⇡t+1
                                                                 )

But these restrictions imply that too that the terminal inflation rate ⇡T +1 must be such that
for all t = 1, ..., T :
                                                        1 0
                                                         u (N̄t ; t )
                                                       u0 (N̄t+1 ; t+1 )
                                                  Et (       ⇡t+1
                                                                         )

lies in the range of the interest rate rule R. This (potentially complex) restriction on future
equilibria to ensure period t existence is exactly what I criticized in the two-period example.


                                                            25
4       Results

In this section, I derive a number of properties of the (bounded strategic competitive) equi-
libria of the models set forth in section 3. I focus on implications that are distinct from
models with more conventional pricing frictions. As in Kocherlakota (2016a), the proofs rely
on backward induction.


4.1       Secular Stagnation

In this section, I show that under weak uniform boundedness conditions, there are equilibria
in which output is permanently lower than would be efficient. In my view, this kind of
outcome11 corresponds to what Summers (2013) terms “secular stagnation”. The key to
these equilibria is that money is viewed as a highly valuable asset because long-run inflation
⇡T +1 is expected to be low.

Proposition 4. Suppose that the interest rate rule R satisfies the condition:


                                             R(⇡ LB ; ")        RLB


for all ". Suppose too that for some constants LY and LN


                                            u0 (YT +1 ;    T +1 )     LY > 0 w.p. 1

                              For t = 1, ..., T, u0 (N̄t ;     t)   < LN w.p. 1


Then there is a set of equilibria (with sufficiently low inflation ⇡T +1 ) in which consumption
ct < N̄t with probability one for all t  T.

Proof. In Appendix B.

      The following example is a simple illustration of Proposition 4. The example is based
on the premise that the efficient allocation is constant. It then shows that if                /⇡ LB = 1,
 11
      See Eggertsson and Mehrotra (2014) for an overlapping generations model of secular stagnation.


                                                          26
and the nominal interest rate lower bound equals one, there is a set of constant inefficient
equilibria.12

Example 1. Suppose YT +1 = 1, N̄t = 1, t = 1, ..., T, and that there are no marginal utility
shocks. Suppose
                                             R(⇡ LB ; ") = 1

for all " and ⇡ LB = . Set ⇡T +1 to be any constant so that:


                                                    > ⇡T +1


Then, using backward induction, we can construct an inefficient equilibrium in which period
(T + 1) inflation equals ⇡T +1 , period t inflation ⇡t = ⇡LB , and period t consumption satisfies:

                                                     u0 (1)
                                       u0 (ct ) =           > u0 (1)
                                                    ⇡T +1

       Begin with period T. We know that:

                                                           u0 (1) 0
                                     u0 (cT ) = max(             , u (1))
                                                          ⇡T +1

Since /⇡T +1 > 1, it follows that:
                                             u0 (cT ) > u0 (1)

and ⇡T = ⇡LB . Now suppose inductively that:

                                                            u0 (1)
                                           u0 (ct+1 ) =
                                                           ⇡T +1
  12
     Suppose that there (also) exists ⇡
                                      ¯ > ⇡LB such that R(¯
                                                          ⇡ )/¯
                                                              ⇡ = 1. Then, there is also a set of constant
efficient equilibria.




                                                     27
and ⇡t+1 = ⇡LB . Then:

                                                      u0 (ct+1 ) 0
                                  u0 (ct ) = max(               , u (1))
                                                       ⇡LB
                                             u0 (1)
                                        =
                                            ⇡T +1

Since
                                            /(⇡T +1 ) > 1,

it follows that u0 (ct ) > u0 (1), and that inflation must be at its lower bound ⇡ LB . The equi-
librium construction follows by induction.


4.2     Reducing the Nominal Wage Floor

The main result in this subsection is that reducing the nominal wage floor makes inefficient
equilibrium outcomes even worse in welfare terms. I first use example 1 to illustrate this
claim, and then provide a more general proof.

Example 2. Consider the parameter setting in example 1, except that the wage lower bound
⇡ LB is set to be less than . (Note that R(⇡ LB ; ") still equals one for this lower value of ⇡ LB .)
Then, we can use reverse induction as before to show that, given long-run inflation ⇡T +1 , the
equilibrium marginal utility in period t is given by:

                                                    T t+1 0
                                                           u (1)
                                     u0 (ct ) =                         .
                                                  (⇡ LB )T t ⇡   T +1



This equilibrium marginal utility is an exponentially increasing function of ⇡ LB , meaning
that the equilibrium becomes arbitrarily less efficient as the wage lower bound ⇡ LB is made
smaller.
   The intuition behind Example 2 is simple. Reducing the wage lower bound in period
(t + 1) also reduces expected inflation in period t. Because the lower bound on the interest
rate rule has been left unchanged, the fall in expected inflation results in a higher real interest

                                                    28
rate, lower demand, and lower output.
   The following proposition generalizes Example 2.

Proposition 5. Consider two economies that are identical except that they have distinct
                        LB
inflation lower bounds ⇡H  > ⇡LLB and interest rate rules R, R0 such that:


                                      R0 (⇡LLB ; ") = R(⇡H
                                                         LB
                                                            ; ")


for all ". Suppose (ct , ⇡t )Tt=1 is an equilibrium in the former economy given random period
(T + 1) inflation ⇡T +1 such that ct < N̄t with probability one for all t  T . Then, given
the same random period (T + 1) inflation ⇡T +1 , there is an equilibrium (c0t , ⇡t0 ) in the latter
economy such that:
                                                    LB
                                                  ⇡H
                                u0 (ct ;   t )(        )T   t 1
                                                                   u0 (c0t ;   t)
                                                  ⇡LLB

with probability one for all t  T.

Proof. In Appendix B.

   Proposition 4 established that, for a wide class of economies, there is a “secular stag-
nation” equilibrium in which output is inefficiently low in all periods. Proposition 5 shows
that reducing the nominal wage floor, without changing the minimum nominal interest rate,
makes this secular stagnation equilibrium even worse. The intuition is the same as in Ex-
ample 2: The smaller value of the nominal wage floor translates into lower realized inflation
and lower inflation expectations. With a fixed lower bound on the nominal interest rate, the
lower inflation expectations translate into higher real interest rates, lower demand and lower
output.


4.3    L-Shaped Phillips Curve

In this class of economies, the Phillips curve relating the output gap to inflation is L-shaped.



                                                       29
Proposition 6. Consider an equilibrium (c, ⇡). In this equilibrium, ⇡t = ⇡ LB in any date
and state in which ct < N̄t . In these dates and states:

                                                                    u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                          u0 (ct ;   t ) = R(⇡
                                               LB
                                                  ; "t )Et {                         }
                                                                          ⇡t+1

As well, ct = N̄t in any date and state in which ⇡t > ⇡ LB .

Proof. Straightforward implication of the definition of equilibrium.

   In any equilibrium, the Phillips curve is horizontal with inflation equal to ⇡ LB when there
is a negative output gap (so that output is inefficiently low). In these dates and states,
firms bid down wages and prices to the common lower bound. In contrast, when the output
gap is zero (output is efficient), current inflation is determined by expectations about future
inflation and future consumption:

                                                               1
                         ⇡t = min(R 1 (        1
                                                          0                       ; "t ), ⇡ U B )
                                                   Et { uu0 ((cN̄t+1  ; t+1 )
                                                                  t ; t )⇡t+1
                                                                              }

In this vertical portion of the curve, higher future expected inflation and higher future ex-
pected consumption is associated with higher current inflation. This L-shaped Phillips curve
is quite di↵erent from the log-linear Phillips curve that emerges from the New Keynesian
paradigm.
   Friedman (1968) famously argued that, in the long-run, the Phillips curve is necessarily
vertical. But in the models that I study in this paper, there is no force that ensures that
the economy converges to the vertical portion of the Phillips curve. Instead, as Proposition
4 and Example 1 illustrate, the economy may remain stuck permanently on the horizontal
portion of the Phillips curve. More generally, we should expect the economy to fluctuate
between the two branches of the L.




                                                      30
4.4     Fiscal Multipliers

In this subsection, I discuss how fiscal multipliers work in this class of models.
   Suppose that the government buys an exogenously specified process g = {gt }Tt=1 of con-
sumption goods. (The purchases could be financed in a number of ways. To be explicit,
suppose that the government issues debt that pays o↵ only in period (T + 1) and pays o↵
that debt using lump-taxes.) Then, the efficient level of private consumption in any period
t becomes (N̄t          gt ), where gt is the amount of public consumption in that period. The
equilibrium conditions for private consumption become:

                                                       u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 ) 0
            u0 (ct ;   t)   = max( R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et (                   ), u (N̄t               gt ;   t )), t   = 1, .., T   (7)
                                                             ⇡t+1

   Now suppose that we perturb the government purchases process by increasing period
t purchases gt by a small positive               , while keeping final period inflation ⇡T +1 remaining
unchanged. This increase in government purchases has no e↵ect on private consumption if
ct < (N̄t     gt ). In this case, the output multiplier is one. The impact on welfare depends on
how government purchases enter into agents’ utility functions. There is no e↵ect on period t
inflation (if      is small).
   In contrast, if ct + gt = N̄t , then raising gt by                  will lower ct by               . The output multiplier
is zero, as we get completely crowding out. If there is no rationing, then the period t inflation
rate is given by:
                                                                      1
                                    ⇡t = R 1 (    1
                                                                   0                       ; "t )
                                                      Et { u0 (N̄ut (cgt+1
                                                                        t
                                                                           ; t+1 )
                                                                             ; t )⇡t+1
                                                                                       }

and so it is an increasing function of            .


4.5     Failure of Neo-Fisherian Logic

In recent papers, Cochrane (2016) and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2014) have argued that
increasing the nominal interest rate rule will result in higher inflation. In this subsection,



                                                             31
I consider this claim in the context of the models with bounded competition studied in
this paper. I consider two policy rules (R, R0 ) such that R0 > R for all ⇡, ". The following
proposition shows that, given a random variable ⇡T +1 , the implied equilibrium (c0 , ⇡ 0 ) under
R0 is no larger than the implied equilibrium under R.

Proposition 7. Consider two interest rate rules R, R0 such that R0 (⇡; ") > R(⇡; ") for all
(⇡, "). If (c⇤ , ⇡ ⇤ ) is an equilibrium given R with (random) period (T + 1) inflation ⇡T +1 , and
(c0 , ⇡ 0 ) is an equilibrium given R0 with the same (random) period (T +1) inflation, then c0t  c⇤t
and ⇡t0  ⇡t⇤ for all t with probability one.

Proof. In Appendix B.

   The key neo-Fisherian premise is that, for any interest rate rule, the long run real interest
rate is necessarily efficient. Given this premise, the Fisher equation then implies that the
long-run inflation rate has to move one-for-one with the long-run nominal interest rate. But,
as Proposition 4 demonstrates, this presumption of a policy-invariant long-run real interest
rate is not valid in models with bounded competition. In these models, there is a set of
equilibria indexed by the long-run inflation rate, and the long-run real interest rate can vary
both across and within these equilibria.


4.6    The Forward Guidance Puzzle

Del Negro, et. al. (2015) and MacKay, et. al. (2016) demonstrate that forward guid-
ance about future monetary policy is puzzlingly powerful in the New Keynesian modeling
paradigm. In this subsection, I analyze the e↵ect of forward guidance on (inefficiently low)
current output within the class of models studied in this paper. I make two main points:

   • The e↵ect of forward guidance is completely summarized through its impact on the
      inflation rate during the period in which output returns to an efficient level.

   • If the (logged) interest rate rule obeys the Taylor Principle, forward guidance becomes
      exponentially less e↵ective with respect to the horizon.

                                                 32
Transition Inflation as a Summary Statistic

Suppose that the interest rate rule satisfies R(⇡ LB ; ") = RLB for all ". Consider an equilibrium
such that, in some event ⌅t , consumption is known to be inefficiently low in periods (t + s),
s = 0, ..., ⌧, and known to be efficient in all periods after (t + s). This is a description of a
deterministic liquidity trap, in which the nominal interest rate is known to be pinned at its
lowest level for the next ⌧ periods.
   In any equilibrium of this kind, we know that:

                                                   u0 (ct+1 ;   t+1 )
                      u0 (ct ;   t)   = RLB Et {                        }
                                                         ⇡ LB
                                                                        u0 (N̄t+⌧ +1 ; t+⌧ +1 )
                                      = ( RLB /⇡ LB )⌧ RLB Et {                                 }                (8)
                                                                               ⇡t+⌧ +1

This restriction implies that the impact of any form of post-trap forward guidance is com-
pletely summarized through its impact on the inflation rate ⇡t+⌧ +1 , during the single period
in which the economy exits the trap. Note too that the e↵ect of changes in this transition
inflation rate ⇡t+⌧ +1 on prior consumption is independent of the anticipated duration ⌧ of
the liquidity trap.


Decaying E↵ect of Forward Guidance

We’ve seen that post-liquidity trap forward guidance a↵ects outcomes in the trap only
through the inflation rate during the period in which the economy transits from the trap.
How is this transition inflation rate a↵ected by the level of future (that is, post-trap) interest
rates? The answer to this question depends on the interest rate rule that maps realized
inflation into interest rates.
   By way of example, return to the liquidity trap described in the prior subsection. Suppose
that, after the liquidity trap ends, the marginal u0 (N̄t+s ;                t+s )   is equal to a constant M U EF F
(for all s > ⌧ ). Suppose too that, after the liquidity trap ends, the interest rate rule takes




                                                        33
the form:
                                            R(⇡; ") = B⇡ ,             >1

The logged version of this interest rate rule obeys the Taylor Principle (so that the nominal
interest rate adjusts more than one-for-one with the inflation rate).
    Now consider a form of forward guidance in which the central bank lowers B to B 0 = ⇠B,
0 < ⇠ < 1, in a single period (t + k), where k > (⌧ + 1). This change in policy in a future
period increases the inflation rate in that period:


                                   0           B0 1 1
                                  ⇡t+k =(                    )1/ = ⇡t+k ⇠         1/
                                            Et+k (1/⇡t+k+1 )

This increase in period (t + k) inflation feeds back into prior inflation rates, so that:


                                        0               1/   r
                                       ⇡t+k    r   =⇠            ⇡t+k r , r > 1


                      1/   r
But, since   > 1, ⇠            converges to 1 as r converges to infinity. Unlike in the New Keynesian
model, the impact of forward guidance declines exponentially with the relevant horizon.



5     Literature

In this section, I discuss some antecedents for this paper in the existing literature.


5.1    Flat Phillips Curve

The basic New Keynesian model implies that there is a positive log-linear relationship between
current inflation and current output (conditional on short-term expected inflation). But the
data from at least the past nine years suggest that there is little connection between resource
underutilization and inflation. Thus, most measures of labor market slack rose sharply from
2008 to 2009 and inflation fell relatively little over that same time period. Similarly, inflation



                                                         34
has remained essentially unchanged while most measures of labor market slack have fallen
considerably over the past four years (2013-17).
       These observations about inflation don’t seem all that surprising when viewed through
the lens of the bounded competition models analyzed in this paper. As long as there is a
negative output gap, the Phillips curve is flat: there is no connection between the magnitude
of the gap and inflation.13 The Phillips curve becomes vertical only when the output gap
rises back to zero. And, when the Phillips curve is vertical, inflation is determined by the
interaction of the nominal interest rate rule, the efficient real interest rate, and expected
inflation.


5.2        Sticky Wages and Prices

I treat prices and wages as completely flexible, except for extremal bounds. There is con-
siderable evidence that prices and wages are not completely flexible, although the degree of
inflexibility remains a subject of much empirical study (see Nakamura and Steinsson (2013)
for a recent survey of the relevant evidence). As discussed in the introduction, the misal-
location inefficiency that emerges in conventional nominal frictions models is quite di↵erent
from the underproduction inefficiency that emerges in models with bounds. I also focus on
models with perfect competition. However, I believe that the main results would generalize
to models with 1) Dixit-Stiglitz monopolistic competition 2) output subsidies to correct the
baseline market power distortion and 3) flexible prices/wages except price-setting firms face
a ceiling and wage-setting households face a floor.
       In a recent paper, Benigno and Ricci (2011) study a class of Dixit-Stiglitz models in which
prices and wages are flexible, except forward-looking wage-setting households are not able to
lower wages. In these models, the endogeneity of lower bounds on wage choices introduces
dynamic incentives for wage-setters that are absent from the models studied in this paper,
in which wage lower bounds are exogenous. Benigno and Ricci abstract from the equilibrium
  13
       See Daly and Hobijn (2014) for a similar justification for the flatness of the Phillips curve.



                                                         35
indeterminacy that lies at the heart of my analysis.


5.3    Non-Walrasian Equilibrium

In this paper, I study the properties of the outcomes of an economy-wide game in which
firms can set prices and wages subject to bounds. These outcomes may exhibit rationing in
the labor market or in the product market. In this sense, these outcomes are reminiscent of
those studied in the vast non-Walrasian literature (see Benassy (1986) for an introduction).
However, I see two key di↵erences between this paper and that literature. First, I study
equilibrium outcomes (of a dynamic game), not disequilibrium outcomes. The equilibrium
approach is more clearly integrated with conventional microeconomics. Second, my justifica-
tion for the use of price-wage bounds is primarily theoretical, as opposed to empirical: I show
that the bounds are needed to ensure existence of equilibrium for a wide range of policies
and beliefs


5.4    Indeterminacy and Finite Horizon

In the class of finite horizon models studied in this paper, the final period inflation rate is not
pinned down. By construction, the wage floor and price ceiling guarantee that there is a dy-
namic equilibrium associated with each of these possible final period outcomes. Equilibrium
indeterminacy is intrinsic to this class of economies.
   This indeterminacy should not be entirely surprising. Cochrane (2011) describes how,
even under active Taylor Rules, there is a set of equilibrium outcomes in New Keynesian
models. It is typical practice to discard all but one of these equilibria because they lead to
explosive inflationary paths. But, as Cochrane rightly emphasizes, there is no economics to
justify that practice.
   However, there is a key di↵erence between the finite horizon indeterminacy highlighted
in this paper and the infinite horizon indeterminacy that Cochrane discusses. The set of
equilibria in this paper is indexed by the final period random inflation. This is a large

                                                36
set, because it consists of all random variables that are measurable with respect to past
realizations of the exogenous processes in the economy. In contrast, the infinite horizon
indeterminacy is indexed by a one dimensional variable: initial inflation.
      How can it be that the indeterminacy in these finite horizon models is so much larger
than the indeterminacy in the infinite horizon models? The main reason is that users of
the infinite horizon models typically impose an auxiliary restriction that equilibria be time
homogeneous. This restriction also has no economics behind it.



6       Conclusions and Extensions

This paper demonstrates that, for a wide set of policy rules and beliefs about future equi-
librium outcomes, monetary models without price and wage bounds have no equilibria. Mo-
tivated by this observation, I study the properties of a class of dynamic monetary models
with (arbitrarily loose) price ceilings and wage floors. Among other results, I show that
these models imply that the Phillips curve is L-shaped, are consistent with the existence
of permanent secular stagnation, and do not imply that forward guidance is surprisingly
e↵ective. Perhaps most importantly, I prove that lowering the wage floor toward zero leads
to less efficient outcomes emerging as equilibria. It follows that models with very low wage
floors have materially di↵erent implications from non-monetary models or monetary models
without wage floors.14
      I’ve deliberately kept the class of models simple in many respects. It would be useful to
extend the analysis in a number of directions such as:

      • exploring the consequences of adding dimensions of heterogeneity, like di↵erent price/wage
        bounds across firms and di↵erent, imperfectly substitutable, forms of labor.

      • adding some kind of inflation cost, like a Friedmanian tax on transactions or a New
        Keynesian relative price distortion
 14
      This “discontinuity” result (which of course is no such thing) echoes the findings of Kocherlakota (2016a).


                                                       37
   • incorporating social costs of rationing (associated with the price ceiling).

   • including worker-firm matching impediments in the labor market.

Perhaps most importantly, I treat the price and wage bounds as exogenous. Future work
should investigate how these bounds are determined.



References

 [1] Benassy, J.-P., 1986, Macroeconomics: An Introduction to the Non-Walrasian Approach,
    San Diego: Academic Press.

 [2] Benigno, G., and Ricci, 2011, “The Inflation-Output Trade-O↵ and Downward Wage
    Rigidities,” American Economic Review 101, 1436-66.

 [3] Blanchard, O., and Gali, J., 2007, “Real Wage Rigidities and the New Keynesian Model,”
    Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 39, 35-65.

 [4] Christiano, L., Eichenbaum, M., and Trabandt, M., 2016, “Unemployment and Business
    Cycles,” Econometrica 84, 1523-1569.

 [5] Cochrane, J., 2011, “Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules,” Journal of
    Political Economy 119, 565-615.

 [6] Cochrane, J., 2016, “Do Higher Interest Rates Raise or Lower Inflation?” The University
    of Chicago working paper.

 [7] Daly, M., and Hobijn, B., 2014, “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips
    Curve,” Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco working paper.

 [8] del Negro, M., Giannoni, M., and Patterson, C., 2015, “The Forward Guidance Puzzle,”
    Federal Reserve Bank of New York working paper.



                                             38
 [9] Eggertsson, G., 2010, “The Paradox of Toil,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York working
    paper.

[10] Eggertsson, G. and Krugman, P., 2012, “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A
    Fisher-Minsky-Koo Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127, 1469-1513.

[11] Eggertsson, G., and Mehrotra, N., 2014, “A Model of Secular Stagnation,” NBER work-
    ing paper 20574.

[12] Friedman, M., 1968, “The Role of Monetary Policy,” American Economic Review 58,
    1-17.

[13] Jackson, M., 1992, “Implementation in Undominated Strategies: A Look at Bounded
    Mechanisms,” Review of Economic Studies 59, 757-775.

[14] Kocherlakota, N., 2016a, “Fragility of Purely Real Macroeconomic Models,” National
    Bureau of Economic Research working paper 21866.

[15] Kocherlakota, N., 2016b, “Sluggish Inflation Expectations,” National Bureau of Eco-
    nomic Research working paper 22009.

[16] MacKay, A., Nakamura, E., and Steinsson, J., 2016, “The Power of Forward Guidance
    Revisited,” American Economic Review 106.

[17] Nakamura, E., and Steinsson, J., 2013, “Price Rigidity: Microeconomic Evidence and
    Macroeconomic Implications,” Annual Review of Economics 5, 133-63.

[18] Summers, L, 2013, “IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of
    Stanley Fischer,” http://larrysummers.com/imf-fourteenth-annual-research-conference-
    in-honor-of-stanley-fischer/.

[19] Woodford, M., 1995, “Price Level Determinacy without Control of a Monetary Aggre-
    gate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, 1-46.


                                           39
Appendix A: Exact Numerical Solution Methods in the

Markovian Case

In this appendix, I consider the properties of equilibria in a numerical example in which the
driving processes are Markov chains. As above, the horizon is finite and there is a large set
of equilibria indexed by the final period outcomes. However, I restrict attention to settings
in which the dependence of period t equilibrium outcomes on final period (T + 1) outcomes
is small when (T           t) is large. The main purpose of the example is to demonstrate the
(surprising) power of negative nominal interest rates.


A. 1 Markov Chain Setup

I define
                                                                      0
                                               EF F           t+1 u       (N̄t+1 )
                                              gt+1     =
                                                                t   u0 (N̄   t)


to be the growth rate of marginal utility from period t to period (t + 1) in an efficient
allocation. I denote the marginal utility “gap” in period t by:

                                                              u0 (ct )
                                                      m̂t =
                                                              u0 (N̄t )

Note that, in any equilibrium, m̂t is bounded below by 1. In an equilibrium, we know from
(3):
                                                      EF F
                      m̂t = max( R(⇡t , "t )Et m̂t+1 gt+1  /⇡t+1 , 1), t = 1, ..., T   1

    In this economy, there are two relevant exogenous processes: {gtEF F , "t }Tt=1 . I assume
that they are governed by a Markov chain st , which is a Markov chain with state space
{1, 2, .., J} and transition matrix P. I define a state space {(gj , "j )}Jj=1 and assume that
(gtEF F , "t ) = (gsEF
                     t
                       F
                         , "st ) for t = 1, ..., T.




                                                           40
       In what follows, it will be useful to define Q(⇡) to be a J ⇥ J matrix:

                                                       R(⇡ LB , "i )Pij gjEF F
                                       Qij (⇡) =
                                                               ⇡j

I require that:
                                                   ||Q(⇡ LB )|| < 1                                         (9)

where ||.|| represents the Euclidean norm of the matrix.15 This restriction implies that:


                                                    ||Q(⇡)|| < 1


for all values of ⇡.


A. 2 Solving for Markov Equilibrium

In what follows, I assume that in period (T + 1) :

                                                   u0 (YT +1 )
                                               (               , ⇡T +1 )
                                                    u0 (N̄T )

is a function of the state sT +1 in period (T +1). We can then apply backward induction to these
terminal conditions. Given the restriction (9), the resulting equilibrium is approximately
Markov in periods t such that (T             t) is large.
       To be more specific, construct a sequence of marginal utility gap vectors and inflation
vectors by setting m̂0 = ~1 and ⇡ 0 = ⇡ U B~1 and iterating as follows:
  15
       The Euclidean norm ||P || of a square matrix P is the square root of the maximal eigenvalue of P 0 P .




                                                           41
                          m̂n+1
                            i   = max(1, Qi (⇡ n )m̂n )

                          ⇡in+1 = ⇡ LB if Qi (⇡ n )m̂n          1
                                                   1
                                = R 1( P          Pij gjEF F
                                                                      ; "i ) otherwise
                                         J
                                            j=1     ⇡jn
                                                               m̂nj


For any i, the sequence {⇡in }1
                              n=1 is a decreasing sequence in n that is bounded from below

by ⇡ LB . So, it converges to ⇡i⇤ . Given ⇡ ⇤ , and since ||Q(⇡ ⇤ )|| < 1, {m̂n }1
                                                                                 n=1 converges to the

unique solution to:
                               m̂⇤i = max(1, Qi (⇡ ⇤ )m̂⇤ ), i = 1, ..., J

This is the best Markov equilibrium.
   We can solve for the worst Markov equilibrium in a similar fashion. Let ⇡ 0 = ⇡ LB~1.
Because ||Q(⇡ 0 )|| < 1, we can define m̂max to be the unique solution to:


                            m̂max
                              i   = max(1, Qi (⇡ 0 )m̂max ), i = 1, ..., J


We begin the reverse iteration process by letting m̂0 = m̂max . We can then iterate as above:


                          m̂n+1
                            i   = max(1, Qi (⇡ n )m̂n )

                          ⇡in+1 = ⇡ LB if Qi (⇡ n )m̂n          1
                                                   1
                                = R 1( P          Pij gjEF F
                                                                      ; "i ) otherwise
                                         J
                                            j=1     ⇡jn
                                                               m̂nj


For any i, the sequence {m̂ni }1
                               n=1 is decreasing in n and bounded from below. At the same

time, the sequence {⇡in }1
                         n=1 is increasing in n and is bounded from above (by ⇡
                                                                                UB
                                                                                   ). So, both
sequences converge (to what is the worst Markov equilibrium).
   In the numerical examples that follow, the best and worst Markov equilibria always
coincide.

                                                   42
A. 3 Numerical Example

In this subsection, I describe the properties of a numerical example. The main point of the
example is to illustrate how the risk of an economic downturn can create inefficiencies in
apparently “normal” states.16 I discuss to what extent these inefficiencies can be ameliorated
with negative interest rates or a higher inflation target.
      In the example, there are three states. I define the state space for the growth rate of
efficient marginal utility to be:


                                         g EF F = (0.97, 0.97, 1.11)

This parameterization is meant to suggest that the growth rate of marginal utility in an
efficient allocation is “normal” in the first two states. In the last state, the growth rate of
marginal utility in an efficient allocation is very large, meaning that this should be viewed
as a “bad” state. The interest rate rule is defined to be:


                                             R(⇡i , "i ) = "i ⇡i1.5


I vary " in the example.
      I set the transition matrix as follows:


                                               0.975        0   0.025
                                        T = 0.06        0.55     0.39
                                                 0       0.5      0.5


This parameterization ensures that in state 1, there is only a low risk of entering the bad
state 3. Once in state 3, it is impossible to transit to state 1 directly. However, in state 2,
there is a large risk of entering the bad state 3.
      This specification of the transition matrix implies that the average stay in (the good)
 16
      I thank Eunmi Ko for great research assistance with these simulations.


                                                       43
state 1 is 40 years. Once the economy transits into (the bad) state 3, it stays (only) two
years on average in that state. But it can only return to state 1 after going through the
(risky) state 2. As a result, after exiting state 1, the economy takes over thirty years on
average to return to that state..
   Finally, I set the lower bound ⇡ LB on the gross inflation rate to equal one and the upper
bound to equal 1.1 (the latter specification is irrelevant, as long as it is sufficiently high).


Baseline

In the baseline specification, I set " = (1.03425, 1, 1). This setting results in a Markov
equilibrium in which:


                                       m̂ = (1, 1.24, 1.28)

                                        ⇡
                                        ˆ = (1.02, 1, 1)


I chose the parameter "1 so as to ensure that the inflation in period 2 is 2%.
   The equilibrium allocation is efficient in state 1 but (highly) inefficient in state 3. (Note
that this inefficiency is in addition to the low rate of efficient growth in this state.) More
interestingly, the risk of falling into this inefficient state 3 also creates a similarly sized
inefficiency in state 2.


Negative Interest Rates

In this subsection, I set " = (1.0413, 0.995, 0.995). The resulting Markov equilibrium is:


                                       m̂ = (1, 1.02, 1.04)

                                        ⇡
                                        ˆ = (1.02, 1, 1)


I’ve chosen "2 = "3 = 0.995 to be 50 basis points below the zero lower bound. This means
that the nominal interest rate is now (slightly) negative in states 2 and 3. As before, I’ve

                                                44
chosen "1 so as to ensure that the inflation rate in the good state 1 is equal to 2%.
   The main point of this simulation is that lowering the nominal interest rate by only half a
percent in states two and three greatly reduces the inefficiencies in those states. Intuitively,
what matters for stimulus is not the decrease in the annual real interest rate, but the decline
in the cumulated real interest rate before the allocation of consumption is once more efficient
(that is, the economy returns to state 1). The structure of the transition matrix implies that
if the economy is in states 2 or 3, it is expected to remain out of state 1 for a long period
of time (nearly 30 years on average in state 2 and a couple years longer on average in state
3). Over such a long time period, the cumulative impact of a 50 basis point reduction in the
annual real interest rate is very large.
   What happens if I instead set " = (1.0413, 1, 1), so that the nominal interest rate was
raised in the good state 1 relative to the benchmark but the nominal interest rate remained
zero in states 2 and 3? The equilibrium allocation would be (slightly) worse in states 2 and
3. However, the inflation rate would be much lower in state 1.


                                       m̂ = (1, 1.26, 1.29)

                                       ⇡ = (1.006, 1, 1)


Contrary to the neo-Fisherian view, raising interest rates lowers inflation and lowers output.


Higher Inflation Target

In this subsection, I set " = (1.02425, 1, 1). The resulting Markov equilibrium is:


                                       m̂ = (1, 1.22, 1.25)

                                       ⇡
                                       ˆ = (1.04, 1, 1)


I’ve chosen a lower value of "1 so as to increase the inflation rate in state 1 to 4%, as opposed
to 2%.

                                               45
   Raising the state 1 inflation rate has no e↵ect on the (already efficient) level of economic
activity in that state. However, it does provide a partial mitigant against the inefficiently
low levels of output in the other states: the marginal utility gap is about 2% lower in state
2 and is about 3% lower in state 3. Doubling the inflation target helps, but not by much.
   We can understand these simulation results using equation (8). The e↵ect of reducing the
nominal interest rate lower bound RLB grows exponentially with the expected duration of the
liquidity trap. In contrast, the e↵ect of raising the post-trap inflation target is independent
of the duration of the trap.



Appendix B: Remaining Proofs

Proof of Proposition 4

Given the restrictions on the efficient marginal utility process and on the interest rate rule,
there exists L such that for all t = 1, ..., T :

                                         T t+1
                                 T t+1
                                       RLB     Et u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 )
                                                                     >L
                                  (⇡ LB )T t       u0 (N̄t ; t )

with probability one. Pick any positive constant ⇡T +1 that is less than L. I proceed by reverse
induction to show that, with probability one:

                                     T t+1
                                  T t+1
                        0           RLB
                      u (ct ) > LB T t     Et u0 (YT +1 ;    T +1 )   > u0 (N̄t ;   t)
                               (⇡ ) ⇡T +1

and ⇡t = ⇡ LB .




                                                   46
   Note first that:


                        u0 (cT )           R(⇡ LB ; "T )ET {u0 (YT +1 ;         T +1 )/⇡T +1 }


                                    > Lu0 (N̄T ;        T )/⇡T +1


                                    > u0 (N̄T ;       T)




with probability one, which implies that ⇡T = ⇡ LB with probability one.
   Now, inductively assume that:

                                                       T t   T t
                                                           RLB
                      u0 (ct+1 ;        t+1 ) >                      Et+1 u0 (YT +1 ;          T +1 )
                                                  (⇡ LB )T t 1 ⇡T +1

with probability one and ⇡t+1 = ⇡ LB with probability one. Then, if we roll back one period,
we can show that:

                                                        u0 (ct+1 ; t+1 )
                      u0 (ct ;     t)        R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et
                                                              ⇡ LB
                                                    T t T t
                                                        R
                                        > ( RLB ) LB T tLB Et u0 (YT +1 ;                      T +1 )
                                                 (⇡ ) ⇡T +1
                                            T t+1 T t+1
                                                 R
                                        = LB T tLB Et u0 (YT +1 ; T +1 )
                                          (⇡ ) ⇡T +1

with probability one. It follows that:


                             u0 (ct ;      t)   > Lu0 (N̄t ;    t )/⇡T +1   > u0 (N̄t ;   t)




with probability one, which in turn shows that ⇡t = ⇡ LB with probability one.




                                                               47
Proof of Proposition 5

We proceed by reverse induction. Note first that:


                             u0 (c0T ;     T)   = R0 (⇡LLB ; "T )ET (u0 (YT +1 ;             T +1 )/⇡T +1 )

                                                     LB
                                                = R(⇡H  ; "T )ET (u0 (YT +1 ;               T +1 )/⇡T +1 )


                                                = u0 (cT ;       T)




   Now suppose inductively that:

                                                                 LB
                                                               ⇡H
                                       u0 (ct+1 ;     t+1 )(        )T     t 1
                                                                                  u0 (c0t+1 ;    t+1 )
                                                               ⇡LLB

with probability one for some t  (T                           1). Then, u0 (c0t+1 ;         t+1 )    > u0 (N̄t+1 ;   t+1 )   with proba-
                0
bility one and ⇡t+1 = ⇡LLB with probability one. Similarly, since ct+1 < N̄t+1 with probability
             LB
one, ⇡t+1 = ⇡H  with probability one.
   Next move backwards in time to period t. We can show that with probability one:


         u0 (ct ;   t)
                                   LB
                         = max( R(⇡H  ; "t )Et {u0 (ct+1 ;                                      0
                                                                                 t+1 )/⇡t+1 }, u (N̄t ;      t ))

                              LB
                         = R(⇡H  ; "t )Et {u0 (ct+1 ;                        LB
                                                                      t+1 )/⇡H }


                          R0 (⇡LLB ; "t )Et {u0 (c0t+1 ;                    LB  LB T t 1
                                                                      t+1 )(⇡L /⇡H )      /⇡LLB }(⇡LLB /⇡H
                                                                                                         LB
                                                                                                            )

                          u0 (c0t ;          LB  LB T t
                                         t )(⇡L /⇡H )




which implies that:
                                           u0 (ct ;         LB  LB T t
                                                       t )(⇡H /⇡L )                 u0 (c0t ;   t)



with probability one.
   We have established that u0 (c0T ;                   T)     = u0 (cT ;    T)    with probability one, and that if c0t+1 
ct+1 with probability one for t  (T                      1), then c0t < ct with probability one. The proposition
is proved.


                                                                      48
Proof of Proposition 7

We can prove the proposition via reverse induction. Suppose inductively that c0t+1  c⇤t+1
     0      ⇤
and ⇡t+1  ⇡t+1 with probability one. Then:


                 u0 (c0t ;   t)   = max(u0 (N̄t ;       t ),   R0 (⇡ LB ; "t )Et {u0 (c0t+1 ;          0
                                                                                                t+1 )/⇡t+1 })


                                     max(u0 (N̄t ;      t ),   R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et {u0 (c⇤t+1 ;            ⇤
                                                                                                t+1 )/⇡t+1 })


                                  = u0 (c⇤t ;   t)




which implies that c0t  c⇤t . In terms of inflation, consider any event in which ⇡t⇤ = ⇡ LB . In
that event:
                                        R(⇡ LB ; "t )Et {u0 (c⇤t+1 ;            ⇤
                                                                         t+1 )/⇡t+1 }      1,

and it follows that:
                                        R0 (⇡ LB ; "t )Et {u0 (c0t+1 ;           0
                                                                          t+1 )/⇡t+1 }   >1

which implies that ⇡t0 = ⇡ LB in that event.
   Next, consider any event in which ⇡t⇤ = ⇡ U B . In that event, ⇡t0  ⇡ U B = ⇡t⇤ .
   Finally, consider any event in which ⇡ LB < ⇡t⇤ < ⇡ U B with probability one. Then:


                                         R(⇡t⇤ ; "t )Et {u0 (c⇤t+1 ;            ⇤
                                                                         t+1 )/⇡t+1 }   =1


In that event:
                                         R0 (⇡t⇤ ; "t )Et {u0 (c0t+1 ;          0
                                                                         t+1 )/⇡t+1 }   >1

which implies that ⇡t0  ⇡t .
   Note that ⇡T +1 is the same in the two equilibria, and cT +1 = YT +1 in the two equilibria.




                                                                 49
Hence, the reverse induction above implies that:


                                          c0t  c⇤t

                                          ⇡t0  ⇡t⇤


for all t and with probability one.




                                             50
