                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHO FALLS PREY TO THE WOLF OF WALL STREET? INVESTOR PARTICIPATION IN
                       MARKET MANIPULATION

                                        Christian Leuz
                                        Steffen Meyer
                                       Maximilian Muhn
                                        Eugene Soltes
                                       Andreas Hackethal

                                      Working Paper 24083
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24083


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   November 2017




We would like to thank Brad Barber, Joey Engelberg (discussant), Gur Huberman, Andrei
Shleifer, Ahmed Tahoun, Joachim Voth, Tracy Wang, Joshua White and workshop participants at
the Case Western Reserve University, University of Chicago Booth School of Business, HEC
Lausanne, University of Michigan, University of Muenster, NBER Behavioral Finance meeting,
Securities and Exchange Commission, Stockholm University, and Vienna Graduate School of
Finance for their helpful comments. This research would not have been possible without the
collaboration of a German bank and we gratefully acknowledge the help provided by the bank
and its employees. We thank Sebastian de Schmidt and BaFin for kindly providing data on
German tout cases and many helpful conversations about the institutional setting. Christian Leuz
gratefully acknowledges financial support by the Initiative on Global Markets. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Christian Leuz, Steffen Meyer, Maximilian Muhn, Eugene Soltes, and Andreas
Hackethal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Who Falls Prey to the Wolf of Wall Street? Investor Participation in Market Manipulation
Christian Leuz, Steffen Meyer, Maximilian Muhn, Eugene Soltes, and Andreas Hackethal
NBER Working Paper No. 24083
November 2017
JEL No. D14,D18,G11,G14,G18,G28,G41,K22,K42,M48

                                          ABSTRACT

Manipulative communications touting stocks are common in capital markets around the world.
Although the price distortions created by so-called “pump-and-dump” schemes are well known,
little is known about the investors in these frauds. By examining 421 “pump-and-dump” schemes
between 2002 and 2015 and a proprietary set of trading records for over 110,000 individual
investors from a major German bank, we provide evidence on the participation rate, magnitude of
the investments, losses, and the characteristics of the individuals who invest in such schemes. Our
evidence suggests that participation is quite common and involves sizable losses, with nearly 6%
of active investors participating in at least one “pump-and-dump” and an average loss of nearly
30%. Moreover, we identify several distinct types of investors, some of which should not be
viewed as falling prey to these frauds. We also show that portfolio composition and past trading
behavior can better explain participation in touted stocks than demographics. Our analysis offers
insights into the challenges associated with designing effective investor protection against market
manipulation.

Christian Leuz                                   Eugene Soltes
Booth School of Business                         Harvard Business School
University of Chicago                            Morgan Hall 365
5807 S. Woodlawn Avenue                          Boston, MA 02163
Chicago, IL 60637-1610                           esoltes@hbs.edu
and NBER
cleuz@chicagobooth.edu                           Andreas Hackethal
                                                 Goethe University Frankfurt
Steffen Meyer                                    Grüneburgplatz 1 House of Finance
Leibniz Universitaet                             60323 Frankfurt a.M. Germany
Koenigsworther Platz 1                           hackethal@gbs.uni-frankfurt.de
30167 Hannover
Germany
meyer@gif.uni-hannover.de

Maximilian Muhn
Humboldt University of Berlin
Germany
maximilian.muhn@gmail.com


An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24083
1.         Introduction

       Well-functioning equity markets are predicated on investors’ access to reliable and accurate

information. There are many information sources that investors can utilize in their decisions

including disclosures issued by firms, news conveyed by third-parties (e.g. analysts, brokers,

promoters), and information contained in prices themselves. Manipulation of any of these

sources of information can create distortions that undermine market functioning, efficient capital

allocation, and individuals’ willingness to invest in the stock market in the future (e.g., Aggarwal

and Wu 2006; Kyle and Viswanathan 2008; Giannetti and Wang 2016).

       Given these distortions and potential externalities, securities regulators generally mandate

truthfulness in disclosures and take action against those who seek to deceive. Regulators also

prohibit deceptive trading practices and market manipulation, largely with the intention to

protect investors. For example, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) describes

its mission as one “to protect investors, maintain fair, orderly, and efficient markets, and

facilitate capital formation” (SEC 2016). As these objectives can compete with each other,

making the appropriate tradeoffs between them requires, among other things, understanding the

trading behavior of individual investors. 1

       While there is a significant body of work examining the role of disclosure and securities

regulation in fostering capital formation and market quality (e.g., Leuz and Wysocki 2016 for a

survey), there is much less research on even the most basic questions related to market

manipulation and investor protection. What is the participation rate in market manipulation?

How damaging is market manipulation to investors’ portfolios? And to what extent do investors


1
     For instance, lowering the regulatory burden for firms can foster access to and use of public capital markets, but
     doing so can also expose investors more frequently to duplicity in market transactions and lower market quality
     (e.g., Brüggemann et al. 2017).


                                                                                                                     1
“fall prey” to manipulative schemes and need protection?

      In this paper, we seek to make progress towards answering these questions by analyzing

investor participation in “pump-and-dump” schemes. In such schemes, a promoter acquires a

position in a stock and then artificially raises the price by disseminating false or misleading

information about the firm (Kyle and Viswanathan 2008; Putnins 2012). To facilitate a rapid run

up in stock price during the pump phase, promoters often target thinly traded “penny” stocks for

which limited liquidity leads to fast price increases when demand rises. Once the stock reaches a

certain heightened price level, promoters sell their shares causing a rapid decline in share price

and significant losses for other investors.

      Pump-and-dump schemes harm investors who purchase shares on the false premise that

some innovation or impending development justifies a rising valuation. Harm can spread further

as those investors come to distrust information about other stocks and, more generally, loose

trust in stock markets (Antweiler and Frank 2004; Guiso et al. 2008; Giannetti and Wang 2016;

Soltes 2016). To mitigate these adverse effects, regulators expend considerable resources seeking

to curtail market manipulation. Yet, an effective regulatory response requires understanding who

invests in such schemes and why, as well as a sense for how investors fare in them.

      To shed light on these questions, we examine a large set of pump-and-dump schemes from

2002-2015 provided to us by the German supervisory authority, BaFin, supplemented with

additional hand-collected cases. We combine these schemes with trading records for over

110,000 individual investors from a major German online bank. 2 These confidential trading

records not only allow us to assess the returns or losses of individual investors that participate in

2
    The sample of individual investors is randomly drawn from the total customer base. We compare investor
    characteristics in our sample to those in other studies with individual investor data (e.g., Barber and Odean 2001;
    Dorn and Huberman 2005; Calvet et al. 2007) and find that our sample is quite comparable in terms investor age,
    gender, portfolio value, etc.


                                                                                                                     2
pump-and-dump schemes, but also allow us to learn about the characteristics of participating

investors, their trading behavior and their portfolios.

    Our evidence shows that investing in pump-and-dump schemes is fairly common. We find

6,569 individuals making over 20,000 purchases during the first 60 days of the 421 pump-and-

dump schemes in our sample. Thus, nearly 6% of the investors in our sample invest in at least

one pump-and-dump scheme. Moreover, in any given year, there is a 2% chance that a sample

investor would take a position in at least one tout campaign. Analyzing which pump-and-dump

schemes garner larger responses, we find that schemes for stocks that have their headquarters in

Germany have the most investors, likely reflecting a tendency of individuals to invest in firms

closer to home (French and Poterba 1991). We also find that pump-and-dumps using e-mail tend

to have larger responses than those employing telephone or fax, which likely reflects the wide

reach and low cost of e-mail distribution.

    Investors put on average €6,972 into a tout, which is sizeable relative to their average

portfolio value (11.4%). By comparison, the average investment outside pump-and-dump

schemes for these investors is €6,142. Compared to a random sample of active investors who do

not invest in pump-and-dump schemes, tout investors hold a greater number of stocks, have a

higher share of penny stocks in their portfolio, a lower share of blue chip stocks, and smaller

investments in each stock they purchase, compared to the average investment for non-tout (or

control) investors of €9,725 per firm.

    As would be expected, tout investments on average produce considerable losses with the

average return to a pump-and-dump scheme being -28%. This return, however, is less than what

the price path of many schemes would suggest. The average (median) 120-day holding period

return for a pump-and-dump beginning on the date it is first touted is -53% (-70%). Thus,


                                                                                              3
investors manage to curb their losses by selling their tout investments early instead of holding

them through the dump period. Aggregating losses across investors in our sample and assuming

that investors at other online banks behave similarly, we estimate that the average tout generates

losses for German online investors of at least €1.2 million. While this estimate excludes losses to

German investors with brick-and-mortar accounts as well as foreign investors, it is still small

relative to the aggregate losses investors incur when a blue-chip stock experiences a significant

decline. But the latter magnitude is driven by the large investor base of blue-chip stocks. Thus, it

might be more appropriate to compare our estimate to damages caused by other frauds. For

instance, the median fraud that is criminally prosecuted in the United States generates damages

than are half than our estimate for the aggregate loss generated by the median tout. When

converted to U.S. dollars, the above estimate for the average tout is comparable to the 90th

percentile of the damages caused by frauds prosecuted in the United States ($1.75 million). 3 This

comparison illustrates that pump-and-dump schemes are not small financial crimes. We reach a

similar conclusion when comparing our estimate to aggregate investor losses incurred around the

announcement of accounting restatements (Durnev and Mangen 2009).

      Given the negative returns to tout investments, it is perhaps surprising that we find a

considerable number of individuals investing in more than one tout. In fact, roughly 11% of tout

investors place money in four or more touts during the sample period. These multi-tout investors

perform less poorly in their initial tout investments, but they still lose on average 24% across all

their touts. These investors place larger-than-average investments and have a large fraction of

penny stocks in their portfolios. The frequency with which some investors invest in touts as well

as the composition of their portfolios suggests that not all tout investors are gullible or fall prey


3
    See Section 4.2 for further details on these comparisons and our computations.


                                                                                                   4
to pump-and-dump schemes. Instead, it appears that some investors seek out pump-and-dump

schemes and view them as gambles or lotteries.

    To assess the characteristics of tout traders and better understand the vulnerability of retail

investors to tout schemes, we group investors based on their past trading behavior in non-tout

stocks. By relying on their prior non-tout trading to characterize their investment behavior, we

can assess how the likelihood of a tout investment differs across different types of investors. We

find that more than 35% of the tout investors have been day-trading in penny stocks or are

frequent traders with short investment horizons. These investors appear to be willing to take

substantial risks and trade aggressively also in other stocks. We find that these investor types are

more likely to invest in touts, place larger bets and have better returns. Their participation in

touts looks quite differently from more conservative traders, who trade infrequently and do not

invest in penny stocks. This group could be the ones that were tricked into the schemes.

    We also investigate the broader ramifications of pump-and-dump experiences for investor

behavior by studying how past tout investments are related to subsequent portfolio choices. We

find that investors’ subsequent investment behavior is associated with prior tout performance.

Specifically, investors with relatively poor returns in their past tout are less inclined to invest in

another tout. Those with more positive returns invest more quickly into the next tout and stay in

for a longer period (which tends to hurt performance and perhaps indicates overconfidence).

Moreover, we find that investors with more negative return experiences in a past tout tend to

trade fewer stocks and are more likely to stop trading in stocks all together in the subsequent 120

days. The latter effect is more pronounced for infrequent traders who are more likely to have

been tricked into a tout investment. Finally, we find some evidence that participation in a pump-

and-dump campaign could have a lasting effect on the behavior on the behavior of some



                                                                                                    5
investors. For instance, we find that, even three years after the tout, investors who lost money in

a pump-and-dump campaign still make fewer equity trades than before the tout.

    Overall, our analysis contributes to a more nuanced understanding of market manipulation

and investor protection. First and foremost, our findings highlight the heterogeneity among

investors participating in deceptive market manipulation like pump-and-dump schemes. There

appear to be several types of individuals, including investors who trade infrequently and perhaps

are more vulnerable. But there is also a substantial fraction of investors (about 35%) who trade

frequently and often day-trade in penny stocks. These investors are more likely to gamble with

tout stocks, rather than being fooled by the schemes. Importantly, we find that demographics

provide only limited insights into who participates in pump-and-dump schemes. Instead,

portfolio characteristics and past trading behavior play a much larger role. We also show that

there is substantial heterogeneity in outcomes and that this heterogeneity is connected to trading

motives and investor types. Last but not least, we find that the level of participation and the

magnitude of the individual and implied aggregate losses are considerable.

    Observing individual investor behavior is challenging and prior research with access to such

data has typically focused on characterizing potential investment biases (e.g. Odean 1999; Barber

and Odean 2000, 2013; Schmittmann et al. 2014; Fecht et al. 2017). We build on this work by

exploring individual investor participation in specific investments, i.e., pump-and-dump

schemes, which are particularly relevant from an investor protection perspective. One unique

aspect of our analysis is that we examine how investor responses differ across a variety of

distribution channels for promotional communications, including e-mail, newsletter, and phone.

    We also contribute to the literature on fraud and investor protection. A considerable body of

work has examined the impact of financial fraud on firms (Karpoff and Lott 1993; Karpoff et al.


                                                                                                 6
2008b), managers (Karpoff et al. 2008a), and investors (Guiso et al. 2008; Giannetti and Wang

2016; Miles and Pyne 2017). However, there is much less work on the impact of market

manipulation. We find that participating in pump-and-dump schemes is fairly common. At the

same time, our findings highlight that the notion that investors simply fall prey to deceptive

schemes is not appropriate in all cases. Some tout investors appear to gamble in penny stocks

and pump-and-dump schemes. This evidence contrasts with the popular image of vulnerable

investors being successfully duped by aggressive promoters. As such our analysis suggests a

nuanced approach to investor protection, one that recognizes the documented heterogeneity. To

the extent that some individuals knowingly invest in pump-and-dump schemes, regulators could

question the need of protecting these investors. 4 Our analysis also suggests that educational and

protection efforts that target investors based on personal characteristics alone are unlikely to be

particularly effective in reaching the relevant audiences.


2.         Stock Touts and Investor Behavior

2.1.       Stock Touting and Pump-and-Dump Schemes

       Since the creation of the earliest joint-stock companies, individuals have been deceptively

promoting specific stocks. In the early 1700’s, the South Sea Company devised a scheme to

exploit investors as the British government sought to restructure its debt by proposing to convert

its obligations into South Sea stock (Sperling 1962). The South Sea Company created the

appearance of a highly desirable stock by publicly distributing it to influential people who spread

rumors of overnight fortunes (Voth 2016). Investors rushed to purchase stock and within three




4
     Regulators may still want to mitigate investments in tout campaigns (even by those who understand and are
     willing to bear the risks of such schemes) to curtail the incentives for promoters to manipulate stocks. But even
     then, it would be important to understand that the motive for some investors appears to be a form of gambling.


                                                                                                                    7
months it soared from 330 to 1,050 pounds. The bubble burst three months later as the price fell

by more than 80% leaving investors with worthless stock and creating a national economic crisis.

      Despite the growth in regulation over time to combat deceptive enterprises and fraud,

market manipulation continues (Allen and Gale 1992; Jiang et al. 2005; Khwaja and Mian 2005).

Putnins (2012) characterizes manipulative schemes as market-power based (e.g., “corners,”

“squeezes”), contract-based (e.g., “marking the close,” “capping”), or information-based (e.g.,

“pump-and-dump”). We focus on information-based pump-and-dump schemes. Such schemes

distort trading in and market prices of the underlying stocks and hence are a form of illegal

market manipulation according to the definition of Kyle and Viswanathan (2008). 5

      In the typical pump-and-dump scheme, a promoter begins by purchasing stock in a thinly

traded firm. Promoters tend to focus on stocks that trade at low share prices, commonly referred

to as penny stocks. Most of these securities trade on over-the-counter or alternative markets (e.g.,

the German Open Market, the U.K. AIM, or the U.S. OTC Markets, formerly known as the Pink

Sheets), which are less rigidly regulated than major exchanges (Aggarwal and Wu 2006;

Brüggemann et al. 2017). The relatively light regulation and low liquidity of these markets

facilitate more effective “pumping.” Moreover, even when a severe mispricing is identified, low

liquidity makes arbitrage difficult. Together, these factors make these markets well-suited for

promoters to engineer deceptive schemes (Griffin and Block 2001; White 2016; Renault 2017).

      To increase interest in the stock, promoters often concoct a story about some impending

news or innovation that would lead to a dramatic increase in the firm’s value. The promoters




5
    We also provide the relevant legal definition for this form of market manipulation when we describe our sample
    in Section 3.1.


                                                                                                                8
then circulate this information through e-mail, newsletters, or other promotional communications

to potential investors. As an example, in one tout from September 2007, a promoter e-mailed:

        We are glad to inform you of a CANCER CURE invented by ANDOVER MEDICAL INC (ADOV)
        that will take the world by storm. This new medicine, is above all other and boosts a 80% success
                                             rate during clinical trials

                     Over the next few days you will hear about this in the PAPERS and on TV.
                            So buy shares now, while price is low, before the news hits.

                                      ANDOVER MEDICAL INC (ADOV) $.45

      During the period of promotion and touting, the price of the stock typically rises as investors

increasingly purchase shares in anticipation of the good news being realized. Once the campaign

ends (or perhaps even during the campaign), the promoters sell their holdings leading to a

precipitous decline in the stock. This pattern of promotion and rapid price increase followed by a

steep decline in price fits the name to describe such schemes.

      As with other attention-grabbing news about firms (Lee 1992; Barber and Odean 2008),

investors have been shown to react to information touted by promoters. Several prior papers

examine promotional communications and find that stock touts generate significant trading

volume and distortions in market pricing. Frieder and Zittrain (2008), for example, show that

trading volume rises dramatically during periods of heavy touting. They find that stocks with a

4% likelihood of being the most actively traded during non-touted days have a 70% likelihood of

being the most actively traded during touting periods. Relatedly, Böhme and Holz (2006) find

significantly positive abnormal returns on the day of the tout for over 100 stock spams. Nelson et

al. 2013 find that stock spams that are bundled with ostensibly more credible information also

tend to have greater market impact. 6



6
    Renault (2017) examines the potential for social media (Twitter in particular) to foster market manipulation and
    create pump-and-dump schemes. He finds that abnormally large message activity is associated with price


                                                                                                                  9
    Although the deceptive practices utilized by promoters to create pump-and-dump schemes

are not themselves new or innovative, the cost of engineering such schemes has declined

dramatically by recent technological advances. Promotional campaigns once required

telemarketers or physical mailings to reach potential investors, but now promoters can rely on

inexpensive e-mail lists. To put these costs in comparison, Böhme and Holz (2006) estimate the

cost per recipient for direct mailing and telemarketing (i.e., via phone) at $1.39 and $0.66 per

recipient respectively. By comparison, sending e-mails to potential investors with addresses

harvested from bulk e-mail lists costs only $0.0005 per recipient.

    With these reduced costs, it is not surprising that the amount of stock related e-mail spam

has risen dramatically in the 2000s (Böhme and Holz 2006; Frieder and Zittrain 2008). One

estimate from the security firm Sophos suggests that stock spam as a percentage of all

unsolicited e-mail rose as high as 25% in 2007 (Sophos 2007). Even if e-mail is significantly less

effective than telemarketing on a per unit basis, the vastly larger reach makes e-mail campaigns a

popular and potentially successful way of promoting stocks.

    To provide an example of a pump-and-dump campaign, Figure 1 displays the price path for

BAR.bra Mining Group AG from December 5, 2007 to December 31, 2008. BAR.bra Mining

Group was authorized for trading on the less strictly regulated Open Market of the Frankfurt

Stock Exchange on December 5, 2007 with an initial price of € 0.46. Officially, the company

was a mining company extracting precious metals and rare earths with operations in Mongolia

and Ghana. The company stated that it has licenses for several territories in both countries and

had been doing explorations for several years. Beginning on January 10, 2008, promoters

advertised the company in several newsletters, mentioning the surge of the stock price since its

  movements consistent with pump-and-dump schemes in those firms and suggests that these price changes are
  rooted in manipulative promotion rather than over-optimism by investors.


                                                                                                       10
launch in Frankfurt’s Open Market as well as highlighting the firm’s tremendous growth

potential. 7 Specifically, the promoters claimed that BAR.bra Mining Group was heavily

undervalued since the company’s mining territories were very promising and the company was

expected to generate enormous profits once these resources were extracted. Indeed, the stock

continued to rise by 26% over the next five days until the price reached it its climax (€ 0.87) on

January 15, 2008. As the dump phase began, the stock lost 67 percent of its value (€ 0.29) in less

than a week. Roughly three months later, the stock was essentially worthless (€ 0.04). According

to German newspaper reports, the premises of the stock promoters were searched by police in

2012 in connection with the BAR.bra Mining Group tout as well as eight other promotional

campaigns (Reimann and Reimer 2012).


2.2.      Investors and their Investments in Touted Stocks

       Although the price path of touted stocks suggests that pump-and-dump campaigns can be

effective, little is known about the investors who trade upon receiving a promotional

communication. From a regulatory perspective, understanding who responds, why they respond

and whether there are different motivations or investor types is central to regulators’ efforts to

protect investors and reduce the impact of manipulative schemes. Media articles discussing the

risks of pump-and-dump schemes offer anecdotal evidence suggesting that those who fall prey to

these schemes are vulnerable investors who believe the touted information is truthful and are



7
    Touted stocks often have an upward sloping price path just before the actual beginning of the promotional
    campaign. One likely reason is that perpetrators seek to create an appearance of rising prices and an illusion of
    market liquidity in advance of the actual scheme. For example, the SEC complaint related to the ‘Amogear’
    pump-and-dump case (Litigation Release No. 23041) provides rich details on the behind-the-scenes planning of
    such a scheme. The FBI secretly recorded several discussions between the perpetrators and one discussion related
    to pre-tout trading is summarized as follows: “The trades they discussed were to be rigged trades between
    participants in the scheme to manipulate Amogear's stock price in which the participants would trade with and
    among accounts they controlled to create the appearance of a false market. [The defendants] discussed the ‘cross
    trades’ and the plan to follow the trades with false touting”.


                                                                                                                  11
taken aback when it is revealed to be otherwise (e.g., Sterbenz 2014; Antilla 2016). Put

differently, these investors are deceived by the schemes and unaware of their risks.

      Why investors succumb to schemes that contain unsubstantiated or even outlandish claims

has gained considerable attention in the behavioral ethics literature. Chugh and Bazerman (2007)

argue that people have bounded awareness, which limits individuals’ ability to appropriately

incorporate accessible and relevant information into their decision-making processes. In one

experiment exploring this limitation, Zhang et al. (2015) show a graph to participants depicting

the multi-year returns for five hypothetical funds, including the S&P 500, a tobacco fund, and a

technology fund. They also included an additional fund named the “Fortitude Fund” that

exhibited a significantly better risk-return profile than the other funds with remarkably stable

year-over-year growth at a moderately high rate. Zhang et al. (2015) asked participants to place

themselves in the position of an investment advisor and choose the fund that had a long-term

perspective and a moderate tolerance for risk. Nearly 70% of participants chose the Fortitude

Fund. Yet, unbeknownst to the participants, Fortitude was actually a Madoff feeder fund (whose

returns plummeted immediately after the graph ended when Madoff’s fraud was disclosed). The

returns for Fortitude were “too good to be true,” but the majority of participants were not able to

identify this suspicion without being prompted. Thus, bounded awareness provides one

explanation why investors do not identify deceptive schemes when making trading decisions. 8

      However, it is not clear that all investors fall prey to pump-and-dump schemes. Some

investors may invest in high-risk or penny stocks because they view them as lotteries and a form

of gambling (Kumar 2009). These investors are looking for legitimate stocks that potentially


8
    For a broader overview of the behavioral ethics research regarding why individuals overlook deceptive conduct,
    see Bazerman and Tenbrunsel (2011) and Gino (2013). Frankel (2012) describes the victims of financial fraud by
    examining those that fall prey to Ponzi like investments.


                                                                                                               12
generate large returns, albeit with high risks. Such investors may accidentally invest in a pump-

and-dump scheme when seeking high-risk, high-return payoffs. It is also conceivable that some

investors participate in pump-and-dump schemes in order to profit from the schemes. These

individuals are not duped by the promotional communication, but rather consciously decide to

invest despite knowing the nature and risk of the investment. For example, a 2014 Bloomberg

article describes a 27-year-old telecom broker named Matthew Fromm who often traded stocks

in his spare time in the evening (Faux and Lawrence 2014). He often invested in touted penny

stocks noting that “the trick with trading penny stocks is being ahead of the curve.” Fromm

labeled these “Lotto Picks,” indicating that he hoped to reap a large gain, but also understood

that his initial investment might be worthless in the end. Thus, some investors are attracted to

touted penny stocks, because of the skewed payoffs and/or utility gain from investing in risky

equities (Kumar 2009; Eraker and Ready 2015). Given the more deliberate involvement, it is also

much less clear that these investors can or should be protected by securities regulators.

    Prior research on market manipulation provides only limited evidence of the size of tout

investments and the losses incurred by investors. Frieder and Zittrain (2008) assume investors

purchase stocks when they are most heavily touted and hold them for two days. Based on these

assumptions, they estimate that investors lose on average 5.4% in a tout investment before

transaction costs. However, if investors entered earlier or held longer, their profits could be

substantially different. Moreover, we do not know if investors place small bets or invest a

significant fraction of their stock portfolios.

    To obtain evidence on tout investments and their performance, we combine detailed trading

and portfolio data for a large sample of German investors with a dataset of pump-and-dump

schemes that were “offered” to German investors or “pushed” in Germany. As market



                                                                                              13
manipulation is a global phenomenon, investors encounter pump-and-dump schemes in securities

markets around the world. 9 In fact, the same schemes are often pushed in several countries at the

same time. As such, our analysis speaks to the global market for touts, beyond Germany.


3.        Data and Research Design

3.1.      Pump-and-Dump Sample

       Our investigation of pump-and-dump schemes extends from January 2002 to January 2015.

We collect data on stocks that were subject to touting from two sources. The first source is a

proprietary sample provided to us by the German Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin). This

agency is charged with supervising German securities markets and enforcing German securities

laws. Restricting market manipulation is considered one of its main functions. 10 BaFin actively

monitors German securities markets and also receives tips and complaints about manipulative

schemes from investors and banks. It investigates these claims and determines whether the

schemes constitute illegal market manipulation. 11 The characteristics of an illegal pump-and-

dump campaign are summarized and described in Article 4 of MaKonV (“other acts of

deception”). Under German law, it is prohibited (i) to tout a stock based on false or misleading

information or (ii) to provide deceptive stock recommendations that conceal the promoter’s




9
     Market manipulation is a phenomenon in both developed securities markets (e.g., the US and the UK) and
     emerging markets (e.g., Khwaja and Mian 2005).
10
     See Market Manipulation, BaFin, May 8, 2017 (available at:
     https://www.bafin.de/EN/Aufsicht/BoersenMaerkte/Marktmanipulation/marktmanipulation_node_en.html).
11
     Illicit market manipulation is prohibited in Germany according to Article 20a of the Securities Trading Act
     (Wertpapierhandelsgesetz). The definition of illegal market manipulation was revised in 2005 via an
     administrative order by the German Ministry of Finance (Marktmanipulations-Konkretisierungsverordnung,
     MaKonV). The law changed again in 2016 (i.e., after our sample period) due to changes in EU law.


                                                                                                             14
financial interests. 12 Cases that BaFin determines to be illegal market manipulation are handed

over to the German prosecution.

       From January 2002 to January 2015, BaFin identified 259 allegedly illegal tout campaigns

which it handed over to law enforcement. 13 This sample comprehensively includes all pump-and-

dump schemes provided by BaFin to German prosecutors during this time period. BaFin

generally does not consider the likelihood of apprehending the promoters or the likelihood of

obtaining a conviction in determining whether or not to refer these cases to the prosecution.

Thus, almost all cases that BaFin investigates and it views as illegal are referred to the

prosecution and hence form part of our sample. Given BaFin’s jurisdiction, we are confident that

the touts within this sample targeted German investors and took place in German markets. This

feature is important for our analysis, given that we have a sample of retail investors with

accounts in Germany and given how we identify individual investor participation.

       To mitigate potential sample selection concerns about this sample (e.g., due to the way

BaFin identifies potentially illicit stock promotions), we create a second dataset of touts through

hand-collecting cases from German websites and internet forums. To find these additional cases,

we conducted several different searches. First, we examined stock trading websites that feature

promotional communications and that allow users to post touts and spams. Second, we examined

those trading websites for complaints by individuals about receiving unsolicited e-mail, fax, or

telephone calls touting a stock (see Internet Appendix for details on the search process and


12
     Stock ownership or other financial interest in a firm constitutes a conflict of interest that must be disclosed when
     recommending a stock. Insufficient conflict-of-interest disclosures can make a stock promotion illegal. Pump-
     and-dump campaigns are also illegal for other reasons (“wrong and misleading signals due to an artificial price
     level”, Article 3 of MaKonV). For example, pump-and-dump campaigns often rely on fake trading to create an
     illusion of market activity and liquidity in advance of the scheme.
13
     BaFin viewed the schemes as illicit market manipulation, but the touts would be accurately described as ‘alleged
     market manipulation’ since depending on the nature and result of the prosecution there may not have been civil or
     criminal sanctions for the perpetrators of the schemes.


                                                                                                                     15
examples). To ascertain that the incident described was a stock tout, we require that the

individual provided either a copy or detailed description of the promoted tout text. Based on this

strategy, we identify 280 distinct campaigns that occurred between January 2002 and January

2015. If the same stock is touted multiple times, we treat the subsequent tout as a new campaign

if there are more than six months between promotional communications.

       When we combine the two sources, we obtain 421 distinct pump-and-dump campaigns.

There are 118 cases that appear in both samples. While the overlap in the cases from the two

sources may appear low, we emphasize that the BaFin sample is focused on manipulations in

German markets. For the hand-collected cases, it is harder to ascertain that the tout campaigns

actually targeted German investors or that they took place on German trading venues. Moreover,

all the BaFin cases were deemed illegal market manipulation by the supervisor after an

investigation. Our hand collection does not apply this criterion. As such, the hand-collected

sample is less restrictive and could include promotions that were not necessarily illegal. In the

end, both subsamples have their advantages and, for this reason, we combine them for our

analyses. However, we confirm that all our analyses yield similar results and inferences when

using BaFin cases only. 14

       A key data item for our analysis is the beginning of the tout campaign (i.e., pump phase).

For the BaFin cases, we rely on the date provided by BaFin, which marks the beginning of the

illegal promotion activity according to their investigation. For the hand-collected cases, we

define the beginning of the tout campaign as the date of the promotional e-mail, fax, or telephone

communication, unless this date is not available in the actual message. In this case, we record the


14
     We also analyze systematic differences between the two subsamples (Table 1) and find that the primary
     difference is the “uptake” by our sample investors, consistent with the above discussion on the sample
     construction.


                                                                                                        16
date of the post about the tout as the start of the tout campaign. When we find multiple posts or

messages for the same tout campaign, we record the date of the first promotional

communication. For each pump-and-dump campaign, we collect additional descriptive

information about the touted firm, the type and country of its trading venue, the location of its

headquarters, and industry via historical snapshots of Datastream.

    Figure 2 describes our tout sample with 421 distinct pump-and-dump campaigns. In Panel

A, we show the number of touts per year in our BaFin sample, hand-collected sample, and those

contained in both samples. From 2006-2014, there are 46 touts on average per year. In the earlier

period, 2002-2005, we have far fewer touts in our sample, which could be explained by the

supervisory ramp-up. BaFin was not charged with the supervision of market manipulation until

2002. Its special organizational unit for the surveillance and enforcement of market manipulation

came into existence a year later and its legal authority with respect to market manipulation was

further expanded in 2004 and 2005. The time-series pattern of pump-and-dump schemes also

coincides with the bull-bear market cycles. Moreover, within the hand-collected sample, the

lower incidence rate likely reflects that it is harder for us to find stock touts on websites when

they are more distant in time. In addition, the spike in the number of hand-collected touts in 2007

stands out. The large number could be related to the following stock spam patterns. The internet

security firm Sophos notes that increased SEC enforcement with respect to ‘hyped’ Pink Sheets

stocks (in particular, “Operation Spamalot” in March 2007) led to a significant rise in stock spam

campaigns outside the US (Sophos 2008). Simultaneously, new spam technology (‘image spam’

or ‘PDF spam’) allowed perpetrators to bypass most anti-spam filters during this year. Consistent

with this explanation, we observe that almost 95% of all tout cases in 2007 involve e-mail or

newsletter campaigns.



                                                                                                17
       In general, however, promoters disseminate tout campaigns via a variety of different

communications. E-mail and phone are the two most common means of distribution and are used

by 30% and 29% of all campaigns in our sample, respectively. The relatively high percentage of

phone campaigns is notable considering the higher costs and lower reach of such campaigns.

About 25% of campaigns employ newsletters, which provide stock recommendations to

subscribers. Over a fifth of all campaigns, or 21%, use multiple distribution forms with two

channels being common. The two most common combinations are e-mail & phone and e-mail &

newsletter. Only a very small number of campaigns (<2%) employ more than two channels.

       We are able to find data on the industry, location of the tout venue, and the company’s

official headquarters for 416 out of 421 touts. Our touted stocks are traded on venues from 9

different countries, with Germany and the United States dominating the sample with 73% and

19%, respectively. The location of tout firms’ headquarters is more diverse, comprising 12

countries. Although Germany and the United States are again the most frequent locations, there

is considerably more heterogeneity in the official headquarter location, with Germany, the

United States, and the UK representing 31%, 22%, and 13%, respectively (Figure 2, Panel D).

       We also find that touted firms are purported to be operating in a diverse set of industries

(Panel E). Tout stocks are most commonly in Financial Services (27%), but mining, software,

and oil & gas companies are also common. However, these designated industries may be

deceptive in that some touted firms are shell companies and/or lack substantive operations.


3.2.     Investor Sample

       We obtain individual investor trading and portfolio data from a large German online bank

that operates in all 16 states of the country. Out of the bank’s more than half-million clients, we




                                                                                                18
obtain a random sample of 113,000 investors. For each investor, we have their complete trading

activities from 2002 to 2015. This includes information on the transaction volumes, prices, and

dates as well as information on order types (i.e., orders with and without limits). We also receive

information on age, gender, residence (i.e., zip-code), marital status, education level,

employment type, and for how long they had an account with the bank. We also have self-

reported categorical information on income levels, total wealth, and investment risk tolerance. 15

       During our sample period, the investors in our sample made 29 million trades with an

aggregate transaction value of €178 billion. 54% of all trades are purchases and the average

portfolio value at the end of 2013 is €55,854. Slightly more than half (55%) of the average

investor’s portfolio is invested in equities. The mean and median number of transactions (equity

and non-equity trades) per year is 36 and 16, respectively, indicating that most investors manage

their portfolios quite actively. The majority of our sample is male (83%) with an average age of

52. Prior research suggests that individuals with investment portfolios are more highly educated

and financially savvy than the population (van Rooij et al. 2011; Cole et al. 2014). Following this

expectation, we find that 7% of the sample investors hold doctoral degree as compared with

1.5% of the German population (German Federal Bureau of Statistics 2015).

       We conduct several comparisons to gauge how our sample compares to the population of

German investors to make sure that investment portfolios in our sample are fairly representative

(and not, for instance, online “play money” accounts). Towards this end, we first compare the

average portfolio value in our sample to the value reported in German national statistics. The

Deutsche Bundesbank reports that the average portfolio value for German equity investors in

2013 is €48,000, which is only slightly lower than our sample average of €55,854. We also

15
     Some investors do not provide personal characteristics (e.g. employment type) to the bank. Thus, we do not have
     these characteristics for all investors in our sample.


                                                                                                                 19
compare the portfolio holdings to annual household income. As investors in our dataset provide

income in ranges (e.g., €100,000 - €150,000), we use the midpoint of each range to construct a

measure for the average investor’s income. We find that the ratio of the average portfolio value

to average annual income is 1.3 in our sample, which is comparable to the ratio of 1.1 computed

for German investors more broadly (German Federal Bureau of Statistics 2008a, 2008b;

Deutsche Bundesbank 2013). Together, this evidence suggests that our bank sample is

comparable to the population of German investors holding accounts at other financial

institutions. We also compare several key descriptive statistics for our sample to those reported

in other household finance studies using U.S online brokerage data (e.g., Odean 1998; Barber

and Odean 2001) and Scandinavian data (e.g., Calvet et al. 2007). Again, we find that the

statistics for our sample are quite comparable (see Internet Appendix for details).


4.        Descriptive Analysis of Tout Participation and Performance

4.1.      Investor Participation in Pump-and-Dump Schemes

       We do not observe whether our sample investors obtain the communication used to tout the

stock (e.g., the spam e-mail). Thus, we have to infer tout participation from their trading

behavior. We assume that investors who purchase the touted stock within 60 days of the

beginning of the pump phase as participating in the pump-and-dump scheme. (We discuss this

assumption in more detail in Section 5.1.)

       In Table 1, we describe the characteristics of touts with a positive investor response. Out of

the 421 distinct touts in our sample, 79% (334 touts) are traded by at least one investor in our

bank sample during the 60-day period from the start of the tout. 16 Of the touts with a positive


16
     As expected given the sample construction (Section 3.1), the participation in the BaFin subsample is higher (84%
     of these touts have at least one sample investor participating) than in the hand-collected subsample (72%).


                                                                                                                  20
investor response, the average tout has approximately 60 purchase trades by our sample

investors. However, we find that the distribution is positively skewed; the median tout has 13

purchases. Our sample investors make a total of 20,066 purchases in touted stocks during the

assumed 60-day pump period. As some investors would make multiple trades in the same touted

stock during the pump campaign, we have a total of 12,296 tout-investor observations. Thus, the

average tout investor makes approximately 1.6 purchases if they participate.

    Panel B of Table 1 indicates that the average tout attracts 37 different investors from our

sample bank. However, there is considerable variation and skew with the median tout having 9

investors and the standard deviation being 90 investors. In total, we have 6,569 unique investors

who participate in at least one tout in our sample. Thus, 5.8% of all sample investors trade in at

least one tout during our sample period. We find that more than 50% of the investors participate

only once but the average tout investor purchases nearly 1.9 distinct tout stocks, implying that at

least some investors participate in multiple distinct touts.

    In Panel C of Table 1, we explore the characteristics of different tout campaigns. In Column

(1), we use a linear probability model and find that tout firms that are headquartered in Germany

are 12.1% more likely to have a positive investor response. We also find that e-mail touts are

more likely to garner a response by sample investors than telephone-based campaigns, likely

reflecting the greater reach by low cost e-mail campaigns. Touts that utilize e-mail (telephone)

are 16.0% more likely (15.8% less likely) to be traded by an investor from our sample bank. We

do not find any differences in trading propensity between trading venue locations, potentially

reflecting the ease with which investors can trade on different venues globally.

    We also examine which attributes are associated with more “effective” campaigns that draw

in more investors. In Column (2), we find that firms headquartered in Germany attract more


                                                                                                21
investors, likely reflecting a form of home bias (French and Poterba 1991). Specifically, touts

headquartered in Germany have on average 61% more investors. E-mail and newsletter

campaigns reach greater number of investors and we find that more investors join the campaign

when such media are utilized. Phone campaigns are costlier and likely reach fewer potential

investors, resulting in fewer individuals who actually invest in the tout. Specifically, telephone

campaigns are associated with a 65% decrease in the number of investors. We also find that touts

investigated by BaFin are 30% more likely to be traded within our sample and that such touts

attract more investors. This finding reflects our sample construction, i.e., the fact that for the

BaFin sample we know that the scheme targeted German investors. In Column (3), we find that

schemes involving larger firms (as measured by their pre-pump market capitalization) attract

more investors. In Column (4), we explore the associations for the tout message and hence focus

on the subset of touts for which we can observe the original tout message. We code a discrete

variable ranging from 0 to 3 with higher values indicating a more sophisticated tout message

(i.e., professional text quality, specific financial data). As one would expect, we find that more

sophisticated tout messages are associated with a larger number of participating investors.

       Overall, the participation rate in touts is fairly high, with nearly 6% of all investors in our

brokerage sample investing in at least one. Thus, our analysis shows that pump-and-dump

campaigns engage a considerable number of investors.


4.2.     Performance in Pump-and-Dump Schemes

       In this section, we examine the portfolio and wealth consequences of investors’ decisions to

participate in pump-and-dump schemes. In Table 2, we provide descriptive statistics on the

returns of investing in pump-and-dump campaigns. In Panel A, we describe the performance of

individual tout trades. Within our sample, 84.5% of the tout trades are closed out during the


                                                                                                   22
sample period, i.e., roundtrip investments. For those trades that are not closed by the investor, we

“close” the trade 120 days after the purchase for the purpose of computing roundtrip returns. 17

       The mean raw return for the 20,066 tout purchases that occurred during the 60-day pump

period is -24%. We also compute the average market return over the period during which

investors hold the touted stocks using the CDAX index (2%). Thus, the market-adjusted tout

return is -26%. On average, each tout trade reduces investor wealth by €800. 18 Despite the

significantly negative return for the average tout trade, we find that for a considerable fraction of

the tout trades (30%) the return is actually positive. The average and median return for these

trades are 29.82% and 12.98%, respectively. It is conceivable that some investors are attracted to

touts because of these returns or the “lottery-like” payoffs suggested by the price path.

       In Panel B of Table 2, we show the performance of tout investments by aggregating all

trades by the same investor within a tout. We find the market-adjusted, value-weighted

performance is -31%, indicating that relatively larger tout trades are being made by investors that

tend to perform worse. The average loss per tout investment is €1,305. Aggregating these losses

for all sample investors (approximately 37 investors per tout) yields a total loss of €48,000 per

tout in our sample. This number is small but reflects that our investor sample represents only

about 4% of all online brokerage accounts in Germany. Thus, assuming investors at other

German online banks behave similarly, the average tout generates aggregate losses for German

17
     Trades that investors do not close out over our sample period (i.e., inventory investments) tend to have more
     negative returns than roundtrip investments. With our 120-day assumption, the average return for inventory
     investments is -53%, compared to -18% for the average roundtrip investment. This difference makes sense for
     several reasons. Retail investors tend to hold losing investments for longer periods (Shefrin and Statman 1985;
     Odean 1998). Additionally, selling crashed stocks is often not feasible (liquidity) or sensible (given fees). Thus,
     the return using a 120-day cut-off is likely to understate the magnitude of the losses associated with inventory
     investments. For example, roundtrip investments that are sold after this cut-off date have a more negative return
     (-63%) with only a quarter of those investments achieving better-than-average returns (i.e., above -53%).
18
     White (2016) examines returns for trading in U.S. OTC stocks and finds a considerably smaller magnitude for the
     loss per trade (median loss equals $96). For promoted stocks, he reports a mean holding return of -13%, which is
     better than the average return for our roundtrip investments (-18%).


                                                                                                                    23
retail investors with online accounts of at least €1.2 million.19 This estimate does not account for

trading activity of investors with non-online brokerage accounts, who may be less responsive,

but traditional brick-and-mortar accounts have a 90% market share in Germany. In addition, we

are missing losses by investors in other countries.

       We acknowledge that even if one could aggregate over all tout investors, the total losses

would likely still be small compared to the aggregate losses investors incur when a blue-chip

stock declines significantly on a given day. But the latter magnitude is driven by the large

investor base of blue-chip stocks. In our view, it is more appropriate to compare our loss estimate

to damages caused by other frauds. As an example, the median fraud that is criminally

prosecuted in the United States generates losses of roughly $70,000, which is less than half of the

median we obtain for the aggregate losses per tout. When converted to U.S. dollars, our estimate

for the average aggregate losses of German investors per tout is comparable to the 90th percentile

of the damages caused by prosecuted frauds in the United States ($1.75 million). 20 This

comparison illustrates that pump-and-dump schemes are not small financial crimes and that the

losses to individual investors are fairly substantial. We come to the same conclusion when we

compare the above estimate for the average aggregate losses to investor losses incurred when

U.S. firms announce that they have to restate their financials due to fraudulent or improper

accounting. For example, using Durnev and Mangen (2009), we estimate that the aggregate

losses induced are $1.04 million per restatement (considering the effect on both the restating firm

and peer firms).

19
     This estimate is conservative using the market share of our sample (based on the number of accounts). We can
     also compute aggregate losses based on trading volume. We relate the aggregate trading volume of touts that are
     exclusively traded on German exchanges (for which we have the consolidated trading volume via Datastream) to
     the purchase trading volume in our sample over the 60-day pump period. Using this approach, we estimate that
     the aggregate losses to German investors are at least €1.5 to 2 million per tout.
20
     These statistics for damages of prosecuted frauds are calculated from 2002-2015 using data from the U.S.
     Sentencing Commission. They include all prosecuted offenses with an individual offense type of fraud.


                                                                                                                 24
    In Panels C and D of Table 2, we examine the returns for the tout and non-tout part of the

portfolios of investors who invest in at least one tout campaign. The performance of the tout part

of the portfolios is aggregated by investor and described in Panel C of Table 2. The average tout

investment by our sample investors is €13,051, but the standard deviation is €56,567 reflecting

considerable variation in the invested amount across investors. The average value-weighted

return for the tout portion of an investor’s portfolio is -31% with the median value being similar

in magnitude. Remarkably, the average return for the tout portion of the bottom quartile of tout

investors is -64%.

    For comparison, the hypothetical 120-day buy-and-hold return for the median tout

is -70.4%. Thus, tout investors are doing considerably “better” than holding returns based on the

price path following the pump phase would suggest. Essentially, many investors limit losses by

selling earlier. That said, the average (median) holding period is 61 (11) days and hence

considerably longer than the 2 days assumed in Frieder and Zittrain (2008). 73.6% of the trades

are closed out within 120 days from the start of the tout. To the extent that investors hold onto

tout investments longer, their losses tend to grow substantially.

    Panel D of Table 2 shows the attributes of the non-tout part of the tout investors’ portfolios

and hence give us a sense for their overall investment behavior and portfolio performance. 5,140

of our 6,569 unique tout investors purchase other non-tout stocks during the 60-day pump period

in which they purchase a touted stock. For these stock investments, the median and average

value weighted return is -4% and -5%, respectively. This return is below the market return but

considerably greater than the return in tout investments. The former observation is consistent

with prior research showing the tendency for individual investors to underperform market indices




                                                                                               25
(e.g., Barber and Odean 2000). The latter observation already indicates that tout investments are

indeed different and considerably worse than other investments made by tout investors.


5.       Analysis of Touts Campaigns

       In this section, we investigate which individuals invest into touts and their investment

behavior subsequent to these investments. We begin by providing support that investors do

respond to tout campaigns when making investments during the 60-day period after the start of

the pump-and-dump campaign. Next, we explore which investor characteristics relate to tout

participation, cross-sectional differences in investor returns, the existence of investor types, and

how the tout experience relates to subsequent tout and non-tout investments.


5.1.     Tout Response versus Coincidental Investment

       In treating investor purchases during the 60 days after the start of the tout campaign as

“participation” in the tout, we assume that investors are responding to promotional

communications. However, we do not observe whether investors actually saw or received the

tout communications. Thus, we have to infer tout participation from investment behavior. To

assess the validity of this assumption, we provide two pieces of evidence that suggest that

investors are responding to tout communications rather than trading in touted stocks by chance.

       First, we find that only 11% (732) of the investors who invest during the 60 days pump

period purchased the same tout stock in the 180 days preceding the beginning of the tout

campaign. This relatively small number of prior investments in touted stocks already suggests

that these stocks are not typical investments in their equity portfolio for our sample investors and

that they are responding to the tout campaigns.




                                                                                                 26
    Second, we examine whether we would see a similar trading response by our sample

investors for other stocks that were not touted, yet exhibited a similar price path. This test

addresses for instance the concern that investors respond to momentum, rather than tout

promotions. Toward this end, we match the prices of touted stocks at five dates before the pump-

and-dump campaign to the prices of non-touted stocks from the same country using coarsened-

exact matching techniques (see Internet Appendix for details on the matching procedure). In

essence, this technique matches stocks based on the price path until the beginning of the tout. We

rather match on prices (instead of returns) to ensure that control stocks have similar price levels

(and hence the lottery-like characteristics of low-priced stocks). Panel A of Figure 3 shows the

price path of the touted and the matched non-touted stocks. Visually, the run-up in prices is

relatively similar across both types of stocks until the beginning of the pump-and-dump

campaign. We also confirm with t-tests that the returns of the two groups are not significantly

different before the tout date. Next, we examine investor responses to tout and control stocks. In

Panel B (average number of purchase-trades per stock) and Panel C (mean value of purchases),

we plot the purchases of tout and matched non-tout stocks by our sample investors to compare

the response in event time. The figures illustrate that investors react right around the time of the

tout campaign and that the response is much stronger for touted stocks than for matched stocks.

These results suggest that investors respond to the touts and mitigates concerns that investors

purchase these stocks for some other reasons (e.g., momentum trading). That said, our

measurement of tout participation is indirect and so our results should be interpreted with this

caveat in mind.




                                                                                                 27
5.2.       Characteristics of Tout Investors

       Given the significantly negative returns to the average tout investment as shown in Section

4, we seek to better understand who and why investors participate in tout campaigns. Panel A of

Table 3 indicates that the median tout investor is a 47-year-old male living in the suburbs, is

married, and has a high self-assessed risk tolerance for his investments. The average tout investor

has approximately €60,000 invested in securities, most of which is in equities. In fact, a large

fraction of his (or her) entire portfolio (31%) is comprised of penny shares (defined as having a

price below €5), which often have lottery-like return characteristics (Kumar 2009).

       To provide a basis of comparison, we create a matched control sample of investors. For each

tout month, we draw a random sample of 2,000 investors that did not invest in any tout before

this date. We then retain only those investors who purchase at least one non-tout stock during the

60-day pump period. This restriction ensures that our control investors are not inactive and also

invest in equities during the same time period. We find that control investors are relatively

similar with respect to their personal characteristics and demographics (i.e., age, gender,

married), but that there are significant differences in their portfolio characteristics. Specifically,

non-tout investors trade less frequently than tout investors and hold a smaller (larger) fraction of

their portfolio in penny (blue-chip) stocks.

       In Panel B of Table 3, we investigate more closely the characteristics associated with being

a tout investor. In line with the univariate evidence, we find that investors who are male, older,

have higher investment risk tolerance, and live outside cities are more likely to be tout investors

(Column 1). 21 Additionally, investors with a greater wealth (based on the value of their entire



21
     An investor’s risk tolerance is an investor’s self-reported assessment of their desire for risk and range from 1 to 5.
     Clients of our sample German bank are only allowed to purchase securities equal or below their self-reported risk


                                                                                                                       28
portfolio) are less likely to invest into touts. In Column (2) we add portfolio-level characteristics.

Investors who hold riskier portfolios are more inclined to invest into touts. Specifically, those

with a higher share of penny stocks, a lower proportion of blue chip shares, and a greater number

of individual stocks are more likely to become tout investors. Personal characteristics alone can

explain the propensity to become a tout investor only to a limited extent (R2=2.7%). However,

adding portfolio-level characteristics significantly enhances the explanatory power of the model

(R2=19.4%). This finding suggests that tout investors can be better identified based on their

portfolio composition and investment behavior than based on their personal characteristics. 22 In

Column (3), we add an investor’s profession to the model. Profession is self-reported by the

investors when they open their brokerage account with the bank and captures broad employment

categorizations (the omitted category is                       “dependents        and others,” which includes

students, apprentices and unemployed people). Again, the explanatory power increases only

modestly after the professional indicators are added to the model (R2=20.4%). Relative to the

omitted category (3% of all tout investors and 4% of all control investors), we find that blue-

collar workers, retirees, and self-employed are more likely to be tout investors. This result

suggests that education could play a role in tout participation. However, our model cannot

separate whether certain investors are more responsive to pump-and-dump schemes or promoters

target people with certain personal characteristics.

       Remarkably, over one-third of the tout investors included in the analyses of Table 3 have

more than one tout investment over the sample period. This large fraction of “repeat investors” is


     class. For example, to be able to trade in blue chips stocks, clients need to select at least risk-class 3 and to trade
     in penny stocks a risk-class of 5 is required.
22
     This conclusion is subject to one caveat. For about 340 of our 6,549 tout investors (~ 5%), we do not have all the
     main personal characteristics (gender, age, etc.). Additionally, another 722 tout investors (~ 11%) choose not to
     disclose their profession to the bank. This lack of data could lead us to underestimate the extent to which personal
     characteristics are useful in identifying tout investors.


                                                                                                                        29
noteworthy given the large negative return for the average tout investment. One possible

explanation could be that multi-tout and single investors fare quite differently, suggesting that

they are different investor types. For example, multi-tout investors could possess superior trading

skill or participate in touts for different reasons. Therefore, Table 4 provides descriptive statistics

conditional on the number of tout investments over our sample period. Overall, multi-tout

investors seem to be a more ‘extreme’ version of single-tout investors, rather than a different

type. For example, the share of penny (blue chip) stocks increases (decreases) in the number of

tout investments. Investors with only one tout investment have a 27% penny stock share,

whereas this percentage reaches almost 50% for investors with seven or more touts. We find

little support for the notion that multi-tout investors in general are superior traders or more

successful in their tout investments. Although the mean return is higher than the mean return of

single-tout investors, it is still quite negative (i.e., -23% for investors with seven or more touts).

Moreover, multi-tout investors incur large cumulative losses. While a single-tout investor loses

about $1,350 of his investment, an investor with five tout investments loses more than $7,000

across all touts.

       In Table 5, we specifically analyze characteristics that are associated with the “success” or

better performance of tout investments. 23 In Column (1), we relate investors’ average tout returns

to their personal and portfolio-level characteristics. Although most characteristics do not exhibit

significant associations with returns, tout investors that hold a larger fraction of penny stocks in

their portfolio as well as fewer stocks tend to have more positive tout returns. In Column (2), we

compare multi-tout investors with other tout investors, indicating those investing in four or more

touts. On average, these multi-tout investors have a 6.5 percentage points higher return. In

23
     We also explore whether certain tout-stock characteristics (e.g., location of headquarter) are related to investor-
     level returns. However, this analysis yields largely inconclusive results.


                                                                                                                    30
Column (3), we add investor- and tout-fixed effects and focus on two new variables related to the

relative timing of the purchase and the relative position of the tout. First, we find that investors

who invest relatively early into the tout (compared to other investors that invest into the same

tout) have more positive returns. This result highlights the pyramid-like nature of pump-and-

dump campaigns. The magnitude of the coefficient suggests that even investors who purchase

after the beginning of the tout (and hence are not likely the perpetrators or affiliated with the

promoters) can profit from a pump-and-dump scheme by investing early and quickly flipping the

tout to other potential victims. 24 Second, we find a negative coefficient for the variable indicating

the number of touts that an investor has participated in up to the point of the most recent tout.

This result suggests that repeated participation does not increase performance and, hence, our

evidence does not support the interpretation that the superior average return performance of

multi-tout investors (Column 2) is due to investor learning.


5.3.       Subsequent Pump-and-Dump Investments

       In this section, we explore how past tout participation influences subsequent tout

investments. In Table 6, we investigate investors’ willingness to invest in a subsequent campaign

conditional on prior tout performance, controlling for various portfolio characteristics. In

Column (1), we examine whether investors that have a more positive experience in their first tout

are more likely to invest into a second tout. We find that the return decile is significantly

associated with future tout investments. The coefficient implies that a one-decile increase in the

first tout’s return makes it 8.1% (2.5 percentage points) more likely that the investor participates

in a second pump-and-dump campaign. In Column (2), we focus on the first four touts of all


24
     Our descriptive statistics in Table 2, Panel B, suggest that fewer than 25% of the investors are able to do so. We
     also check and do not find return or trading evidence suggesting that some of our sample investors are
     perpetrators or affiliated with the promoters.


                                                                                                                   31
investors and include the return decile of the investor’s most recent as well as the return decile of

the prior tout (thereby, dropping the first tout observation of each investor). While both return

variables have positive coefficients, only the return of the most recent tout is significantly

associated with the likelihood of the subsequent tout investment. We also find that other right-

hand side variables have plausible and expected associations. For example, irrespective of

returns, investors with riskier portfolios (as indicated by a higher penny stock share, lower blue-

chip share, or a larger number of individual stocks) are more likely to invest in a subsequent tout.

    In Column (3), we explore how past performance relates to the time until the next tout

investment. We find that, for investors who do invest in another campaign, those with a higher

return in the most recent tout invest more quickly into the next one. A one-decile increase in the

most recent tout return reduces the time between two tout investments by approximately 11.6%.

That is, more successful investors appear to be more eager to quickly invest into another tout,

while less successful ones seem to hesitate even when they eventually invest into another tout.

Consistent with these adjustments, we find in Column (4) that investors with higher returns in

their prior tout stay longer in the next tout, perhaps suggesting overconfidence rather than skill as

staying in tout campaigns for longer periods typically hurts performance.

    In sum, investors’ prior experiences with pump-and-dump schemes appear to influence their

future tout investments. Investors who have negative experiences, i.e., relatively poor returns,

tend to reduce subsequent participation and, if they invest again, increase wait times and shorten

holding periods. In contrast, investors who are initially successful are more likely to continue

participating and seem to accumulate larger losses than initially unsuccessful investors.




                                                                                                  32
5.4.     Types of Tout Investors

       As discussed in Section 2.2, investors may participate in pump-and-dump campaigns for

different reasons, consistent with the idea of different types of tout investors. While some

investors likely are duped by the promoters and their campaigns, other investors may be aware of

the nature of the pump-and-dump scheme and decide to participate with the goal of quickly

flipping the stock for a profit. However, it is challenging to infer the ex-ante motive of tout

investors based on their investment behavior in touted stocks. To address this challenge, we

classify individuals based on their past trading behavior in non-touted stocks.

       In Table 7, Panel A, we create and describe four investor categories: New Traders,

Conservative Traders, Penny Stock Day Traders, and Short-term Traders (plus a fifth residual

category captures all traders who do not fall into any of four categories). We create the first

investor type, New Traders who recently began trading because it is difficult to characterize past

non-tout investment behavior for people who only recently opened an account at the bank. The

second investor group, Conservative Traders, comprises people who have not purchased a penny

stock or did not trade at all within the six months before the tout date. This investor category

contains the least active equity investors who also have little experience with penny stocks.

Given their limited trading experience, investors in this group are potentially more vulnerable.

The next two investor groups contain frequent traders that regularly trade in penny stocks and

typically have short holding periods. Investors in the third group, Penny Stock Day Traders,

often buy and (quickly) sell risky, low-priced stocks.

       Panel A of Table 7 provides descriptive statistics for the sample composition by investor

types, separately for tout and active control investors. While only 2.2% of control investors are

Penny Stock Day Traders, more than 10% of all tout investors are of this type. Conservative


                                                                                               33
Traders, on the other hand, are underrepresented in the tout investor sample (26.9% versus

57.9% in the control sample). Penny Stock Day Traders and Short-term Traders are more likely

to understand the risks of investing in penny stocks so their participation is less likely to be due

to deception. These investors comprise 34% of the tout sample suggesting that a substantial

portion of tout investors would be less aptly described as being deceived when making tout

investments. There are relatively few New Traders and their frequencies are very similar for the

tout and control investors, suggesting that it is not common for individuals to open an account

simply to make a tout investment. In our sample, most tout participants already had and used

their account for some time and thus have some degree of familiarly with stock investments. 25

       The described classification of investor types can lead to some overlap of the categories.

However, the overlap between the groups is relatively modest; on average, each investor would

be only assigned to 1.07 investor types, if they were not assigned sequentially. In the Internet

Appendix, we examine the distribution of investor types in our sample if we did not exclusively

assign investors to one investor type (via iterative assignment). The New Trader category has the

largest overlap with other investor groups. In contrast, Conservative Traders and the two groups

of frequent traders are relatively distinct. Given the limited overlap, we use mutually exclusive

investor type definitions via an iterative assignment of investors in Table 7 (e.g., if an investor is

assigned to investor group I, we will not assign him or her to any other group).

       Next, we re-estimate our models in Tables 3, 5 and 6 adding indicators for the different

investor types. In Panel B of Table 7, Model 1, we investigate the association between investor

types and tout participation. In line with the frequencies in Panel A, we find that Conservative


25
     Whether this result reflects a deliberate strategy by promoters (i.e., they have lists of people with investment
     accounts) or selection (i.e., people without accounts tend not to be responsive to tout communications) is not
     something we can investigate with our data.


                                                                                                                  34
Traders have a significantly lower likelihood of participating in pump-and-dump campaigns,

whereas Penny Stock Day Traders and Short-term Traders participate with higher frequency

compared to the residual traders. We note that the adjusted R2 of the regression increases

considerably (from about 19.4% to 24.5%) once we add the investor type dummies. This

increase in explanatory power is significant (F-Test of joint significance has a p-value<0.01) and

suggests that our investor type classification captures meaningful differences in the propensity of

tout participation, despite the fact that the classification is based on past investment behavior in

non-touted stocks.

    Column (2) shows the results for the return regression. Both frequent trader categories have

significantly larger returns as compared with the residual category. The average difference is

19.0% for Penny Stock Day Traders and 8.6% for Short-term Traders. Although these return

differences are large, the average tout investment return is still negative for both groups.

Nevertheless, the findings are in line with the notion that Penny Stock Day Traders and Short-

term Traders are unlikely to be deceived by the pump-and-dump schemes or unaware of their

nature. In Column (3), we assess whether certain investor types are more or less likely to invest

into another tout. Even after controlling for performance in the most recent tout, frequent traders

(and particularly Penny Stock Day Traders) have a significantly higher likelihood of investing

into another tout. This group of investors might even be actively seeking out touts. In contrast,

Conservative Traders seem to shy away from another tout investment after facing an adverse

outcome in a prior tout.

    Finally, in Column (4), we run a linear probability model to test whether certain investor

types differ in how much they invest in a tout (‘tout stake’). It is conceivable that some invest

only small amounts to ‘dip their toe into the water.’ In contrast, more seasoned traders may make



                                                                                                 35
more substantive investments once they decide to invest. To shed light on such strategies, we

code the dependent variable as ‘1’ if an investor invests less than 2.31% of her portfolio value

into the tout (i.e., the cutoff is equal to the lowest quintile). The finding is in line with our

expectation. Relative to the residual category, Conservative Traders (frequent traders) are more

(less) likely to invest small amounts in touted stocks.

       Overall, the analysis in Table 7 supports the notion that there are several distinct investor

types who invest in pump-and-dump schemes. Specifically, we find a substantial number of

investors who appear to trade in penny stocks and non-tout stocks with high frequency. Tout

participation by these investors is less likely due to deception, but instead is more likely a

reflection of gambling or speculation. This interpretation is also supported by the differential

performance of the investor types in the touts.


5.5.     Market Participation after Investing in Pump-and-Dump Campaigns

       Our earlier analyses show associations between the past and future tout investments. In this

section, we seek to build on this analysis by exploring whether tout participation potentially

influences investors’ subsequent investment behavior and market participation more broadly.

       In Panel A of Table 8, we partition each tout-investor observation into quintiles based on the

return of the tout. Observations in the lowest (highest) quintile have a mean return of -88%

(37%). We then compute the change in trading frequency in the 120 days after the pump period

relative to the 120 days before the pump period (scaled by the total number of trades). Changes

in total number of trades (Diff # TotalTrades) as well as changes in number of penny stock trades

(Diff # PennyTrades) display a monotonic pattern across quintiles. Investors who are relatively

more successful in past touts appear to adjust their risk of their other investments less. For

example, investors in the lowest quintile reduce the number of penny stock trades by 33%, but


                                                                                                  36
investor in the highest quintile reduce the number of penny stock trades by 6% only. Changes in

blue chip trades (Diff # BlueChipTrades) exhibit a reversed U-shaped pattern. Investors in the

lowest quintile seem to reduce the number of blue-chip investments. It is possible that they

decide to leave the equity market entirely. In contrast, investors in the highest quintile potentially

substitute blue-chip trades with riskier stocks.

    In Panel B of Table 8, we explore how past returns in touts relate to investors’ future market

participation in the near-term using a linear probability model. In Column 1 of Table 8, we find

that investors who experience more negative returns are more likely to stop trading in stocks in

the subsequent 120 days after the pump-period. A one-decile decrease in tout returns is

associated with a 1.8 percentage point increase in the probability that the investor stops trading

stocks entirely. In untabulated tests, we also analyze how these associations vary by investor

type. Specifically, the effects should be more pronounced for vulnerable investors and hence we

expect to see stronger associations for the category of Conservative Traders. It is conceivable

that these investors shy away from investing in the stock market entirely after a bad experience.

In line with this conjecture, we find that Conservative Traders are significantly more sensitive to

the return of their tout investment.

    In Column (2), we replace the binary left-hand side variable with a continuous variable,

capturing trading frequency (i.e., the difference between the number of trades in the 120 days

after the pump period and the number of trades in the 120 days before the pump period scaled by

the total number of trades). Again, investors with worse returns reduce their future trading more

strongly. Column (3) and Column (4) focus on changes in penny stock trades and changes in

blue-chip share trades, respectively. A comparison of the two columns reveals that penny stock

trades are more sensitive to the investor’s return of the tout.




                                                                                                   37
    In Panel C of Table 8, we explore whether the changes in post-tout investment behavior

persist in the long-term. Specifically, we analyze how investors change their long-term portfolio

composition and investment behavior conditional on their tout performance. In Column (1), we

regress the change in trading frequency (number of trades in the second and third year after the

tout minus the number of trades in year three and year two before the tout, scaled by the total

number of trades) on an investor’s tout return. We find that lower tout returns are associated with

a significant decrease in the trading frequency even several years out. In Column (2) to (4), we

focus on investors with a negative tout experience (or return) and examine whether long-term

portfolio changes are consistent with their short-term responses or adjustments documented in

Panel B. In Column (2), Diff # TotalTrades has a positive association with the corresponding

long-run variable, indicating that investors who trade less frequently immediately after the tout,

still do so two to three years later. In the next two columns, we analyze the association of the

initial response with the long-run portfolio composition. Consistent with the initial response,

investors that increase the number of penny trades still hold more penny stocks three years after

the tout relative to their respective penny stock share six months before the tout (Column 3).

Finally, investors that purchase fewer blue chip stocks immediately after the tout, have a smaller

fraction of blue-chip stocks three years after the tout date (Column 4). While these associations

are not necessarily causal and have to be interpreted carefully, they suggest that tout investments

not only influence the investment behavior shortly after the tout, but also in the long-term.

    Overall, the evidence suggests that pump-and-dump campaigns have the potential to create

more lasting effects on investor behavior. Harmed investors appear to reduce their equity market

participation. In contrast, investors who fared better in such schemes continue to seek risky and




                                                                                                38
lottery-like investments. As such, our evidence raises the possibility that pump-and-dump

schemes have broader distortionary effects in markets beyond the immediate losses to investors.


6.     Conclusion

     Although pump-and-dump schemes have long been the subject of significant regulatory

attention, we have relatively little evidence on investor participation in such schemes. Using a

unique proprietary set of trading records for a large set of individual investors along with a

database of German pump-and-dump schemes, our paper sheds light on individual investor

participation in and outcomes of market manipulation. Our evidence suggests that participation

in pump-and-dump schemes is quite common and results in sizable losses. Nearly 6% of the

sample investors participate in at least one “pump-and-dump,” losing on average nearly 30%.

     There is considerable heterogeneity in participation and investment outcomes, with a

considerable fraction of investors participating in multiple touts. We find that portfolio

composition and past trading behavior are better able to explain participation in touted stocks

than investor demographics. Moreover, we identify several distinct types of investors, some of

which should not be viewed as simply falling prey to these frauds. A sizeable fraction (35%) of

the investors trades frequently, with very short holding periods and often in penny stocks. For

these investors, speculation or gambling are more likely to be the motive.

     Our analysis offers several insights that could help with designing effective investor

protection against pump-and-dump schemes. It seems that effective investor protection should

take the documented heterogeneity in investor types into account. For those investors who appear

to be duped into these schemes, recent work in behavior ethics offers ideas on how to potentially

dissuade individuals from investing in pump-and-dump schemes. For instance, Zhang et al.

(2015) show that by simply prompting individuals to think about which fund looked more


                                                                                              39
suspicious, individuals were significantly less likely to invest in an attractive, but fraudulent

Ponzi scheme. Brokerages could similarly offer prompts to investors to reconsider investing in

pump-and-dump like stocks. Other techniques known to help investors from becoming victims

include asking investors to assess the reasonableness of the claims and the evidence prompting

them to invest (i.e., the tout communication) or nudging individuals to take more time when

making a decision.

    Such techniques, however, are less likely to be effective for those investors who speculate or

gamble and might even deliberately seek these schemes. They are much less likely to be fooled

and might even view the pump phase as an opportunity to make a gain. Such investors are less

likely to be dissuaded from investing with additional educational efforts, which makes it more

challenging to curtail their desire to invest in pump-and-dump schemes. Doing so could still be

worthwhile to the extent that their investments create externalities by providing greater benefits

for promoters. We leave this issue for future research.




                                                                                               40
References

Aggarwal, R.K., and G.J. Wu. 2006. Stock Market Manipulations. Journal of Business 79 (4): 1915-1953.
Allen, F., and D. Gale. 1992. Stock-Price Manipulation. The Review of Financial Studies 5 (3): 503-529.
Antilla, S. 2016. Retirement Fallout from a Penny-Stock Scam: 'We Don't Do Hardly Anything'. The
         Street, published on April 24, 2016 [retrieved April 1, 2017]. Available
         from https://www.thestreet.com/story/13527493/1/retirement-fallout-from-a-penny-stock-scam-
         we-don-t-do-hardly-anything.html.
Antweiler, W., and M.Z. Frank. 2004. Is All That Talk Just Noise? The Information Content of Internet
         Stock Message Boards. The Journal of Finance 59 (3): 1259-1294.
Barber, B.M., and T. Odean. 2000. Trading Is Hazardous to Your Wealth: The Common Stock
         Investment Performance of Individual Investors. The Journal of Finance 55 (2): 773-806.
———. 2001. Boys Will Be Boys: Gender, Overconfidence, and Common Stock Investment. The
         Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (1): 261-292.
———. 2008. All That Glitters: The Effect of Attention and News on the Buying Behavior of Individual
         and Institutional Investors. The Review of Financial Studies 21 (2): 785-818.
———. 2013. The Behavior of Individual Investors. Handbook of the Economics of Finance 2: 1533-
         1570.
Bazerman, M.H., and A.E. Tenbrunsel. 2011. Blind Spots: Why We Fail to Do What's Right and What to
         Do About It: Princeton University Press.
Böhme, R., and T. Holz. 2006. The Effect of Stock Spam on Financial Markets. Working Paper.
Brüggemann, U., A. Kaul, C. Leuz, and I.M. Werner. 2017. The Twilight Zone: OTC Regulatory
         Regimes and Market Quality. Review of Financial Studies, Forthcoming.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and P. Sodini. 2007. Down or Out: Assessing the Welfare Costs of
         Household Investment Mistakes. Journal of Political Economy 115 (5): 707-747.
Chugh, D., and M.H. Bazerman. 2007. Bounded Awareness: What You Fail to See Can Hurt You. Mind
         & Society 6 (1): 1-18.
Cole, S., A. Paulson, and G.K. Shastry. 2014. Smart Money? The Effect of Education on Financial
         Outcomes. The Review of Financial Studies 27 (7): 2022-2051.
Deutsche Bundesbank. 2013. Statistik Über Wertpapierinvestments [Statistic About Stock Investments].
Dorn, D., and G. Huberman. 2005. Talk and Action: What Individual Investors Say and What They Do.
         Review of Finance 9 (4): 437-481.
Durnev, A., and C. Mangen. 2009. Corporate Investments: Learning from Restatements. Journal of
         Accounting Research 47 (3): 679-720.
Eraker, B., and M. Ready. 2015. Do Investors Overpay for Stocks with Lottery-Like Payoffs? An
         Examination of the Returns of OTC Stocks. Journal of Financial Economics 115 (3): 486-504.
Faux, Z., and D. Lawrence. 2014. Searching for Cynk: The $6 Billion Penny-Stock Debacle, from Belize
         to Las Vegas. Bloomberg.
Fecht, F., A. Hackethal, and Y. Karabulut. 2017. Is Proprietary Trading Detrimental to Retail Investors?
         The Journal of Finance, forthcoming.
Frankel, T. 2012. The Ponzi Scheme Puzzle: A History and Analysis of Con Artists and Victims: Oxford
         University Press.
French, K.R., and J.M. Poterba. 1991. Investor Diversification and International Equity Markets. The
         American Economic Review 81 (2): 222-226.
Frieder, L., and J. Zittrain. 2008. Spam Works: Evidence from Stock Touts and Corresponding Market
         Activity. Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal 30: 479-520.
German Federal Bureau of Statistics. 2008a. Einkommens- Und Verbrauchsstichprobe: Vermoegen &
         Schulden [Income and Consumption Sample Statistic: Assets & Liabillites].
———. 2008b. Einkommens- Und Verbrauchsstichprobe: Einkommen, Einnahmen & Ausgaben [Income
         and Consumption Sample Statistic: Earnings, Income & Expenditures].


                                                                                                     41
———. 2015. Statistisches Jahrbuch [Statistical Yearbook].
Giannetti, M., and T.Y. Wang. 2016. Corporate Scandals and Household Stock Market Participation.
         Journal of Finance 71 (6): 2591-2636.
Gino, F. 2013. Sidetracked: Why Our Decisions Get Derailed, and How We Can Stick to the Plan:
         Harvard Business Review Press.
Griffin, S.P., and A.A. Block. 2001. Penny Wise: Accounting for Fraud in the Penny-Stock Industry.
         Contemporary Issues in Crime and Criminal Justice: Essays in Honor of Gilbert Geis: Prentice
         Hall Publishing.
Guiso, L., P. Sapienza, and L. Zingales. 2008. Trusting the Stock Market. The Journal of Finance 63 (6):
         2557-2600.
Jiang, G.L., P.G. Mahoney, and J.P. Mei. 2005. Market Manipulation: A Comprehensive Study of Stock
         Pools. Journal of Financial Economics 77 (1): 147-170.
Karpoff, J.M., D.S. Lee, and G.S. Martin. 2008a. The Consequences to Managers for Financial
         Misrepresentation. Journal of Financial Economics 88 (2): 193-215.
———. 2008b. The Cost to Firms of Cooking the Books. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
         43 (3): 581-611.
Karpoff, J.M., and J.R. Lott. 1993. The Reputational Penalty Firms Bear from Committing Criminal
         Fraud. Journal of Law & Economics 36 (2): 757-802.
Khwaja, A.I., and A. Mian. 2005. Unchecked Intermediaries: Price Manipulation in an Emerging Stock
         Market. Journal of Financial Economics 78 (1): 203-241.
Kumar, A. 2009. Who Gambles in the Stock Market? The Journal of Finance 64 (4): 1889-1933.
Kyle, A.S., and S. Viswanathan. 2008. How to Define Illegal Price Manipulation. American Economic
         Review 98 (2): 274-279.
Lee, C.M. 1992. Earnings News and Small Traders: An Intraday Analysis. Journal of Accounting and
         Economics 15 (2): 265-302.
Leuz, C., and P.D. Wysocki. 2016. The Economics of Disclosure and Financial Reporting Regulation:
         Evidence and Suggestions for Future Research. Journal of Accounting Research 54 (2): 525-622.
Miles, S., and D. Pyne. 2017. The Economics of Scams. Review of Law & Economics 13 (1): 1-18.
Nelson, K.K., R.A. Price, and B.R. Rountree. 2013. Are Individual Investors Influenced by the Optimism
         and Credibility of Stock Spam Recommendations? Journal of Business Finance & Accounting 40
         (9-10): 1155-1183.
Odean, T. 1998. Are Investors Reluctant to Realize Their Losses? The Journal of Finance 53 (5): 1775-
         1798.
———. 1999. Do Investors Trade Too Much? American Economic Review 89 (5): 1279-1298.
Putnins, T.J. 2012. Market Manipulation: A Survey. Journal of Economic Surveys 26 (5): 952-967.
Reimann, A., and H. Reimer. 2012. Neue Details Zur Großrazzia Wegen Kursmanipulation [New Details
         About Large-Scale Raid Linked to Market Manipulation]. Wirtschaftswoche, published on March
         3, 2012 [retrieved April 1, 2017]. Available from http://www.wiwo.de/finanzen/boerse/aktien-
         skandal-neue-details-zur-grossrazzia-wegen-kursmanipulation-/6282368.html.
Renault, T. 2017. Market Manipulation and Suspicious Stock Recommendations on Social Media.
         Working Paper.
Schmittmann, J.M., J. Pirschel, S. Meyer, and A. Hackethal. 2014. The Impact of Weather on German
         Retail Investors. Review of Finance 19 (3): 1143-1183.
SEC. 2016. Agency Financial Report, Fiscal Year 2016.
Shefrin, H., and M. Statman. 1985. The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too
         Long: Theory and Evidence. The Journal of Finance 40 (3): 777-790.
Soltes, E.F. 2016. Why They Do It: Inside the Mind of the White-Collar Criminal. New York:
         PublicAffairs.
Sophos. 2007. Mass Pump-and-Dump Scam Causes Spam Level Surge. Sophos, published on August 8,
         2007 [retrieved April 20, 2017]. Available from https://www.sophos.com/en-us/press-
         office/press-releases/2007/08/spam-pump.aspx.


                                                                                                     42
———. 2008. Security Threat Report 2008.
Sperling, J.G. 1962. The South Sea Company: An Historical Essay and Bibliographical Finding List:
        Boston, Harvard Graduate School of Business Administration.
Sterbenz, C. 2014. Penny Stocks: The Dark Side of the Legal Marijuana Boom. Business Insider,
        published     on     August     26,   2016     [retrieved   April   1,   2017].     Available
        from http://www.businessinsider.com/marijuana-penny-stocks-2014-7.
van Rooij, M., A. Lusardi, and R. Alessie. 2011. Financial Literacy and Stock Market Participation.
        Journal of Financial Economics 101 (2): 449-472.
Voth, H.-J. 2016. South Sea Bubble. In Banking Crises: Springer, 321-323.
White, J.T. 2016. Outcomes of Investing in OTC Stocks. SEC White Paper.
Zhang, T., P.O. Fletcher, F. Gino, and M.H. Bazerman. 2015. Reducing Bounded Ethicality: How to Help
        Individuals Notice and Avoid Unethical Behavior. Organizational Dynamics 44 (4): 310-317.




                                                                                                  43
                                            Table 1: Participation in Pump-and-Dump Schemes
This table investigates the participation of investors in pump-and-dump schemes. Panel A shows that 334 touts out
of 421 sample touts were traded. Our tout sample consists of two subsamples (BaFin and hand-collection). The table
also provides statistics on the number of purchases made by all sample investors during the 60-day pump window
for both roundtrip and holding period tout trades. Panel B provides summary statistics at the tout-level (number of
investors per tout) and the investor-level (number of touts per investor). Panel C reports correlations between tout
characteristics and investor participation in the tout using a linear probability model. The dependent variable in
Column (1) is coded as ‘1’ if at least one investor in our sample participates in a certain tout and ‘0’ otherwise. The
independent variables are firm characteristics of the touted stock, the medium used for the tout and whether the tout
is in the BaFin subsample. Market variables (returns and market value) are calculated over a 60-day period before
the tout. In Column (2) to (4), we use the logarithm of the number of investors (plus 1) as the dependent variable. In
Column (4), we include a manually-coded variable ranging from 0 to 3 depending on the sophistication of the tout
message. Higher values of this variable indicate a higher degree of sophistication (e.g., a more professional text). All
t-statistics are based on robust standard errors. *, **, and *** indicate significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels, respectively.
                                             Panel A: Trades in Pump-and-Dump Schemes
                                               N           Mean         SD          Q1       Median       Q3       Total Trades
# purchases per tout during pump phase         334          60          179         4         13          46         20,066

                                     Panel B: Number of Investors in Pump-and-Dump Schemes
                                                   N         Mean         SD        Q1       Median      Q3     Total Tout-Trades
# investors per tout during pump phase            334        36.81      90.09      3.00       9.00      33.00        12,296
# touts per investor during pump phase           6,569       1.87        1.82      1.00       1.00      2.00         12,296

                                         Panel C: Investor Response to Pump-and-Dump Schemes
                                           (1)               (2)                   (3)                   (4)
                                     Tout Response Log(Number Investors) Log(Number Investors) Log(Number Investors)
            Tout HQ in Germany         0.121***          0.476***              0.480**               0.727***
                                         (2.61)            (2.94)                (2.57)                (2.71)
            Tout on German Exchange     -0.089            -0.311                -0.208                -0.300
                                        (-1.30)           (-1.32)               (-0.75)               (-0.81)
            Tout on US Exchange         -0.092            -0.072                -0.090                 0.085
                                        (-1.16)           (-0.23)               (-0.27)                (0.22)
            Utilized E-Mail            0.160***          0.749***              0.514**                 0.522
                                         (2.84)            (3.08)                (2.15)                (1.64)
            Utilized Telephone        -0.158***         -1.051***             -1.211***             -1.016***
                                        (-3.21)           (-5.27)               (-5.58)               (-3.07)
            Utilized Newsletter          0.069          0.916***              0.700***               0.665**
                                         (1.59)            (4.88)                (3.44)                (2.33)
            Utilized Fax                 0.018             0.258                 0.015                 0.280
                                         (0.31)            (1.36)                (0.07)                (0.80)
            BaFin sample               0.292***         1.040***              0.940***              0.921***
                                         (5.04)            (5.40)                (4.67)                (2.93)
            Log(Market value)                                                  0.115**
                                                                                 (2.37)
            Returns                                                              0.036
                                                                                 (0.36)
            Degree of Sophistication                                                                0.366***
                                                                                                       (2.98)
            Constant                   0.632***         1.246***              1.191***               0.997**
                                         (8.08)            (4.63)                (3.80)                (2.53)
            Adj. R2                      0.112             0.288                 0.265                 0.193
            No. Obs                       421               421                   354                   224
                            Table 2: Investor Performance in Pump-and-Dump Schemes
This table provides descriptive statistics on the size and performance of tout (Panel A to C) and non-tout
investments (Panel D). Panel A shows descriptive statistics on all tout trades during the 60-day pump period.
Volume of investment refers to number of shares. Size of investment (measured in euro) is the number of shares
multiplied by the market price at the time of purchase. Tout trades that are not closed out during our sample period
are imputed to be closed out 120 days after the purchase date (these returns are calculated based on Datastream
data). Market-adjusted returns are raw returns adjusted by the German CDAX index. Gross gain/loss is the
investor’s loss before fees. Panel B describes the returns for investors aggregating across all their trades in a
particular tout. If indicated, variables are value-weighted by the size of the investment of each trade within a tout.
Panel C depicts the performance statistics of investor’s tout trades aggregated by all tout investments made by the
investor. Returns are value-weighted across touts. Panel D provides statistics on investments in non-touted stocks
that were made during the same 60-day pump period as the tout investment. These statistics refer to the 5,140 (out of
6,569) investors that made at least one non-tout investment during the 60-day pump period. We also provide the
number different stocks purchased (distinct ISINs) during the 60-day pump period. Average investment size refers
to the total investment amount divided by the distinct number of stocks purchased. All remaining rows are defined
as in Panel C.
                                         Panel A: Investor Performance at Trade Level

                 All Trades                           N       Mean (per trade)         SD         Q1      Median     Q3
      Volume of investment (# shares)               20,066        6,519              42,964       500     1,250     4,000
        Size of Investment (Euros)                  20,066        4,272              19,248       916     1,910     4,050
           Percent Return (raw)                     20,066        -0.24               0.54       -0.63    -0.21     0.03
       Percent Return (mkt adjusted)                20,066        -0.26                0.56      -0.65    -0.23      0.03
          Gross gain/loss (Euros)                   20,066        -800                6,640      -993      -245       60

                                          Panel B: Investor Performance at Tout Level
                    All Touts                          N         Mean (per tout)       SD          Q1      Median     Q3
        Volume of investment (# shares)              12,296         10,638           110,635       600     1,900     5,000
       Size of Investment in Tout (Euros)            12,296          6,972            30,595       995     2,189     5,298
   Average Percent Return (raw value weight)         12,296          -0.28             0.53       -0.66    -0.27      0.00
Average Percent Return (mkt adjust, value weight)    12,296          -0.31             0.54       -0.68    -0.29     -0.01
            Gross gain/loss (Euros)                  12,296         -1,305            8,895      -1,419     -377       0

                                 Panel C: Performance of Tout Portion of Investor Portfolio
                All Investors                           N      Mean (per investor)     SD         Q1       Median     Q3
      Number Different Touts Purchases                6,569          1.87              1.82      1.00       1.00     2.00
            Number Tout Trades                        6,569          4.18             11.63      1.00       2.00     4.00
           Total Investment (euro)                    6,569         13,051            56,567     1,160     3,114     8,935
      Average Return (raw value weight)               6,569          -0.31             0.50      -0.64     -0.31     -0.04
   Average Return (mkt adjust, value weight)          6,569          -0.33             0.51      -0.67     -0.33     -0.05

                              Panel D: Performance of Non-Tout Portion of Investor Portfolio
                 All Investors                          N            Mean               SD        Q1       Median     Q3
      Number different stocks purchased               5,140          11.74             36.76      2.00       5.00   11.00
          Number Non-Tout Trades                      5,140          30.09            258.28      3.00       7.00   19.00
            Total Investment (euro)                   5,140         117,606          1,538,663   4,336     14,444   45,535
   Average Investment (euro/different stocks)         5,140          6,142             19,189    1,360      2,742    5,453
   Average Percent Return (raw value weight)          5,140          -0.05              0.34     -0.17      -0.04     0.04
Average Percent Return (mkt adjust, value weight)     5,140          -0.09              0.33     -0.19      -0.06    0.01
                          Table 3: Characteristics of Tout and Non-Tout Investors
This table investigates the characteristics of investors who participate in pump-and-dump schemes. Panel A depicts
the average characteristics of a tout investor at the point of investing in his or her first tout (n= 6,569). Non-tout
investors are randomly drawn from the sample of all investors that did not invest into a tout before. Non-tout
investors are then matched in the same month as the tout investor and are required to have purchased a non-touted
stock during the pump period (n = 21,384). For categorical variables, p-values are based on chi-squared tests (t-tests
otherwise). Panel B is a linear probability model using investor-level observations. The dependent variable is equal
to ‘1’ if the investor is a tout investor and ‘0’ otherwise. The explanatory variables refer to investor and portfolio
characteristics (measured one month before the tout investment) and the investor’s profession. Male is an indicator
equal to ‘1’ if the investor’s gender is male. Married is an indicator equal to ‘1’ if the investor is married. Age is the
investor’s age at the tout date. City is an indicator equal to ‘1’ if the investor’s 4-level zip code contains more than
40,000 citizens. The risk class is a measure for investment risk tolerance and has a value between 1 and 5. It is
assigned by the investor; 5 indicates the highest inclination toward taking financial risk. Portfolio wealth is the euro
value of the investor’s portfolio and we use the logarithm of the variable (plus 1). Penny stock share is defined as the
percentage of the portfolio which is invested in penny stocks (defined as share price below €5). Blue chip share is
the percentage of the portfolio that is invested into stocks from the S&P500 and the Euro STOXX 600 indices. All
professions are self-reported by investors. The omitted professional category is “dependents and others”. All t-
statistics, included in parentheses, are based on standard errors double-clustered at the investor and month level. *,
**, and *** indicate significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively
                         Panel A: Descriptive Statistics for Tout and Non-Tout Investors

                                                           Tout Investor          Non-Tout Investor p-value
            Portfolio Wealth (Euro)                           60,988                   77,922         0.00
           Total Stock Value (Euro)                           41,605                   51,096         0.00
              Penny Stock Share                               30.9%                    13.2%          0.00
                Blue Chip Share                               14.4%                    31.9%          0.00
             Size of Trade (Euros)                             3,837                   6,634          0.00
      Number of Purchases (over prior year)                      62                      29           0.00

                       Age                                        47                         46                0.01
                      Male?                                      89%                        87%                0.00
                     Married?                                    61%                        60%                0.46
                     Retired?                                    18%                        16%                0.00
        Self-assigned Risk Class (out of 5)                       4.0                        3.7               0.00
                  City Resident?                                 36%                        41%                0.00

                     Maximum N                                   6,569                     21,384
                  Panel B: Personal and Portfolio Characteristics of Tout Investors

                                            (1)                    (2)                      (3)
                                      Tout Investor          Tout Investor            Tout Investor
Male                                   0.031***                0.020**                   0.018*
                                          (2.73)                 (2.02)                   (1.77)
Married                                  -0.006                  0.001                    0.007
                                         (-0.71)                 (0.21)                   (1.02)
Age (at tout date)                     0.003***               0.003***                    0.001
                                          (3.28)                 (4.38)                   (1.44)
City                                   -0.043***              -0.031***                -0.029***
                                         (-4.42)                (-4.37)                  (-4.33)
Self-assigned Risk Class                0.031***               0.012***                 0.024***
                                          (8.23)                 (4.33)                   (6.99)
Log(Portfolio Wealth(t-1))             -0.026***              -0.020***                -0.019***
                                         (-8.54)                (-6.29)                  (-6.37)
Penny Share (t-1)                                              0.396***                 0.384***
                                                                (14.46)                  (14.82)
Blue Chip Share (t-1)                                         -0.348***                -0.335***
                                                                (-9.55)                  (-9.86)
Log(# Stocks (t-1))                                            0.058***                 0.057***
                                                                (10.29)                  (10.16)
White-collar Job                                                                         -0.003
                                                                                         (-0.20)
Blue-collar Job                                                                         0.065***
                                                                                          (2.62)
Retiree                                                                                 0.098***
                                                                                          (3.99)
Civil Servant                                                                            -0.013
                                                                                         (-0.60)
Managerial Position                                                                      -0.007
                                                                                         (-0.34)
Self-employed                                                                           0.055***
                                                                                          (2.86)
Not disclosed (NA)                                                                      0.161***
                                                                                          (5.17)
Constant                               0.304***                0.202***                 0.193***
                                         (4.29)                  (3.79)                   (4.13)
Adj. R2                                  0.027                   0.194                    0.204
No. Investors                           24,742                  24,742                   24,742
No. Obs                                 38,313                  38,313                   38,313
                            Table 4: Multi-Tout Investors and their Performance
This table provides descriptive statistics on unique tout investors sorted by the number of their tout investments over
the sample period. Returns are value-weighted across touts (i.e., within investor) and equally-weighted across
investors. Euro Return are the cumulative gains/losses over all tout investments. Investment is the average
investment amount per tout (equally-weighted across touts and investors) and is calculated as the number of shares
multiplied by the market price at the time of purchase. See notes of Table 3 for the other variable definitions.

                               % Returns      Euro Return (EUR)   Investment (EUR)    Penny Share     Blue Chip Share
 # Touts invested     N     mean       p50     mean        p50     mean       p50    mean     p50     mean       p50
        1           4,162   -0.33     -0.36    -1,355     -427     5,248     1,837   0.27     0.12    0.16       0.02
        2           1,156   -0.28     -0.29    -2,343     -942     5,859     2,565   0.37     0.28    0.12       0.02
        3            517    -0.24     -0.24    -5,164    -1,474    7,685     2,639   0.43     0.38    0.11       0.01
        4            285    -0.24     -0.22    -4,813    -2,079    8,512     3,433   0.40     0.32    0.10       0.03
        5            174    -0.26     -0.24    -7,559    -3,949    7,133     4,158   0.47     0.43    0.07       0.02
        6            103    -0.26     -0.24    -7,446    -4,172    8,499     4,326   0.48     0.45    0.10       0.05
  7 or more touts    172    -0.23     -0.18    -9,140    -4,717   10,148     4,119   0.49     0.48    0.09       0.03
       Total        6,569   -0.31     -0.31    -2,442     -640     5,918     2,142   0.32     0.20    0.14       0.02
                           Table 5: Regression Analysis of Tout Investor Returns
This table reports results from a regression analysis of tout investor returns. In Column (1), we use investor and
portfolio level variables as defined in Table 3. The dependent variable is the average percentage return of an investor
in a specific tout. In Column (2), we add MultiToutInvestor, which is an investor-level indicator variable coded as
‘1’ if an investor participates in at least four different touts during our sample period. Investor- and tout-fixed effects
are included in Column (3). Days after tout is defined as the number of days between the investor’s first trading date
in the focal tout and the beginning of the tout campaign. We take the natural logarithm of this variable (plus 1).
Number of Tout is a discrete variable that captures how many touts an investor has invested in until (and including)
the focal tout. To determine this variable, touts are sorted within each investor based on the final closing date of
each tout (we assume a maximum closing date of 120 days for ‘inventory investments’ or long ‘round-trip
investments’). In line with Table 4, the maximum value of this variable is set to 7. All t-statistics, included in
parentheses, are based on standard errors double-clustered at the investor and month level. *, **, and *** indicate
significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                                (1)                        (2)                     (3)
                                          Mean Return (%)           Mean Return (%)          Mean Return (%)
        MultiToutInvestor                                              0.065***
                                                                         (3.43)
        Log(# Days After Tout)                                                                   -0.056***
                                                                                                   (-4.35)
        Number of Tout                                                                           -0.031***
                                                                                                   (-4.45)
        Male                                      -0.022                   -0.025
                                                  (-1.10)                  (-1.24)
        Married                                   -0.011                   -0.011
                                                  (-0.97)                  (-1.01)
        Age (at tout date)                        -0.001                 -0.001**
                                                  (-1.57)                  (-2.26)
        City                                       0.011                    0.012
                                                   (0.81)                   (0.95)
        Self-assigned Risk Class                  -0.001                   -0.002
                                                  (-0.11)                  (-0.38)
        Log(Portfolio Wealth(t-1))                 0.001                    0.002                   0.000
                                                   (0.17)                   (0.43)                  (0.11)
        Penny Share (t-1)                       0.117***                 0.103***                   0.006
                                                   (4.17)                   (3.92)                  (0.23)
        Blue Chip Share (t-1)                      0.016                    0.027                  -0.014
                                                   (0.31)                   (0.55)                 (-0.27)
        Log(# Stocks (t-1))                    -0.038***                -0.043***                   0.003
                                                  (-4.00)                  (-4.51)                 (0.18)
        Constant                               -0.179***                -0.174***
                                                  (-4.21)                  (-4.24)
        Fixed Effects                               No                       No              Investor & Tout
        Adj. R2                                    0.012                    0.015                 0.394
        No. Investors                              6,094                    6,094                 2,354
        No. Obs                                   11,466                   11,466                 7,942
                             Table 6: Subsequent Pump-and-Dump Investments
This table examines the investment behavior of tout investors in subsequent pump-and-dump schemes and its
associations with the return of prior touts, portfolio and tout characteristics. To alleviate right censoring, we restrict
the analysis to touts before 2013. The dependent variable in Column (1) and (2) is an indicator variable that takes the
value of ‘1’ if an investor invests into at least one subsequent tout later during our sample period (for the sorting
procedure of the touts see notes of Table 5). In Column (1), we restrict the sample to the first tout of each investor.
Decile Return (most recent tout) is a decile-ranked return of the tout with a higher rank indicating higher returns. All
remaining variables are defined as in Table 3. In Column (2), we add a lagged decile-ranked return variable (i.e.,
decile-ranked return of the previous tout) and restrict the sample to the first four tout observations of each investor.
In Column (3) to (4), we additionally restrict the sample to tout-investor observations that resulted into at least one
subsequent tout investment of the investor during the sample period. In Column (3), the dependent variable is the
natural logarithm of the number of days between the closing of the most recent tout and the investment into the
subsequent tout (plus 1). The dependent variable in Column (4) is an indicator variable that is coded as ‘1’ if the
next tout investment has a longer duration than the most recent tout investment. Linear (probability) models are used
in all tests. All t-statistics, included in parentheses, are based on standard errors double-clustered at the investor and
month level. *, **, and *** indicate significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.

                                           (1)                   (2)             (3)             (4)
                                      Another Tout         Another Tout Log(# Days Next      Increase
                                       Investment           Investment         Tout)         Duration
Decile Return (Recent Tout)             0.025***             0.034***       -0.116***        0.037***
                                         (9.56)                (7.20)         (-3.77)          (4.32)
Decile Return (Previous Tout)                                   0.005         -0.026*           0.005
                                                               (1.17)         (-1.71)          (1.19)
Log(Portfolio Wealth(t-1))               -0.000               -0.010*           0.025           0.007
                                         (-0.09)               (-1.68)         (1.36)          (0.93)
Penny Share (t-1)                       0.144***              0.053**          -0.143         -0.066*
                                          (4.40)               (2.00)         (-1.46)         (-1.88)
Blue Chip Share (t-1)                  -0.171***             -0.140***       -0.539**          -0.070
                                         (-6.00)               (-3.08)        (-2.34)         (-0.88)
Log(# Stocks (t-1))                     0.048***             0.065***         0.119*           -0.019
                                          (7.49)               (5.45)          (1.91)         (-1.18)
Utilized Newsletter                      0.067*                 0.010         0.523*           -0.045
                                          (1.67)               (0.25)          (1.91)         (-1.16)
Constant                                  0.023              0.178***        5.411***        0.226***
                                          (0.50)               (3.09)         (17.71)          (2.93)
Sample                                After 1st Tout      After 2-4 Touts After 2-4 Touts After 2-4 Touts
Adj. R2                                   0.065                 0.053           0.118           0.047
No. Investors                             6,303                 1,992            881             881
No. Obs                                   6,303                 3,250           1,498           1,498
                               Table 7: Investor Types Trading in Touted Stocks
This table classifies investors into five different investor types based on their trading behavior in non-touted stocks
during the 180 days before each tout. Panel A provides the definitions and descriptions of these five different
investor types. Panel A also shows the percentage of tout investors that fall into each investor type category at the
point of investing in his or her first tout relative to the corresponding percentage for active control investors (see
Table 3 for details on control investors). We iteratively assign investors into each investor type category in Panel A,
resulting in mutually exclusive investor types. In Column (1), (2) and (3) of Panel B, we supplement prior analyses
of Table 3, Table 5 and Table 6, respectively, by adding dummies for each investor type to the regressions. The
dependent variable in Column (4) is an indicator variable that is coded as ‘1’ if the tout investment is less than
2.31% of the investor’s overall portfolio value (lowest quintile). In all columns, the omitted investor type category is
“residual trader”. In line with Panel A, we use mutually exclusive investor type definitions. All t-statistics, included
in parentheses, are based on standard errors double-clustered at the same level as in the underlying analyses (and by
investor and month in Column 4). *, **, and *** indicate significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels,
respectively.
                                           Panel A: Different Investor Types
                                                                                  Tout-Investors Control-Investors
                                                                                   (N = 6,569)     (N = 21,384)    p-value
                                First-time use of brokerage account in the 180
   I.    New Trader                                                                   6.6%             6.3%         0.47
                                days before the tout
                                No trade or no penny trade in the 180 days
   II.   Conservative Trader                                                         26.9%            57.9%         0.00
                                before the tout
                                At least one day-trade in a penny stock in the
  III.   Penny Stock Day Trader                                                      10.9%             2.2%         0.00
                                180 days before the tout
                                Flipped at least one stock within a week in the
   IV.   Short-term Trader                                                           24.3%            10.6%         0.00
                                180 days before the tout
                                Not a member of the other four investor-type
   V.    Residual Trader                                                              31.3%           23.0%         0.00
                                groups
                                                                                     100.0%          100.0%
                              Panel B: Explanatory Power of Investor Types

                                        (1)             (2)                 (3)           (4)
                                       Tout        Mean Return       Another Tout       Small
                                    Investor           (%)            Investment    Investment
New Trader                            0.035           0.019             0.067**      -0.059***
                                      (1.58)          (0.53)              (2.29)       (-4.17)
Conservative Trader                -0.102***         -0.032            -0.092***      0.022**
                                     (-6.18)         (-1.43)             (-4.90)        (1.98)
Penny Stock Day Trader              0.300***        0.190***            0.134***      -0.036**
                                     (13.34)          (5.75)              (5.33)       (-2.45)
Other Short-term Trader             0.123***        0.086***            0.055***     -0.061***
                                      (6.10)          (3.46)              (3.28)       (-6.16)
Decile Return (Recent Tout)                                             0.022***
                                                                          (7.90)
Constant                            0.243***         -0.236***          0.108***    -0.230***
                                     (4.74)            (-4.27)            (3.08)      (-6.28)
Controls
Personal characteristics              Yes               Yes              No            Yes
Portfolio characteristics             Yes               Yes              Yes           Yes

Adj. R2                              0.245             0.029             0.083        0.209
No. Investors                        24,742             6,094            6,303         6,094
No. Obs                              38,313            11,466            6,303        11,466
                   Table 8: Subsequent Portfolio Investments after Tout Participation
This table analyzes subsequent portfolio investments after tout participation. We restrict our sample to investors that
purchased at least one stock during the 120 days before the pump period (as in Table 6, we focus on the first four
touts of each investor). In Panel A, we partition the sample based on return quintiles. The dependent variable Diff #
TotalTrades is the number of stock purchases in the 120 days after the pump period minus the number of stock
purchases in the 120 days before the pump period (scaled by the total number of purchases). The dependent variable
(Diff # PennyTrades) [Diff # BlueChipTrades] is the number of penny stock [blue chip] purchases in the 120 days
after the pump period minus the number of penny stock [blue chip] purchases in the 120 days before the pump
period (scaled by the total number of penny stock [blue chip] purchases). Panel B shows the trading behavior of tout
investors in the immediate aftermath of a tout investment conditional on the success of the most recent tout (decile-
ranked returns). All independent variables are defined as in Table 5, except that the portfolio composition is
measured six months before the tout for some variables (due to the definitions of the dependent variables in Column
2 to 4). The dependent variable in Column (1) is an indicator variable coded as ‘1’ if an investor does not purchase
any stock in the 120 days after the pump period of a tout. The remaining dependent variables are defined as in Panel
A. Panel C focuses on long-term changes in subsequent portfolio investments conditional on the investor’s tout
return. The dependent variable in Column (1) is defined as the number of stock purchases in year 2 and year 3 after
the tout minus the number of purchases in year 2 and 3 before the tout (scaled by the total number of purchases). We
use the decile-ranked return in the most recent tout as the variable of interest. In Column (2) to (4), we focus on the
long-term consequences for investors that had a negative tout return. We use the dependent variables of Panel A as
our main test variables. The dependent variable in Column (3) [(4)] is DiffPennyShare [DiffBlueChipShare], which
is the difference between the penny share [blue chip share] three years after the tout and the penny share [blue chip
share] six months before the tout. The remaining variables are defined as in Panel B. All t-statistics, included in
parentheses, are based on standard errors double-clustered at the investor and month level. *, **, and *** indicate
significance (two-sided) at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels, respectively.
                                 Panel A: Investor Response by Return Quintile

                                                   Diff # TotalTrades     Diff # PennyTrades    Diff # BlueChipTrades
 Return Quintile      count      (Mean Return)     mean          p50       mean        p50        mean         p50
       1              1,671         -87%           -0.36        -0.33      -0.33      -0.33        -0.10       0.00
       2              1,669         -57%           -0.26        -0.25      -0.24      -0.20        -0.05       0.00
       3              1,670         -26%           -0.19        -0.14      -0.17      -0.13        -0.02       0.00
       4              1,670          -4%           -0.17        -0.13      -0.17      -0.13        -0.05       0.00
       5              1,670          38%           -0.10        -0.05      -0.06       0.00        -0.06       0.00
   Average            8,350         -27%           -0.22        -0.19      -0.19      -0.14        -0.06       0.00
                              Panel B: Stock Trading Subsequent to Tout

                                  (1)              (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                             No Trades    Diff # TotalTrades Diff # PennyTrades Diff # BlueChipTrades
Return Deciles               -0.018***         0.032***            0.032***               0.003
                              (-11.03)           (9.57)              (6.20)              (0.71)
Log(Portfolio Wealth(t-6))    0.006**            -0.002              0.000                0.003
                                (2.54)           (-0.80)             (0.03)              (0.72)
Penny Share (t-6)              -0.016            -0.019            -0.051**             0.044**
                               (-1.20)           (-0.80)            (-1.98)              (2.24)
Blue Chip Share (t-6)        0.069***             0.001             0.077*             -0.122***
                                (3.20)           (0.03)              (1.95)              (-3.60)
Log(# Stocks)(t-6)           -0.064***         0.047***            0.023**                0.016
                              (-11.80)           (6.34)              (2.13)              (1.62)
Utilized Newsletter            -0.025             0.025              0.027               -0.003
                               (-1.52)           (0.60)              (0.48)              (-0.12)
Constant                     0.331***          -0.477***          -0.427***            -0.122***
                               (13.67)          (-14.07)            (-9.56)              (-3.70)
Adj. R2                         0.048             0.040              0.027                0.004
No. Investors                   5,460             5,460              5,460                5,460
No. Obs                         8,324             8,324              8,324                8,324
                             Panel C: Long-Term Portfolio Changes for Investors

                                       (1)                 (2)               (3)               (4)
                             DiffNumberPurchases DiffNumberPurchases   DiffPennyShare   DiffBlueChipShare
Return Deciles                     0.012***
                                     (3.09)
Diff # TotalTrades                                     0.174***              0.000             0.010
                                                        (6.61)               (0.02)            (1.16)
Diff # PennyTrades                                       0.026              0.018*             0.002
                                                        (1.09)               (1.68)            (0.24)
Diff # BlueChipTrades                                   -0.015             -0.026**           0.010*
                                                        (-1.05)             (-2.05)            (1.94)
Log(Portfolio Wealth(t-6))        -0.021***            -0.018**           -0.012***         -0.005***
                                    (-2.90)             (-2.17)             (-7.02)           (-4.27)
Penny Share (t-6)                 -0.183***           -0.172***           -0.667***         -0.067***
                                    (-6.80)             (-5.70)            (-30.41)           (-7.32)
Blue Chip Share (t-6)              0.104***            0.105***           -0.170***         -0.636***
                                     (3.33)              (2.80)             (-8.73)          (-22.50)
Log(# Stocks)(t-6)                   -0.009             -0.019             0.031***         0.023***
                                    (-0.91)             (-1.62)              (5.17)            (6.89)
Utilized Newsletter                  -0.044             -0.063               -0.025           -0.002
                                    (-0.92)             (-1.22)             (-1.46)           (-0.19)
Constant                            0.209**            0.317***            0.289***         0.137***
                                     (2.40)              (3.60)             (14.80)           (12.94)
Adj. R2                               0.031              0.050               0.299             0.237
No. Investors                         5,344              4,488                4,575            4,575
No. Obs                               8,180              6,047                6,144             6144
         Figure 1: Example for a Pump-and-Dump Campaign – BAR.bra Mining Group AG
This figure shows the price path of “BAR.bra Mining Group AG” (ISIN: CH0032823640). The red line corresponds
to January 10, 2008 which is the first date for which we find a newsletter. At December 5, 2007, the stock was
authorized for trading on the Open Market of the Frankfurt stock exchange, a less strictly regulated market segment.
The price increased from € 0.46 at its inception to € 0.69 (January 10, 2008) and reached its maximum at January
15, 2008 (€ 0.87). Within less than three months, the stock lost most of its value (€ 0.04 at April 15, 2008) and is
basically worthless ever since.
                    Figure 2: Descriptive Statistics on the Pump-and-Dump Schemes
This figure provides descriptive statistics on the 421 touts in our sample. Panel A shows the frequency of touts as
well as the source of the data by year. The sample period begins in 2002 and ends in January 2015. Panel B
describes the distribution channel or tout medium. Panel C and Panel D show the country of the touted firm by its
primary trading venue and the location of its headquarters, respectively, as described by Datastream. Panel E shows
the industry of each tout at the time of the pump-and-dump as collected from Datastream.
                                           Panel A: Frequency of Touts


         120

         100

           80

           60

           40

           20

            0
                 <=     2006    2007     2008    2009      2010      2011     2012    2013    2014   2015
                2005                                                                                 (Jan)

                            # of BAFIN Touts     # of Public Touts          BAFIN & Public Sample




                                     Panel B: Distribution Channel of Touts

                                                     % of Touts


                                                4%
                                         12%                                                 Mail
                                                           30%
                                                                                             Phone
                                                                                             Newsletter
                                   25%
                                                                                             Fax
                                                                                             Other
                                                     29%
                           Panel C: Country of Tout Trading Venue

                                   # Touts (Trading Venue)
                                       78 5       5    2       20
                       3
                       1
                           1
                   1




                                                                      305


   Australia                    Austria                    Canada                   Denmark
   Germany                      Hong-Kong                  Hungary                  Netherlands
   Singapore                    Switzerland                United Kingdom           United States
   Not Available

                               Panel D: Tout Headquarter Locations

                                   # Touts (Headquarters)
                                                  7        3
                           93                      5
                                                                          97




                                                                                1
                   53



                           23
                                                                        130
                                       1
                                   5       2 1

Australia           Austria                   Canada                Denmark            Germany
Hong-Kong           Hungary                   Netherlands           Singapore          Switzerland
United Kingdom      United States             Not Available
                                        Panel E: Tout Industries

                                    0       20        40           60   80   100   120

               Financial Services
                          Mining
   Software & Computer Services
             Oil & Gas Producers
              Alternative Energy
                          Media
Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology
                Support Services
                Travel & Leisure
Electronic & Electrical Equipment
                General Retailers
           Industrial Engineering
Real Estate Investment & Services
                Other (<=7 touts)
                     Unclassified
                   Not Available
           Figure 3: Coarsened-Exact Matching of Touted Stocks with Non-Touted Stocks
This figure shows the price path and investor response for coarsened-exact matched touted stocks and non-touted
control stocks. Stocks are matched based on (unadjusted) prices at five dates before the beginning of the tout using
five different price strata. Panel A shows the price path of touted and non-touted stocks. Returns for both types of
stocks are not significantly different before the tout date. See Internet Appendix. Panel B shows the within-sample
average of the number of purchases per stock and per day. Panel C provides the within-sample average of the
average value of the purchases per stock and per day.
                               Panel A: Price Path of Touted and Matched Stocks




                   Panel B: Average Number of Purchases for Touted and Matched Stocks
Panel C: Average Value of Purchases for Touted and Matched Stocks
