NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SPATIAL PATTERNS OF DEVELOPMENT:
A MESO APPROACH
Stelios Michalopoulos
Elias Papaioannou
Working Paper 24088
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24088

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We would like to thank an anonymous referee for valuable comments. Raphael Corbi, Giorgio
Chiovelli and Sebastian Hohmann provided valuable help with the data and numerous discussions
and comments. All errors are our sole responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Spatial Patterns of Development: A Meso Approach
Stelios Michalopoulos and Elias Papaioannou
NBER Working Paper No. 24088
November 2017
JEL No. D0,N0,O0,Z1
ABSTRACT
Over the last two decades, the literature on comparative development has moved from countrylevel to within-country analyses. The questions asked have expanded, as economists have used
satellite images of light density at night and other big spatial data to proxy for development at the
desired level. The focus has also shifted from uncovering correlations to identifying causal
relations, using elaborate econometric techniques including spatial regression discontinuity
designs. In this survey we show how the combination of geographic information systems with
insights from disciplines ranging from the earth sciences to linguistics and history has
transformed the research landscape on the roots of the spatial patterns of development. We
discuss the limitations of the luminosity data and associated econometric techniques and conclude
by offering some thoughts on future research.

Stelios Michalopoulos
Brown University
Department of Economics
64 Waterman Street
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
smichalo@brown.edu
Elias Papaioannou
London Business School
Regent's Park
Sussex Place
London NW1 4SA
United Kingdom
papaioannou.elias@gmail.com

1

Introduction

In the early 1990s, the field of economic growth underwent a renaissance with the development
of new theoretical insights1 and major empirical advances examining a myriad of cross-country
growth correlates (see Barro (1998) for an overview of the growth regressions). The increasing
availability of internationally comparable data on output, its components, and prices (the
Penn World Table (PWT) Project) allowed meaningful comparisons across a large number of
countries and enabled the testing of competing theories of growth.2
From the cross-country growth regressions to the development accounting exercises, a series of influential empirical papers set the stage for a vibrant literature that explored the (conditional) correlates of economic growth across countries since World War II.3 Emerging empirical
regularities on the correlates of development and growth regarding the role of physical capital,
human capital, financial development, geography, social characteristics, and institutions fueled
theoretical work feeding back to further empirical investigations. This lively empirical literature, however, eventually faced increasing diﬃculties. The reasons were multifaceted, ranging
from the econometric problems that plague small-sample estimations including coeﬃcient instability stemming from multicollinearity, limited degrees of freedom, classical measurement error,
outliers, and the sizable variation in the data quality and availability across countries (leading
to nonclassical error in variables). In spite of running millions of regressions (Sala-i-Martin,
Doppelhofer, and Miller (2004)), it became hard to even spot the robust correlates (Ciccone
and Jarocinski (2010), Johnson, Larson, Papageorgiou, and Subramanian (2013)). Moreover,
identification remained a perennial issue notwithstanding novel attempts to leverage aspects of
a country’s colonial history as a source of variation (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998), Hall and Jones (1999), and Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001)).
In the meantime, starting in the early 2000s the micro-development literature embraced
in earnest randomization techniques, raising the bar for identification (Duflo, Glennerster,
and Kremer (2006)). The yawning gap between the well-identified but (initially) limited in
scope studies of micro development and the generalizable but less-credible lessons from the
cross-country empirics proved a fertile ground for the development of a literature exploring
within-country large-scale variation. This meso approach, while not problem free, attempts
1

See, among others, Lucas (1988), Romer (1990), Azariadis and Drazen (1990), Grossman and Helpman
(1991), Aghion and Howitt (1992), Galor and Zeira (1993), and Banerje and Newman (1993).
2
For the history of the Penn World Tables and the International Comparison Project, see Heston and Summers
(1996), Heston, Summers, and Aten (2011), and Feenstra, Inklaar, and Timmer (2015). Robert Barro and JongWha Lee’s laborious compilation of cross-country data on educational attainment and schooling since 1960 was
also instrumental in estimating the role of human capital (Barro and Lee (2013)).
3
See Barro (1991), Levine and Renelt (1992), Mauro (1995), Easterly and Levine (1997), and Klenow and
Rodríguez-Clare (1997), among others.

1

to strike a delicate balance between the merits and drawbacks of both the macro and micro
studies. The hallmark of this approach is that it draws on the empirical toolset of applied
micro to shed light on broad macro questions, using large, often global, samples. By moving
the analysis within countries, the economics research on the causes of (under)development
has greatly benefited by incorporating insights from anthropology, political science, ethnology,
and history. This new literature emerged thanks to the integration of geographic information
systems (GIS) in the arsenal of development and growth economists. The growing availability of
big spatial data, such as satellite imagery of light density at night, and the increasing willingness
to leverage unconventional (from an economic point of view) data sources and contexts such as
historical natural experiments, have greatly expanded the scope of questions tackled. Thanks
to these developments, a new era for economic history and for the research on the deep roots of
comparative development has dawned (see Diamond and Robinson (2010), Nunn (2014), and
Margo (2017)).
Structure In this paper we discuss how images of satellite light density have proven
to be a versatile proxy of spatial development, fostering empirical research in growth that
takes a meso approach. In the next section we present the luminosity data, discuss works
showing their connection with various proxies of economic well-being, and review their strengths
and weaknesses. In Section 3 we discuss how luminosity has been combined with data on
geography, ecology, history, and institutions at various levels of spatial aggregation to explore
some of the fundamental inquiries in the fields of economic growth and development. We pay
particular attention to studies focusing on borders and comment on the use of spatial regression
discontinuity techniques. In the last section, we oﬀer some thoughts on future research.

2
2.1

Development Seen from Outer Space
Pitfalls of Cross-Country GDP Estimates

In the last few years, growth economists have come to realize that even small revisions of GDP
estimates lead to substantial variability, which matters crucially for the stability of the crosscountry growth patterns. This nonrobustness of the cross-country growth determinants is quite
problematic. The World Bank (WB), cognizant of this reality, has been spending significant
resources in an attempt to shore up the ailing statistical agencies across the developing world
(Jerven (2013)). For example, between 2005 and 2015, hundreds of millions of dollars have
been allocated for this purpose to countries such as the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),

2

Bolivia, Mongolia, Indonesia, Nigeria, Ghana, and Afghanistan.4
Despite ongoing improvements in statistical capabilities across countries, problems remain, especially in low-income states that often lack functioning statistical systems. In Somalia
and the DRC, for example, the last population census was carried out in 1975 and 1981, respectively. Measurement challenges are present even outside war-prone regions. The PWT,
for instance, reports two sets of GDP estimates from China. In April 2014, Nigeria’s GDP
almost doubled overnight after a major revision. The large size of the underground economy
and the high share of subsistence agriculture in many low-income and lower middle-income
countries make it challenging to properly measure output (La Porta and Shleifer (2008)). Since
measurement error is related to low state capacity, conflict, and industrial specialization, it is
most likely nonclassical, making inference challenging. In fact, using data on the individual
components of statistical capacity constructed by the WB in 2016, one can show that poorer
countries are systematically less likely to follow international standards both in the quality
of the underlying data sources as well as in the methodology employed in the construction of
statistics. And the emergence of the new economy, with the growing importance of outsourcing
and the fragmentation of production lines, further exacerbates issues.
This state of aﬀairs has significantly impeded our progress in understanding the sources
of the considerable variation in economic performance within and across societies around the
globe. Then remote sensing scientists came to the rescue.

2.2

Luminosity Data

In the early 1990s, as the field of economic growth was booming, Woodruﬀ Sullivan, an astronomer from the University of Colorado Boulder, pieced together a mosaic of about 40 individual satellite images of nighttime photographs (copies of film strips from the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) archives over the period 1974-1984), producing for the first
time a global map of luminosity. Sullivan (1991) was struck by how clearly human activities
such as street lighting, rangeland burning, slash-and-burn agriculture, natural gas burn oﬀs in
oil fields, and squid-fishing lights were reflected on the images. He was particularly surprised
by how well certain political boundaries could be discerned; there were sharp spatial discontinuities in luminosity at the border between East and West Germany and between North and
South Korea. While Sullivan foresaw that such information would be useful for economists in
4

For example, the WB has allocated the following resources: $45 million to the DRC for the Statistics
Development Program, $47 million to Indonesia for the Statistical Capacity Building-Change and Reform for
the Development of Statistics (STATCAP-CERDAS), $10 million to Nigeria for the Statistics Development
Program (NSDP), $2 million for Strengthening the National Statistical System of Mongolia, and $40 million
for the Statistics Development Program of Ghana. Another $40 million has been invested in AFGHANSTAT:
Strengthening the National Statistical System, and $833 million for Strengthening Statistical Capacity in Bolivia.

3

their quest to trace economic activity (echoing Croft (1978)), in his concluding remarks at the
International Astronomical Union Colloquium, he lamented that “the light pollution in urban
centers both devastates astronomical observations and removes much of human kind from any
familiarity with the night sky.” Despite Sullivan’s grim assessment, luminosity images would
revolutionize the field of comparative development in the subsequent decades.
2.2.1

Properties

The United States Air Force Space Command manages the DMSP, which in turn monitors
meteorological, oceanographic, and solar-terrestrial physics for the United States Department
of Defense. For more than 40 years, the primary function of its orbiting satellites has been to
record the weather via the daytime records of the Operational Line Scan (OLS) sensors. The
OLS is an oscillating scan radiometer that generates images with a swath width of about 3 000
kilometers, generating global coverage every 24 hours. The electromagnetic energy captured by
the sensors during the night is mostly a product of human-related light-emitting activities. The
DMSP-OLS images are processed at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
(NOAA) National Geophysical Data Center (NGDC), producing a six-bit number calculated
for 30 arc-sec or 086 square kilometer cells at the equator. The intensity of lights is coded in
a grid format ranging between 0 (no light) to 63. Although nighttime lights data have been
gathered from satellites for more than four decades, the publicly available annual series begin
in 1992 (data on earlier years were deleted because of space considerations).
The three annual datasets that NOAA has made publicly available are time-stable lights,
unfiltered lights, and radiance-calibrated lights, respectively.
• The time-stable lights are created by overlaying all images captured during a calendar
year, dropping observations of the moonlit half of the lunar cycle, pixels where the sun

sets late in the summer, locations where the visibility of lights is hindered by clouds (a
rather common phenomenon for cells closer to the tropics) or overpowered by the aurora
or solar glare (near the poles), and removing ephemeral lights such as fire and lightning.
• The unfiltered lights are available for the same period and can potentially give more values

at low luminosity, which is helpful for studies in areas with low levels of development,
but it is often hard to distinguish it from the natural illumination of the soil.

• Radiance-calibrated lights give more variation at high luminosity levels, as they are not
top coded. The latter is the process of censoring all values above a certain threshold.

Figure 1 illustrates the time-stable luminosity images recorded by the DMSP-OLS in
2013, the latest year available on a global scale.
4

Figure 1
2.2.2

Cross-Country Correlations

The satellite lights data considered as a proxy of economic activity have several attractive
features. First, the recorded information is “objectively”measured, in the sense that it does
not reflect any biases from the statistical agencies. Second, the data are available for all parts
of the globe, except for the high and low latitudes (close to the Arctic and Antarctica). Third,
as the satellites and their sensors improve, the data capture an increasing portion of economic
activity.
The literature has applied various transformations of the underlying pixel data to aggregate luminosity in a given location. These include the sum of total night light in a given
region, province, or country, the share of lit pixels, the average night light, and the log of
average night light, either per square kilometer or per capita (sometimes a small number is
added before taking the log to account for the presence of zeros). Many high-resolution studies also employ a binary, 0-1, transformation that accounts for the highly nonlinear nature
of the data. Building on Elvidge, Baugh, Kihn, Kroehl, and Davis (1997) and Doll, Muller,
and Morley (2006), Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) introduced the luminosity data to
economics, showing that light density at night is a robust proxy of economic activity across and
within countries (see also Pinkovskiy (2017)). Although some debate whether the association
between light density and incomes per capita is stronger for levels rather than growth rates,
it is clear that luminosity can be a powerful proxy of economic activity for regional analyses
in war-prone countries and those with poor-quality national statistics. These are precisely the
regions where understanding the causes of underdevelopment is likely to be of greater value

5

added (see Chen and Nordhaus (2011), Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012), and Chen and
Nordhaus (2014)).
Figure 2 depicts the cross-country relationship between log average luminosity per square
kilometer in 2000 and log GDP per capita in 2000, partialling out continental fixed eﬀects.
There is a strong correlation that is also present within each continent separately (results not
shown).

Figure 2
Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) show that a similarly strong correlation emerges
when one estimates the association between luminosity and GDP in log diﬀerences over the
period 1992-1993 to 2005-2006 across 170 countries, finding an elasticity of 032 and an 2
of around 028. Figures 3 − 3 illustrate the usefulness of luminosity as a proxy of economic

development over the medium run, focusing on South Africa in 1994 and 2012. In line with GDP
statistics and anecdotal evidence of robust growth in South Africa since the fall of apartheid,
luminosity has increased considerably.

Figure 3

Figure 3

Starting from the observation that while both luminosity and GDP series are noisy proxies of the true underlying output, their respective error structures are likely to be uncorrelated.
6

Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil (2012) use standard statistical aggregation techniques to combine the GDP and lights series to construct an updated output series. Their analysis shows
that in many countries (e.g., Burundi, Haiti, Ivory Coast and the Congos), actual GDP statistics understate growth over the period 1993-2006, whereas in others (e.g., Angola, Myanmar,
Vietnam, and Ghana), GDP estimates tend to overstate real output growth.5 A work similar
in spirit is that of Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a), who use luminosity as an auxiliary
variable to help uncover the correlation structure between GDP per capita and consumption
and income surveys. They construct revised data on poverty rates across countries, finding
that global poverty has been falling considerably in most parts of the world, including Africa
(see also Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016a)).
2.2.3

Within-Country Regional Correlations

The main advantage of the luminosity data is that, thanks to its fine resolution, it permits
comparisons of economic activity across regions in the same country. Hence, a natural question
is whether luminosity reflects local development, for example, across states/provinces/regions,
administrative units, or other spatial partitions. There are considerable econometric benefits
of conducting within-country empirical analyses, since one can account for nationwide features
that are common to all regions including national policies, history and institutions, and even
measurement error (which quite often has a sizable country-specific component).
Global Hodler and Raschky (2014) show that log luminosity and log output are related
at the regional level. Similarly, Gennaioli, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2013) in
a sample of 1 503 regions across 83 countries, estimate the elasticity to be around 025, only
slightly smaller than the cross-country elasticity reported by Henderson, Storeygard, and Weil
(2012). They further show that nonlinearities at this level of spatial aggregation are small and
not important quantitatively.
Africa In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) we present graphical illustrations of
significant regional correlation between luminosity and survey-based measures of well-being using data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) from 4 African countries (Zimbabwe,
Tanzania, Nigeria, and the DRC). In Figure 4 we plot the correlation between log luminosity
and the DHS composite wealth index across admin-3 level units, netting out country-survey
fixed eﬀects (see Chiovelli, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2017)). The data are retrieved
5

In recent work Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin (2016b) use luminosity data to evaluate the accuracy of the
various vintages of the Penn World Tables, using again the insight that noise in GDP statistics is unlikely to be
correlated with measurement error in satellite imagery data. Their analysis shows that newer vintages of the
Penn World Table are more, rather than less, noisy proxies of the underlying economic activity.

7

from 74 DHS surveys that cover close to 9 000 third-level administrative units from 21 African
countries. The coeﬃcient on log luminosity is 03 and highly significant, and the within 2
is 030-037. Figure 4 shows that regional luminosity also correlates with average years of

-3

-10

-5

years of schooling residual
0
5
10

household wealth quintile residual
-2
-1
0
1

2

15

schooling at the district level. The patterns are similar at the admin-2 level.

-10

-5

0
log light density residual
rhv270

5

10

-10

-5

Fitted values

0
log light density residual
rv133

Figure 4

5

10

Fitted values

Figure 4

But what about rural areas in low-income countries where luminosity is either zero or
very small? Can luminosity be used to proxy economic activity in such places as well? Figure
5 shows that in administrative regions where the satellites detect some light, wealth and mean
education are considerably higher, as compared to regions that do not emit any light. This
pattern is present in both urban and rural areas in Africa, suggesting that while nonlinearities
may be present, luminosity can be used to proxy for development even in low-income rural
areas with low population density. A similar pattern emerges when we associate luminosity
with mean education.
urban

rural
0
avg admin3 mean hh wealth quintile deviation from survey mean
-.6
-.4
-.2

0

-.6

avg admin3 mean hh wealth quintile deviation from survey mean
-.4
-.2
0
.2

avg admin3 mean hh wealth quintile deviation from survey mean
.5
1

.4

1.5

all

unlit

lit

unlit

lit

Figure 5

8

unlit

lit

Weidmann and Schutte (2017) report similarly strong correlations between luminosity
and the DHS composite wealth index across regions and even neighborhoods using data covering 39 low-income, mostly nondemocratic countries. Bruederle and Hodler (2017) show that
luminosity also correlates with education, health, and public goods across DHS enumeration
areas in Africa.
Latin America Looking within Brazil is useful because its statistical agency reports
output estimates for close to 3 500 municipalities during the period 2000-2011. There is an
evident unconditional association between log municipal income, as given by census data in
2000 and 2010, with log luminosity (Figure 6) that retains significance once we partial out
year and state fixed eﬀects to account for the sizable diﬀerences between the North and the
South (Figure 6). The highly significant elasticity is 030, and the in-sample fit is good with
an 2 of 025.

Figure 6

Figure 6

Other Even for developed countries like Sweden with reliable national statistics, it
nevertheless turns out that nighttime lights are strong predictors of aggregate local economic
activity, reflected in establishment and population density, though uncorrelated with average
wages (Mellander, Lobo, Stolarick, and Matheson (2015)). This suggests that researchers
using nighttime lights may want to discuss whether their proxy of development is a better
measure of urbanization/agglomeration and aggregate economic activity or also potentially
reflects diﬀerences in the per capita standards of living. In the case of developing countries,
urbanization and per capita incomes are often strongly correlated, whereas for the developed
world, this relationship may be more nuanced.
A potential avenue to assess whether diﬀerences in luminosity also reflect per capita
diﬀerences in income is to adjust the luminosity measures using the available gridded population

9

datasets.6 However, using luminosity per capita may lead to hard-to-sign biases, due to nonlinearities in the luminosity-population elasticity, noise in local population estimates (which
surely diﬀers across countries), and the logarithmic transformation. Thus, may be preferable
to use (log) average luminosity per area and directly control for (log) population density on the
right-hand side. By doing so, there is no a priori restriction, and one can also easily explore
potential non linearities. Researchers may also compare estimates with (log) average luminosity
as the outcome to similar regressions using (log) population density.
2.2.4

Caveats and New Satellite Sensors

DMSP-OLS luminosity statistics are not problem free. Donaldson and Storeygard (2016) provide an excellent review on the history, benefits, and caveats of satellite images and the use of
remote sensing more generally. So, here we briefly touch on the core issues.
First, as satellite sensors age and new satellites are launched, the comparability of luminosity across time, both within as well as across satellites, is not straightforward. Hsu, Baugh,
Ghosh, Zhizhin, and Elvidge (2015) improve on this issue by providing appropriate adjustment
parameters.7
Second, luminosity data are subject to saturation, which results in top-coded values.
Although such instances are less pressing for large swaths of the developing world, usually
in the handful of megacities,8 saturation is a more common phenomenon for the urban core
of developed countries. The availability of radiance-calibrated lights addresses this issue by
providing non-top-censored imagery.
Third, the data are highly skewed. Many parts of the world appear "dark" where pixels
emit just a bit of light and in the capitals of the rich countries luminosity takes extreme values.
However, these issues can be addressed by either employing nonlinear (maximum likelihood)
econometric techniques or transforming the data (takings logs, focusing on the extensive margin,
etc.).
Fourth, luminosity images are subject to blooming; lights, especially bright lights, appear
larger than they actually are over water- and snow-covered areas. For example, because of
blooming light emitted by cities often falls outside the respective urban boundaries (Small,
Pozzi, and Elvidge (2005)). This issue of spatial spillover of light becomes more pressing
at high-resolution levels when one compares economic activity across contiguous small cells,
6

Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN), Columbia University, and Centro
Internacional de Agricultura Tropical (CIAT), 2005. Gridded Population of the World Version 3 (GPWv3):
Population Density Grids. Palisades, NY: Socioeconomic Data and Applications Center (SEDAC), Columbia
University.
7
In practice, this may not be a severe issue since the inclusion of time/year fixed eﬀects also accounts in a
nonparametric way for time trends related to sensor aging and replacements.
8
For example, in Africa in 2007, out of the 30 457 572 pixels of light density, only 000017% are top coded.

10

neighborhoods, and borders in general. Alexei, Lozano-Gracia, and Oram (2016) recognize that
blurring occurs because of the DMSP satellites’ onboard optics and construct an algorithm that
corrects for this bias.
Fifth, the relatively coarse spatial resolution of satellite sensors, the limited dynamic
range, and its six-bit quantification have been also considered as weaknesses of the DMSPOLS sensor. Many of these limitations have been addressed by the latest generation of sensors
known as VIIRS (visible infrared imaging radiometer suite). VIIRS is one of the five instruments
aboard the Suomi-NPP satellite, which was launched in 2011. It is a scanning radiometer that
collects visible and infrared imagery and radiometric measurements of the land, atmosphere,
cryosphere, and oceans. VIIRS data are used to measure cloud and aerosol properties, ocean
color, sea and land surface temperature, ice motion and temperature, fires, and the Earth’s
albedo (defined as the ratio of irradiance reflected to the irradiance received by a surface.).
A major improvement of VIIRS, compared to previous satellite imagery, is its high
resolution. In the DMSP-OLS luminosity data, each cell’s recorded light comes from a footprint
of roughly 3-5 kilometers in diameter, so in practice all measurements are autocorrelated at
that distance. In contrast, the VIIRS uses 64 detector aggregation zones to maintain a constant
footprint of a diameter of 742 meters. Thus, the footprint of VIIRS is 45 times smaller than
that of the DMSP, improving significantly on the spatial dependency issue (see Elvidge, Baugh,
Zhizhin, and Hsu (2013)). Another diﬀerence is that the DMSP-OLS has a nighttime overpass
roughly around 19:30 whereas VIIRS has an overpass around 1:30. This is why despite VIIRS’s
substantially lower detection limit than the OLS, the former images appear on average more
dimly lit.9 Li, Li, Xu, and Wu (2017) provide an algorithm that links VIIRS with DMSP. They
first develop an adjustment procedure that transforms the two luminosity series in the same
digital units. They then identify a nonlinear relationship that allows the transformation of the
VIIRS numbers to the DMSP scale.
2.2.5

Spatial Aggregation and Patterns
Administrative Regions A straightforward benefit of the satellite imagery data on

luminosity is that one can easily aggregate them and construct proxies of economic activity
across administrative units. In an interesting application, Hodler and Raschky (2014) show
that changes in countries’ leadership are associated with increases in luminosity at the leader’s
birthplace. They further show that regional favoritism is especially strong in countries with
weak constraints on the executive (where leaders have more discretion) and in countries with
9
According to Elvidge, Baugh, Zhizhin, and Hsu (2013) the OLS detection limit is near 5E-10 watts/cm2/sr,
whereas the corresponding number for VIIRS is 2E-11 watts/cm2/sr. The lower detection limits of VIIRS enables
the detection of dimmer lighting.

11

low levels of education.
Another application is the one by Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2016), who
combine luminosity data with administrative (as well as ethnolinguistic) maps to construct
cross-country measures of regional and ethnic inequality, bypassing data unavailability of regional incomes in the developing world. They then show that inequality across ethnic homelands
and administrative regions is strongly related to underdevelopment.
Beyond Administrative Boundaries But a major benefit of the luminosity data is
that researchers do not have to depend any more on oﬃcial statistics available at predetermined
administrative levels (often drawn based on local economic, political, and social considerations).
This allows economists to view the same cell on Earth in a variety of diﬀerent spatial contexts.
One way to completely disassociate one’s analysis from these politically chosen boundaries
(and the process of country and administrative-region formation more generally), for example,
is to partition countries or the world into virtual “boxes/countries”and use this as the primitive
spatial unit. See Michalopoulos (2012) for an early application of this virtual-country approach.
Figure 7 maps the deciles of average luminosity in 2013 across “boxes” of 4 by 4 decimal degrees.

0. 0.0
01
0
0. 0.0
05
4
0 . 0. 1
14
3
0. 0.3
40
9
1. 1.0
04
3
2 . 2.1
18
7
4. 4.6
61
0
9. - 9
20 . 1
9
19 - 1
.3 9.3
9
-5 8
0.
83

Average Luminosity per sq. km in 2013

Figure 7
Ethnic, Linguistic, and Religious Boundaries Besides creating artificial units, the
inquiry on the causes of spatial development has embraced the idea that ethnic and linguistic
homelands, religious groups, and historical empires may be the relevant units for understanding variation in economic performance across space (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013,
2014, 2016)). In fact, identifying the role of deeply rooted historical factors on comparative
12

development has been greatly aided by moving away from bureaucratically preordained units
of analysis and measures of development (see Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2017) for a
compilation of related contributions over the last 20 years).
An interesting case, shown in Figure 8, is Zomia, a mountainous region the size of
Europe that spreads over seven Asian countries.10 Should one wish to pay particular attention
to the poorest countries in the region, namely, Cambodia, Myanmar, Laos, and Bhutan, without
the use of geographic information systems, one’s analysis would be severely limited. It would
eﬀectively imply relying on oﬃcial statistics from Myanmar, which came out of five decades
of military dictatorship just few years ago; or from Bhutan, whose head of state, King Jigme
Singye Wangchuck, famously said in 1979, “We do not believe in Gross National Product.
Gross National Happiness is more important”; or from Cambodia, a country where land mine
contamination has rendered large areas inaccessible.

China

Bhutan
Nepal
India

China

Average Light
Density per
sq. km. 2013

Bangladesh

Average Light
Density per
sq. km. 2013

0.00

Myanmar

0.01 - 0.03
Laos

0.04 - 0.09

0.00

0.10 - 0.22

0.01 - 0.03

0.23 - 0.47

0.04

0.48 - 1.02

Thailand

0.05 - 0.09
0.10 - 0.22

1.03 - 2.34

0.23

2.35 - 5.75

0.24 - 0.47
0.48 - 2.34

5.76 - 14.42

Cambodia

14.43 - 34.03

2.35 - 5.75
5.76 - 14.42

Vietnam

Figure 8

Figure 8

10

Zomia is a geographical term coined in 2002 by the historian Willem van Schendel to refer to the mass of
Southeast Asia mainland that has historically been beyond the control of governments of the lowlands.

13

TI BE TA N
KUR TOKHA
LAYAKH A
LAKH AD ZALAKH A
DZ ONGKHABU MTH ANGKH A
N EPALI

N EPALI

TIBETAN
KUR TOKHA
LAYAKHA
LAKH AD ZALAKH A
DZ ON GKHA BUM TH ANGKHA

KHAM TI NORR A
LISU
NAGA, TASE
L ISU R AWANG
KHAM TI MARU
KH AMT I
LISU
N AGA, KHIAM NIUN GAN
JIN GPH O LASHI
KH AMT I
LISU LISU
KH AMTI Z AIWA
PURU M

TSH AN GLANEPALI
KH ENGKH A

SHAN
GANGT E
KADO
MEIT EI
C HIN , TH ADO AN AL
C HIN, TED IM
CH IN , FAL AM

NEPALI

L ISU
H PON
TAI NU A
ZA IWAZ AIWA RIAN G

JIN GPH O WA
PALAU NG, R UMAI LISU
PALAUN G, SHWE PARAUK

Percentage of
Ethnoreligionists
by Language Group
0.05 - 0.30
0.31 - 1.00

MOKEN
MOKENMOKEN
M OKEN BUR MESE
MOKEN
MOKEN
MOKEN
MOKEN
MOKEN

HAN I
PARAU K
CHIN , H AKA
LU HMON G NJUA
CH IN, MARA
KAD UO LUPHU NOI
WA LAHU
MIZ O CH IN, N GAWN
IU MIEN
SH AN
CHIN , SENT HAN G
AKHA
LU LUH MONG D AW
KH UN WALU AKH A BIT AKHA TAI D AM
CHAKC HIN , KHU MI
LU
ARA KANESE
LAH U AKHA
LU BIT HMON G D AW PUOC
CH IN, ASHO PALAU NG, PAL E
TAI D AM
ARA KANESE C HIN, DAAI
KHU N LU CON
BUR MESE KAR EN, PAO
TAI NUA
LAHU LAME T
IN TH A
LISU
HMON G DAW
HMON G D AW
AR AKANESEC HIN, MUN
LU
YINC HIA LAH U
IU M IENKHMU
TAI N UA TAI DAEN G
AR AKANESE CH IN, C HIN BON
KAYAN
L AO PH UAN PHON G-KNI ANG
LU L U
LAHU LISU
MAL
IU MIEN
TAI D AM TAI NU A HMONG N JUA
KAYAH, WESTER N
PHAI
KAYAN KAREN , PAO
H MONG D AW H MONG DAW
KAREN, YI NTALE
MLABR I
H UNG
KHM U
YANGBYE
KHM U TAI NUA
TAI N UA BO BO
KAREN , SGAW KAREN , PAO
PH U T HAI AREM
H MONG D AW
KAREN , PWO WEST ERNKAREN , SGAW
MALENG CH UT
KAR EN, SGAW
BO
KAR EN, PWO WEST ERN
SAEK SO KHU A
BR U, EAST ERN
KAR EN, PWO WEST ERN KAR EN, PWO WEST ERN
PH U T HAI
KAR EN, SGAW
MON
SO
KATAAN G
PACOH
KUY
MON
IR
LAO
NGEQ
LAVEN SOK
ON GSOUJENG

Percentage of
Buddhists
by Language Group

KU YLAVE LAVE
KH MER, C ENT RAL KRAVETBR AO
LAO
KU Y
KACO
PEAR
KRU NG 2

TAV OYAN
KARE N, PWO WEST ERN
MOKEN

NORR A
KHAM TI
L ISU
NAGA, TASE
L IS U R AWANG
KHAMT I MARU
KH AMT I
LISU
JIN GPH O LASHI
LISU
LISU
PU RU M
KHAM TI Z AIWA
RALT E
L ISU
SHAN
H PON
GANGT E
KADO
TAI NU A
MEIT EI
ZAIWAZ AIWA RIAN G
C HIN, THAD O AN AL
JIN GPH O WA
C HIN, T EDI M
PALAU NG, RU MAI LISU
CHIN , FALAM
PALAUN G, SHWE PARAUK

T SHAN GLA NEPA LI
KH ENGKHA

NAGA, KHIAM NIU NGAN
KH AMTI

HAN I
PARAU K
CH IN, H AKA
LU HMON G NJUA
C HIN, MARA
KADUO LUPHU NOI
WA LAHU
MI ZO C HIN, NGAWN
IU MIEN
SH AN
AKHA
CH IN , SEN TH AN G
LU LU HMONG D AW
KH UN WALU AKH A BIT AKHA TAI D AM
CHAKC HIN , KHU MI
LU
AR AKANESE
L UBIT HMON G DAW PUOC
LAH U AKHA
CH IN, ASHO PALAU NG, PALE
AR AKANESE C HIN , DAAI
TAI DA M
KHU N LUCON
TAI NUA
BU RMESE KAR EN, PAO
LAHU LAM ET
IN TH A
LISU
HM ON G DAW
HMON G DAW
AR AKANESEC HIN , MUN
LU
YINC HIA LAH U
IU MIE NKHM U
TAI N UA TAI DAEN G
AR AKANESE CH IN, CHIN BON
KAYAN
LU L U
L AO PH UAN PHON G-KNIA NG
LAHU LISU
MAL
IU MIEN
KAYAH, WESTER N
TAI D AM TAI NU A HMON G N JUA
PHAI
H MONG D AW H MONG D AW
KAYAN KAREN , PAO
H
UN
G
KAREN , Y INTALE
MLABR I
KHM U
YANGBYE
KHM U TAI NU A
TAI N UA BO BO
KAREN , SGAW KAREN , PAO
PH U T HAIAREM
H MONG D AW
KAREN , PWO WEST ER NKAREN , SGAW
MALENG CH UT
KAR EN, SGAW
BO
KAR EN, PWO WEST ERN
SAEK SO KH UA
BR U, EAS TERN
KARE N, PWO WEST ERN KAR EN, PWO W EST ERN
PH U T HAI
KARE N, SGAW
MON
SO
KATAAN G
KUY
PACOH
MON
IR
LAO
N GEQ
LAVEN SOK
ON GSOUJENG

0.00 - 0.04

N EPALI

0.0 - 0.039

SAMR E

KRAOL
C HAM, W EST ERN MNON G, CEN TR AL
SOMR AY
CH AM, WEST ERN
C HONG
CH AM , WEST ERN

CH ONG

KH MER, CENT RAL
SAOCH
C HAM, WESTER N

0.040 - 0.30
0.31 - 1.0

MOKEN
MOKENMOKEN
MOKENBURM ESE
MOKE N
MOKEN
MOKEN
MOKEN
MOKEN

Figure 8

KUY LAVE LAVE
KH MER, C ENT RAL KRAVETBR AO
LAO
KU Y
KACO
PEAR
KRU NG 2
SAMR E

TAVOYAN
KAREN , PWO WEST ERN
MOKEN

KRAOL

CH ONG

C HAM, W EST ER NMN ON G, CEN TR AL
SOM RAY
CH AM, WEST ERN
C HONG
CHAM , WEST ERN
KH MER, C ENT RAL
SAOCH
C HAM, W ESTER N

Figure 8

James Scott’s (2009) celebrated study of the Zomia highlands reveals the complexity of
the ethnic landscape; people of various groups have historically fled their houses in response
to nation-building projects from the surrounding societies and have designed their social organization, as well as chosen geographical location and subsistence practices and culture, to
discourage states from annexing them into their territories. Hence, a more appropriate mapping
of the underlying social landscape of this region would be the ethnic and linguistic homelands
of these groups. Figure 8 depicts deciles of average luminosity per square kilometer in 2013 at
the ethnolinguistic homeland level, as recorded in the 15th edition of the Ethnologue dataset
(Gordon and Grimes (2005)).11 There is considerable variation in light density across the 204
ethnolinguistic territories within Bhutan, Laos, and Myanmar. Figures 8 and 8 provide an
alternative mapping of the Zomia highlands. Specifically, we map for each group the respective
shares of Ethnoreligionists (Figure 8) and Buddhists (Figure 8), as recorded in the World
Christian Encyclopedia (Barrett, Kurian, and Johnson (2001)). The clustering of religious identity and economic activity is evident with implications about the degree of ethnic and religious
inequality.
The case of Zomia is telling of a wider phenomenon. Ethnographers, historians, and
anthropologists have long pointed out that in large parts of the developing world where the
state is weak, social and economic activity takes place within the confines of ethnic, linguistic
or religious groups that are often characterized by a great deal of heterogeneity in their social,
institutional, and economic structure. Synthesizing a large body of anthropological research,
11

Each of these polygons delineates a traditional linguistic homeland; populations away from their homelands
(e.g., in cities and refugee camps), linguistic groups of unknown location, widespread languages, and extinct
languages are not mapped.

14

George Peter Murdock (1967) and subsequent authors have put together a comprehensive
dataset on the cultural, political, and economic features of a large cross section of ethnic
groups around the world. Using a plethora of sources, Murdock (1967) documents a wealth of
characteristics mostly for groups in Africa, Asia, Oceania, and the New World, prior to contact
with Europeans. The fruits of this major eﬀort are recorded in the Ethnographic Atlas (EA)
(published in 29 installments in the anthropological journal Ethnology), reflecting the cultural,
geographical, and economic traits of 1 270 ethnicities.
The realization that the ethnic group is the relevant social unit has been particularly
fruitful for understanding the origins of regional development in the context of Africa. In
a series of papers (Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014, 2015, 2016)), we have combined
luminosity data with Murdock’s map depicting the spatial distribution of ethnicities in Africa
on the eve of the colonial era (Murdock (1959)) and information from the EA to test various
conjectures on the origins of comparative African development (Murdock (1967)).

2.3

Spatial Development around the World

Images such as the one depicted in Figure 1 immediately beget the question on the determinants of the location of economic activity. Recently scholars have combined the satellite imagery
data on luminosity with fine-resolution images of geography and ecology-related traits. Examples of high-resolution GIS data include land quality for agriculture,12 natural productivity of
the ocean (Dalgaard, Knudsen, and Selaya (2016)), rainfall, ecological suitability for malaria
(Kiszewski, Mellinger, Spielman, Malaney, Sachs, and Sachs (2004)), and terrain ruggedness
and elevation. Geography has been linked to development at least since the time of Adam Smith
and Montesquieu (or even Aristotle); and various, mostly cross-country works have shown that
economic growth and output correlate with numerous geographic traits, such as malaria (Sachs
(2005)), distance to the equator (Hall and Jones (1999) and Andersen, Dalgaard, and Selaya
(2016)), isolation (Nunn and Puga (2012)), and proximity to the coast (Rappaport and Sachs
(2003)), among many others. Recent works further uncover the indirect eﬀects of geography
on development and the social composition (e.g., Diamond (1997), Acemoglu, Johnson, and
Robinson (2001), Michalopoulos (2012), and Michalopoulos, Naghavi, and Prarolo (2018)).
Henderson, Squires, Storeygard, and Weil (2017), motivated by the observation that in
broad strokes economic activity in the United States is significantly more spatially concentrated
compared to that in Europe, analyze whether geographical attributes may have a time-varying
12

Crop-specific suitabilities have been widely used among agricultural economists and also recently by economists interested in within-country comparative development. The data come from FAO-IIASA’s Global AgroEcological Zones (GAEZ) project from the Food and Agriculture Organization and the International Institute
for Applied Systems Analysis. For an alternative mapping of a cell’s agricultural potential based on caloric
suitability, see Galor and Ozak (2015).

15

impact on the location of economic activity depending on how early a given location developed.
In the first part of their study, they establish the powerful explanatory nature of geography in
shaping economic activity. They find that a relatively small set of 24 geographical attributes
explain 47% of the worldwide variation and 35% of the within-country variation in luminosity
observed across 240 000 grid cells. In the second part, they show that agriculture-related geographic variables wield disproportionate explanatory power vis-a-vis trade-related geographic
traits among early developers, and this pattern is balanced for late developers. The rationale
they oﬀer is the following. Among early developers, high transportation costs made it necessary
for urban centers to remain close to the agricultural core persisting to today. On the contrary,
among late developers the decline in the transportation costs facilitated the rise of cities close
to trade-privileged coastal locations.13

3

Border Studies of Spatial Development

One of the advantages of moving the exploration of the roots of development within countries
is that, partly thanks to overcoming the limited degrees of freedom, one may now exploit a
wide range of identification strategies.14 Naturally, randomization of historical events, social
composition, or random assignment of any of the fundamental growth correlates for that matter
is hard, if not impossible. Nevertheless, comparing economic activity across borders (national,
subnational, ethnic, linguistic, of historical polities, colonial concessions, etc.,) has emerged as
a focal identification strategy improving the credibility of the empirical estimates.
The research field of border studies has a veritable history and has attracted attention
from a wide variety of disciplines including political science, sociology, anthropology, history,
international law, and, more recently, even from the humanities – notably art, media studies,
philosophy, and ethics. And since the seminal paper of McCallum (1995), who found that crossprovince trade in Canada is 22 times more frequent than between provinces and US states, a
large literature on the trade impediments associated with international borders has followed.
Social scientists have long been fascinated by frontier zones, producing a rich account of
the historical, social, and institutional history of these regions (hence the stand-alone field of
border studies). Getting a glimpse of economic activity of these places and its determinants
was largely out of reach for development and growth economists, limiting the cross-pollination
of economic reasoning from neighboring disciplines. In other words, before the integration of
13
Recently, there has also been an increased interest in the role of infrastructure and trade costs on spatial
development (often proxied by luminosity), which owing to space constraints we do not review here. See, among
others, Eaton and Kortum (2002), Arkolakis, Costinot, and Rodríguez-Clare (2012), Jedwab and Storeygard
(2016), Alder (2015), Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), and Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2017).
14
Fuchs-Schündeln and Hassan (2015) provide a thorough review of natural experiments in macroeconomics.

16

GIS in their empirical arsenal, economists could remain largely insulated from the nuances
and specificities of spatial development, since the absence of credible proxies of local economic
performance limited such empirical explorations on a large scale. This has changed dramatically
over the last 10 years. Below we review some of these works by topics explored.
Linking the past of a given location to its current performance has benefited particularly
from the utilization of spatial regression discontinuity designs, mostly because mapping the
locations of historical events to modern-day territories is relatively easier than tracing the
history of the lineage of a given individual. Looking at places, for example, on both sides
of a historical boundary, we can compare contemporary outcomes and uncover the imprint
of whatever it was that diﬀered between the two regions historically. This strategy has been
fruitfully applied in examining the role of institutions, which tend to have a territorial base.

3.1

Cross-Country Border Studies

Recent works associate national border diﬀerences in development, as reflected in luminosity,
with diﬀerences in various country features (e.g., institutions, fragmentation, human capital).
By typically employing regression discontinuity designs, these studies advance on causality.
In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2014), for example, we examine the role of national
institutions in shaping regional development across African countries. We exploit the artificial
drawing of colonial borders that endured after African independence and examine whether
diﬀerences in regional development across the national border today are related to diﬀerences in
national institutions. We conduct the analysis within the historical homelands of ethnic groups
that have been systematically partitioned by the artificial colonial borders so as to account for
unobserved ethnic and geographic features.15 The analysis within ethnic homelands reveals
no systematic link between national institutions (rule of law, bureaucratic quality, control of
corruption) and luminosity. While the lack of any association goes against works stressing the
causal impact of institutions on development, it is in line with the African historiography that
stresses the role of ethnic rather than national features and emphasizes the inability of the
central government to broadcast power far from the capitals (Herbst (2000)).16 Consistent
with this narrative, we show that various proxies of state capacity decline as one moves away
15
In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016) we assess the consequences of the colonial border design that
resulted in the splitting of more than a quarter of the preexisting ethnic groups across the African countries
upon decolonization. After showing that partitioned groups were similar in many respects to nonpartitioned
ones, we establish empirically using high-precision georeferenced data on local events of political violence that
partitioned ethnic homelands have suﬀered disproportionately from state-sponsored violence and discrimination,
uncovering the violent legacy of the colonial border design.
16
There is a plethora of case study evidence on the importance of ethnic institutions and leaders (e.g., Baldwin
(2012)). Using data from the Afrobarometer Surveys, Logan (2009) and Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2015)
present descriptive evidence on the salience of ethnicity and the crucial role of ethnic chiefs.

17

from the capital cities. And there is a weak link between national-level institutional quality
and within-ethnicities diﬀerences in economic activity, as reflected in the satellite images of
light density at night, for those groups close to the capital cities.17
In a follow-up study, Pinkovskiy (2017) examines the patterns of luminosity across national borders globally. He first documents the presence of sizable border discontinuities in
luminosity, suggesting the importance of nationwide diﬀerences. Second, he examines the role
of human capital, infrastructure, institutions, and state capacity and finds that the overall level
of national development and growth, and to a lesser extent of national institutions, explains
diﬀerences in luminosity at the border. Third, there is substantial heterogeneity across continents, with national institutions playing a significant role in Europe and the Americas and
having no explanatory power in Africa.

3.2

Within-Country Borders

Studies associating at-the-border diﬀerences in development (and other outcomes) with countrywide features are useful because they advance on identification; however, they are still subject to the critique that some other nationwide feature may explain these border diﬀerences.
Economists have recently combined GIS data with historical maps to examine the importance
of history, colonial institutions, and oppressive labor practices, exploiting within-country variation.
Colonial Concessions Assessing the developmental impact of colonization has been
a fertile ground of research among growth and development economists (Acemoglu, Johnson,
and Robinson (2005), La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2008)). The colonial heritage,
however, is multifaceted and far-reaching, which makes sweeping mono-causal explanations
diﬃcult. Nevertheless, an aspect of the colonial era that has recently attracted attention is
that of the legacy of colonial resource extraction. It is useful to remember that one of the
key reasons behind the push toward colonization was the acquisition of natural resources and
foodstuﬀ that would ease the pressure of the growing population in the European homelands.
The exploitation of the resources either was directly undertaken by the state, or chunks of
land would be contracted out to private firms through the system of colonial concessions. This
practice was widespread, with hundreds of concessions dotting the colonial landscape. Tracing
the impact of such colonial exploitative practices has been greatly facilitated by the presence
of relatively precise maps delineating the boundaries of public or private colonial exploitations.
17

Dickens (2017) employs a similar identification strategy to explore the extent of ethnic politics across African
groups over time.

18

Comparing villages and districts on two sides of a boundary can shed light on this important
aspect of the colonial experience.
In an early study, Dell (2010) applied a regression discontinuity design to investigate
the long-run impact of the mita, an extensive forced mining labor system aﬀecting parts of
Peru and Bolivia between 1573 and 1812. Proxying development with health and consumption
survey data, Dell (2010) finds that mita regions are underperforming today compared to the
neighboring non-mita districts and this diﬀerence is partially driven by the scarcity of large
landowners and the abundance of subsistence farmers in the mita districts today.
Lowes and Montero (2015) look at another infamous instance of colonial exploitation
throughout King Leopold II’s Congo Free State (CFS). The CFS granted concessions to private
companies that used violent tactics to collect rubber and other minerals. Using a regression
discontinuity design along the well-defined boundaries of the two major concessions, the authors
find that greater exposure to the rubber concessions is associated with lower education, wealth,
and health outcomes today. They go a step further by using survey and experimental data
from a former concession boundary to shed light on these channels, finding that village chiefs
in former concessions are less likely to be elected and provide fewer public goods today.
Dell and Olken (2017) look at the consequences of the Dutch cultivation system in Java,
showing that areas close to where the Dutch established sugar factories in the mid-19th century are more industrialized today, suggesting that the economic structures implemented by
colonizers to facilitate production can continue to promote economic activity in the long run.
This burgeoning literature is likely to enrich our understanding of the colonial legacies.
Precolonial Legacies in Africa In Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2013) we combine luminosity data with Murdock’s map depicting the spatial distribution of ethnicities in
Africa on the eve of the colonial era (Murdock (1959)) and information from Murdock’s atlas
on various precolonial ethnic-specific institutional, social, and economic features to test various
conjectures on the origins of comparative African development (Murdock (1967)).18 We put to
test a long-standing conjecture among African scholars regarding the legacy of deeply rooted
ethnic institutions, in particular, the role of precolonial political centralization (see Herbst
(2000)). The use of satellite imagery data is quite desirable, as it allows us to conduct the
analysis across all of Africa. Figures 9- illustrate our approach. Figure 9 depicts stable
nighttime luminosity at the cell level as of 2013, and Figure 9 aggregates the data at the
18

Starting with Gennaioli and Rainer (2007) and Nunn (2008), many empirical papers have used Murdock’s
data and mapping of the spatial distribution of ethnicities. See Fenske (2013), Alesina, Brioschi, and La Ferrara
(2016), Michalopoulos, Putterman, and Weil (2016), Nunn and Wantchekon (2011) , Giuliano and Nunn (2013),
Fenske (2014), Alsan (2015), Mayshar, Moav, Neeman, and Pascali (2015), Osafo-Kwaako and Robinson (2013),
Alesina, Giuliano, and Nunn (2013), and Bentzen, Hariri, and Robinson (2015).

19

country-ethnic homeland level, using Murdock’s map and contemporary borders (as of 2000).
In Figure 9 we map the degree of ethnic-specific political centralization at the time of the
European colonization of Africa. This index describes the number of jurisdictional layers above
the local (usually village) level for each group. A zero score indicates stateless societies lacking
any form of centralized political organization. A score of 1 indicates small chiefdoms, 2 designates paramount (large) chiefdoms, and 3 and 4 indicate ethnic groups that were part of large
states.
Our econometric analysis shows that within African countries, groups that were organized
as large chiefdoms or states during the precolonial era (such as the Zulu and Tswana) are more
developed today, as compared to ethnicities organized in small chiefdoms or those lacking any
degree of political complexity (such as the Nuer or the Tiv). And while the precolonial political
centralization - contemporary development nexus may reflect hard-to-account-for inertia or
omitted factors, we show that the correlation between the two is present when we control for
dozens of other precolonial societal, economic, and organizational features. We also compared
development at the ethnic border of groups diﬀering in their degree of precolonial political
complexity. The RD estimates confirm the cross-sectional pattern.19

Figure 9

Figure 9

Figure 9

Moscona, Nunn, and Robinson (2017) explore the contemporary legacy of ethnic-specific
precolonial family structures across Africa. Specifically, they test whether ethnicities organized
19

The within-country influence of historical institutions and precolonial political centralization in particular
has been subsequently shown in the context of Latin America (Chiovelli (2014), Angeles and Elizalde (2017)),
in North America (Dippel (2014)), and in Vietnam (Dell, Lane, and Querubin (2017)). In the latter, the
authors look at a specific border between the centralized Dai Viet and the noncentralized Khmer (Cambodian)
Empire and shed some light on the channels by showing that in villages with a strong historical state, citizens,
thanks to a stronger civil society reflected in the quality of the local governments, have been better able to
provide public goods and redistribution, suggesting a complementarity between political centralization and prosocial norms. In an another recent paper, Heldring (2016) documents a positive association between regions’
experience with precolonial kingdoms and contemporary public goods within Rwanda; however, he highlights the
potentially negative aspect of state capacity, showing that mobilization towards state-sponsored violence during
the genocide was more successful in precisely the same locations. Besley and Reynal-Querol (2014) associate
historical conflict, often among large precolonial African kingdoms, with contemporary violence.

20

around “segmentary lineages” are more prone to violence and conflict by combining anthropological data from Murdock (1967) and contemporary GIS data on conflict. This empirical
investigation is motivated by the ethnographic record, suggesting that in such societies, individuals are expected to come to the defense of fellow lineage members when the latter get
involved in conflicts. As a consequence, small disagreements can quickly escalate to largerscale conflicts. Employing within-country variation and RD specifications that look at ethnic
boundaries between segmentary and nonsegmentary groups, they find evidence in support of
the ethnographic record.
Historical Kingdoms in Europe Studies on the shadow of historical boundaries
increasingly focus on Europe. On the one hand, Europe features some of the oldest modern
states where the implementation of strong nation-building policies has given rise to countries
close to the Weberian ideal states, with significant state capacity where statewide policies are
eﬀectively implemented. So, sharp within-country spatial discontinuities in economic activity in
this part of the world seem unlikely. On the other hand, Europe has the advantage of featuring
a rich political legacy, producing a potentially large set of historical political boundaries.
Oto-Peralías and Romero-Avila (2017) focus on the stable frontier between Castile and
the Nasrid Kingdom of Granada in the late Middle Ages. They show that land inequality and
concentration of wealth are higher on the Castilian side, both today and during the 18th century.
They attribute this diﬀerence to the fact that the military insecurity of the frontier region of
Castile favored the concentration of economic and political power to remain jurisdictionally
viable.
Studies also explore the legacies of the Ottomans and the Habsburgs, looking at the
historical borders of these empires and across their administrative regions. Schulze and Wolf
(2009) find that even before the Great War, there were “border”eﬀects within the AustroHungarian empire regions, which can be explained by the ethnolinguistic composition of the
regional capitals.20 Becker, Boeckh, Hainz, and Woessmann (2016) compare communities on
both sides of the Habsburg border within several eastern European countries that have shared
common formal institutions for a century now. They find that historical Habsburg aﬃliation
increases current trust and reduces corruption in courts and police. Grosfeld and Zhuravskaya
(2015) look at discontinuities across regions of Poland that used to be split between three
empires (Russia, Austria, and Prussia) to look at their legacy, documenting sizable inertia.
Grosjean (2011) examines the Ottoman legacy in exploiting regional variation in development within six southeastern European countries that were partly occupied by the Ottoman
20

The trade-diverting role of ethnolinguistic networks is also found by Aker, Klein, O’Connell, and Yang (2014)
who look at market integration in Niger across both international and ethnic boundaries.

21

Empire. Her analysis reveals that financial development proxies are considerably lower in
Ottoman-ruled areas. Grosfeld, Rodnyansky, and Zhuravskaya (2013) assess the role of the
Holocaust in exploiting spatial variation in Russia. Employing a spatial regression discontinuity design, they find that in areas inside the pale of settlement, where Jewish communities were
confined during the Tsarist times, there is less entrepreneurship and less support for democracy,
and citizens are more likely to support communism, though individuals exhibit higher levels of
trust.

3.3
3.3.1

Caveats using Spatial Regression Discontinuities
Omitted Variables

Conducting the analysis at the ethnic homeland, concession, historical kingdom, or district
level or looking at historical boundaries is, however, not a panacea. The compared units may
be diﬀerent along many dimensions. For example, ethnic groups or colonial concessions may
diﬀer in more than the degree of political complexity or intensity of violence, respectively. By
implementing spatial regression discontinuity designs, essentially comparing adjacent regions
along the boundaries, one successfully accounts for factors that vary smoothly in space and
hence mitigate concerns related to bias arising from variation in geographic elements. Nevertheless, such estimates do not take into account other potential diﬀerences at the group,
historical entity, or concession level. To account for the latter and unpack the bundle of traits
that may vary across entities, researchers add other entity-specific traits from the ethnographic,
historical, and colonial record, respectively.
3.3.2

Spatial Spillovers

Another angle that is crucial to keep in mind in explorations on spatial development is that the
treatment studied in one spatial unit may exert an eﬀect on other spatial units that serve as the
control group (Miguel and Kremer (2004)). The potential of positive and negative spatial externalities is an important dimension that researchers using high-resolution spatial data need to
keep in mind. Migration, sorting, and selection aﬀect most units, making the treatment-control
distinction less clear-cut. This issue of whether the consequences of a given "treatment" in a
location may directly influence outcomes elsewhere is particularly important for constructing
counterfactual scenarios based on local estimates as well as aggregating the economic consequences of these local events. One approach is to account for spillovers in an adhoc manner
(e.g., Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016)) or by employing spatial econometric techniques
that model spillovers (e.g., Harari and La Ferrara (2014)). Another approach is to explicitly
model spatial dependence across units in the context of general equilibrium network models.

22

See, for example, Allen and Arkolakis (2014), Acemoglu, García-Jimeno, and Robinson (2015),
Donaldson and Hornbeck (2016), and Desmet, Nagy, and Rossi-Hansberg (2016). Given the
strong interdependence of spatial units within countries in terms of labor and capital mobility
as well policy choices, more studies considering the equilibrium responses in the context of a
network are needed.
3.3.3

External Validity and Heterogeneity

Focusing on specific borders to conduct inference has the advantage that one may bring into
the picture a great deal of the institutional details of the phenomenon being studied.21 Nevertheless, generalizing from case studies can be misleading, echoing the usual “external validity”arguments readily invoked in the context of micro-development. In Michalopoulos and
Papaioannou (2014) we highlight how focusing on a single national border discontinuity can lead
to erroneous conclusions, given the substantial heterogeneity in the degree to which national
institutions translate into diﬀerences in economic performance straddling national boundaries
in Africa. Hence, understanding the forces behind the heterogeneous outcomes of a given
treatment is the direction that is likely to deliver relatively generalizable lessons on the roots of
development. Campante and Yanagizawa-Drott (2017), for example, uncover the heterogeneous
eﬀect of air links on global inequality by establishing that international long-distance flights
increase economic activity (reflected in satellite-measured night lights) only when connecting
high-income to middle-income (but not low-income) countries.
3.3.4

Endogeneity of Ethnicity and Historical Borders

The assignment of ethnicities into specific territorial boundaries and of people into broad ethnic categories are challenging tasks. Ethnic or historical boundaries are often more fluid than
sketched, as historical kingdoms faced challenges in broadcasting power in remote areas (Herbst
(2000)). There is also a wide debate among social scientists regarding the malleability of ethnicity. On the one hand, there is scholarship on how colonizers and postcolonial state builders
have manipulated the ethnic landscape, stressing the socially constructed and time-varying
nature of ethnic identity. On the other hand, there is a stream of research that treats ethnic
groups as relatively stable social units that shape the economic and political environment.22
For example, the fact that geographic and epidemiological factors are robust predictors of the
21

Eﬀectively used, this wealth of information can help overcome the criticism launched among historians
regarding the tendency of economists to compress both time and history, linking causes and eﬀects often centuries
apart (see Hopkins (2009) and the thorough response of Fenske (2010).
22
This debate has a venerable intellectual history of two main strands of thought: the primordialists who treat
ethnic groups as deeply rooted clearly drawn entities (Geertz (1967)), and the constructivists or instrumentalists,
who highlight the contingent and situational character of ethnicity (Barth (1969)).

23

degree of contemporary ethnic diversity highlights the sources of stability of these social entities
Michalopoulos (2012) and Cervellati, Chiovelli, and Esposito (2017).
3.3.5

Invariance to Scale

A well-known issue in spatial studies relates to the modifiable areal unit problem (MAUP). The
essence of MAUP is that the shape and scale of the spatial unit chosen crucially influence the
statistics resulting from aggregating the underlying measure of interest, initially available at a
finer scale. For example, luminosity data may be aggregated into postal code areas, coarser administrative units, counties, or any other arbitrary partition, such as ethnic homelands, religious
areas, or “pixels” (thus, the areal units are modifiable). The MAUP is one of the better-known
problems in geography and spatial analysis, as data aggregation might obscure a correlation
between variables or make unrelated variables appear correlated. So, researchers using GIS
data and conducting spatial analyses should examine the robustness of the results to diﬀerent
levels of aggregation. This is computationally feasible since luminosity and other big spatial
data are available at a fine resolution. See Michalopoulos (2012) for a thorough treatment of
the MAUP in the context of establishing a robust link between geographic heterogeneity and
ethnolinguistic diversity.
Reynal-Querol and Montalvo (2016) examine at various levels of spatial aggregation
the relationship between ethnic diversity and economic performance, as reflected in luminosity.
Their analysis illustrates the usefulness of conducting the analysis at various aggregation levels.
Starting from the country level, and as long as the spatial units are fairly large, there is a
negative relationship between ethnic diversity and economic performance (a finding that is in
line with the seminal work of Easterly and Levine (1997)). However, this relationship weakens
and even changes sign as the unit of analysis becomes smaller. The robust negative relationship
at coarse levels is consistent with the notion that ethnically diverse societies find it diﬃcult
to coordinate on cohesive institutions and suﬀer from the underprovision of public goods.
However, in a given country, the coexistence of people from diﬀerent ethnic backgrounds may
bring economic benefits, for example, by having a denser network of markets in ethnically
diverse territories. Indeed, the authors show that markets are more likely to be located along
ethnic boundaries within African countries, partially rationalizing the positive aspect of ethnic
diversity locally. More generally, the study of Reynal-Querol and Montalvo (2016) suggests
that the cross-country correlates of growth and development may not necessarily translate to
similar associations at finer units of aggregation within countries.
Sometimes the instability of a pattern due to the change in the spatial unit may also
suggest that there is something unique about the spatial unit considered. So, an alternative

24

way to gauge whether a given set of spatial units (zones) is critical for the obtained relationship
is to show that small perturbations of the initial set of boundaries may deliver noisier or no
results. Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou (2016) employ such a technique to show that
it is indeed ethnic inequality measured by the original linguistic boundaries that matters for
development. They construct alternative indexes of inequality based on Thiessen polygons that
have the exact same centroids as the actual linguistic and ethnic homelands in the Ethnologue
and GREG databases, respectively, the key diﬀerence being that the actual homelands have
idiosyncratic shapes.23 Briant, Combes, and Lafourcade (2010) evaluate the magnitude of the
distortions arising from the MAUP on the analysis of spatial concentration, agglomeration
economies, and trade determinants using various French zoning systems. They find that the
size and shape of these spatial units are of secondary importance compared to specification
issues.24 On the contrary, Coughlin and Novy (2016) show that estimates of the standard
gravity model crucially depend on the level of spatial aggregation of the underlying trade data.
Cervellati, Chiovelli, and Esposito (2017) and Alsan (2015) conduct their analysis on the impact
of the ecological suitability of malaria and the tsetse fly at various levels of spatial aggregation,
cleanly addressing the MAUP.

4

Concluding Remarks

We reviewed works of an emerging meso approach in growth and development economics that
uses fine-resolution spatial proxies of development, such as satellite images of light density at
night, and exploits variation across administrative regions, ethnic homelands, historical kingdoms, and pixels of various sizes. This body of research tries to balance the merits and drawbacks of macro cross-country studies, which suﬀer from various sorts of endogeneity (omitted
variables, error in variables, and reverse causation), and micro works, which advance on causation by randomization but often lack generalizability. We discussed studies that employ spatial
regression discontinuity designs and use a plethora of historical accidents (such as the delineation of colonial boundaries) to advance on identification and shed light on general-interest
questions, such as the role of colonial institutions, the lasting impact of empires in Europe,
and the role of ethnic diversity, among others. This vibrant research agenda has been fostered
by the availability of GIS data on luminosity and various geographical-ecological features produced by geographers and earth scientists. Economists have combined this information with
historical maps, anthropological, and archival records including historical censuses to assess a
23

Thiessen polygons have the unique property that each polygon contains only one input point, and any
location within a polygon is closer to its associated point than to a point within any other polygon.
24
For an introduction to the econometric issues arising from large, typically spatial datasets, see Varian (2014)
and Gibbons, Overman, and Patacchini (2015).

25

broad set of issues and shed light on the fundamental drivers of economic activity around the
world.
This meso approach is not problem free, and we discuss its pitfalls. Yet, we believe
that the amalgamation of big spatial data, coupled with increases in computing power and
advances in theoretical and empirical spatial econometric techniques, oﬀers new directions for
this type of research. On the data front, there are already studies that use fine-resolution
information on various aspects of economic activity.

To name a few, recent works have

used GIS data on civil conflict and violence (e.g., Harari and La Ferrara (2014), Berman,
Couttenier, Rohner, and Thoenig (2017), Michalopoulos and Papaioannou (2016), Besley and
Reynal-Querol (2014)) produced by news aggregators and political scientists (UCDP-GED
and ACLED). A vibrant new research uses social media (Facebook and Twitter) data (e.g.,
Enikolopov, Makarin, and Petrova (2016), Acemoglu, Hassan, and Tahoun (2017), Enikolopov,
Petrova, and Sonin (2017)). Google search information has been used to measure labor market dynamics in industrial countries. Cell phone and Internet penetration and usage have
been linked to education and protests in Africa (e.g., Manacorda and Tesei (2017), Hjort and
Poulsen (2017)). Satellite-based land use data also provide a fruitful avenue for future research
(Burgess, Hansen, Olken, Potapov, and Sieber (2012)). Marx, Stoker, and Suri (2016) use
satellite images to infer the quality of housing in slums.
We believe that future research will take a holistic approach. That is, instead of using a particular dataset (say, luminosity or mobile telephony) to test a conjecture or theory,
researchers will use multiple proxies and, perhaps more interestingly, combine the available
proxies to gain a better understanding of local development outcomes and to shed light on the
mechanisms at play.
This meso approach does not imply that country-level policies do not matter. Nationwide
decisions do determine a great deal of public goods and state capacity remains lodged at the
level of the nation state. Nevertheless, the local take up and eventual impact of a given national
policy may crucially depend on a host of location-specific factors that the meso approach aims
to highlight. Moreover, among the United Nations millennium development goals set by the
General Assembly, the decentralization of various aspects of central governance is prominently
featured. As eﬀorts towards decentralization gain momentum in the developing world we expect
the meso approach to be useful for practitioners in identifying frictions and impediments as
well oﬀer guidance on what policies may or may not work on the ground and why.

26

References
Acemoglu, D., C. García-Jimeno, and J. A. Robinson (2015): “State Capacity and
Economic Development: A Network Approach,” American Economic Review, 105(8), 2364—
2409.
Acemoglu,
the Street:

D.,

T.

A.

Hassan,

and

A.

Tahoun (2017):

“The Power of

Evidence from Egypt’s Arab Spring,” Review of Financial Studies,

https://doi.org/10.1093/rfs/hhx086.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson (2001): “The Colonial Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic Review, 91(5),
1369—1401.
(2005): “Institutions as a Fundamental Cause of Long-Run Growth,” in Handbook of
Economic Growth, Volume 1A, ed. by P. Aghion, and S. N. Durlauf, pp. 385—472. Elsevier.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1992): “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction,”
Econometrica, 60(2), 323—351.
Aker, J. C., M. W. Klein, S. A. O’Connell, and M. Yang (2014): “Borders, Ethnicity
and Trade,” Journal of Development Economics, 107(1), 1—16.
Alder, S. (2015): “Chinese Roads in India: The Eﬀect of Transport Infrastructure on Economic Development,” Working paper, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Alesina, A., B. Brioschi, and E. La Ferrara (2016): “Violence against Women: A
Cross-Cultural Analysis for Africa,” NBER Working Paper 21901.
Alesina, A., P. Giuliano, and N. Nunn (2013): “On the Origins of Gender Roles: Women
and the Plough,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469—530.
Alesina, A., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2016): “Ethnic Inequality,” Journal of Political Economy, 124(2), 428—488.
Alexei, A., N. Lozano-Gracia, and C. Oram (2016): “Deblurring DMSP Nighttime
Lights,” Working paper.
Allen, T., and C. Arkolakis (2014): “Trade and the Topography of the Spatial Economy,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(3), 1085—1140.
Alsan, M. (2015): “The Eﬀect of the TseTse Fly on African Development,” American Economic Review, 105(1), 382—410.
27

Andersen, T. B., C.-J. Dalgaard, and P. Selaya (2016): “Climate and the Emergence
of Global income Diﬀerences,” Review of Economic Studies, 83(4), 1334—1363.
Angeles, L., and A. Elizalde (2017): “Pre-colonial Institutions and Socioeconomic Development: The Case of Latin America,” Journal of Development Economics, 124(1), 22—40.
Arkolakis, C., A. Costinot, and A. Rodríguez-Clare (2012): “New Trade Models,
Same Old Gains?,” American Economic Review, 102(1), 94—130.
Azariadis, C., and A. Drazen (1990): “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105(2), 501—526.
Baldwin, K. (2012): “Why Vote with the Chief? Political Connections and Public Goods
Provision in Zambia,” American Journal of Political Science, 57(4), 794—809.
Banerje, A. V., and A. F. Newman (1993): “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(2), 274—298.
Barrett, D. B., G. T. Kurian, and T. M. Johnson (2001): World Christian Encyclopedia.
New York: Oxford University Press, 2nd ed edn.
Barro, R. J. (1991): “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 106(2), 407—443.
(1998): Determinants of Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Empirical Study. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
Barro, R. J., and J. W. Lee (2013): “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the
World, 1950-2010,” Journal of Development Economics, 104(1), 184—198.
Barth, F. (ed.) (1969): Ethnic Groups and Boundaries: The Social Organization of Cultural
Diﬀerence. Little, Brown, Boston, MA.
Becker, S. O., K. Boeckh, C. Hainz, and L. Woessmann (2016): “The Empire Is Dead,
Long Live the Empire! Long-Run Persistence of Trust and Corruption in the Bureaucracy,”
Economic Journal, 126(590), 40—74.
Bentzen, J., J. G. Hariri, and J. A. Robinson (2015): “The Indigenous Roots of Representative Democracy,” NBER Working Paper 21193.
Berman, N., M. Couttenier, D. Rohner, and M. Thoenig (2017): “This Mine is Mine!
How Minerals Fuel Conflicts in Africa,” American Economic Review, 107(6), 1564—1610.
28

Besley, T., and M. Reynal-Querol (2014): “The Legacy of Historical Conflict: Evidence
from Africa,” American Political Science Review, 108(2), 319—336.
Briant, A., P.-P. Combes, and M. Lafourcade (2010): “Dots to Boxes: Do the Size and
Shape of Spatial Units Jeopardize Economic Geography Estimations?,” Journal of Urban
Economics, 67(3), 287—302.
Bruederle, A., and R. Hodler (2017): “Nighttime Lights as a Proxy for Human Development at the Local Level,” CESifo Working Paper 6555.
Burgess, R., M. Hansen, B. A. Olken, P. Potapov, and S. Sieber (2012): “The
Political Economy of Deforestation in the Tropics,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(4),
1707—1754.
Campante, F., and D. Yanagizawa-Drott (2017): “Long-Range Growth: Economic Development in the Global Network of Air Links,” Mimeo, Harvard Kennedy School.
Cervellati, M., G. Chiovelli, and E. Esposito (2017): “Bite and Divide: Ancestral
Exposure to Malaria and the Emergence and Persistence of Ethnic Diversity in Africa,”
Working paper, London Business School.
Chen, X., and W. D. Nordhaus (2011): “Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic
Statistics,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(21), 8589—8594.
(2014): “A Sharper Image? Estimates of the Precision of Nighttime Lights as a Proxy
for Economic Statistics,” Journal of Economic Geography, 15(15), 217—246.
Chiovelli, G. (2014): “Pre-Colonial Centralization, Colonial Activities and Development in
Latin America,” Mimeo, University of Bologna, Economics Department.
Chiovelli, G., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2017): “Land Mines and Spatial
Development,” Mimeo London Business School and Brown Univesrity.
Ciccone, A., and M. Jarocinski (2010): “Determinants of Economic Growth: Will Data
Tell?,” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 2(4), 220—246.
Coughlin, C. C., and D. Novy (2016): “Estimating Border Eﬀects: The Impact of Spatial
Aggregation,” CEPR Discussion Paper 11226.
Croft, T. (1978): “Nighttime Images of the Earth from Space,” Scientific American, 239(1),
86—98.

29

Dalgaard, C.-J., A. S. B. Knudsen, and P. Selaya (2016): “The Bounty of the Sea and
Long-Run Development,” Working paper, University of Copenhagen.
Dell, M. (2010): “The Persistent Eﬀects of Peru’s Mining Mita,” Econometrica, 78(6), 1863—
1903.
Dell, M., N. Lane, and P. Querubin (2017): “The Historical State, Local Collective Action,
and Economic Development in Vietnam,” Working paper, Harvard University, Department
of Economics.
Dell, M., and B. A. Olken (2017): “The Development Eﬀects of the Extractive Colonial
Economy: The Dutch Cultivation System in Java,” Working paper, Harvard University,
Department of Economics.
Desmet, K., D. K. Nagy, and E. Rossi-Hansberg (2016): “The Geography of Development,” Mimeo, Pricenton University.
Diamond, J. (1997): Guns, Germs, and Steel. The Fates of Human Societies. W.W. Norton
and Co, New York.
Diamond, J., and J. A. Robinson (eds.) (2010): Natural Experiments of History. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Dickens, A. C. (2017): “Ethnolinguistic Favoritism in African Politics,” Mimeo, York University.
Dippel, C. (2014): “Forced Coexistence and Economic Development: Evidence from Native
American Reservations,” Econometrica, 82(6), 2131—2165.
Doll, C. N., J.-P. Muller, and J. G. Morley (2006): “Mapping Regional Economic
Activity from Night-Time Light Satellite Imagery,” Ecological Economics, 57(1), 75—92.
Donaldson, D., and R. Hornbeck (2016): “Railroads and American Economic Growth: A
’Market Access’ Approach,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(2), 799—858.
Donaldson, D., and A. Storeygard (2016): “The View from Above: Applications of
Satellite Data in Economics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(4), 171—198.
Duflo, E., R. Glennerster, and M. Kremer (2006): “Using Randomization in Development Economics Research: A Toolkit,” NBER Working Paper 333.
Easterly, W., and R. Levine (1997): “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(4), 1203—1250.
30

Eaton, J., and S. Kortum (2002): “Technology, Geography, and Trade,” Econometrica,
70(5), 1741—1779.
Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, E. A. Kihn, H. W. Kroehl, and E. R. Davis (1997):
“Mapping of City Lights with Nighttime Data from the DMSP Operational Linescan System.,” Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 63(6), 727—734.
Elvidge, C. D., K. E. Baugh, M. Zhizhin, and F.-C. Hsu (2013): “Why VIIRS Data Are
Superior to DMSP for Mapping Nighttime Lights,” Proceedings of the Asia-Pacific Advanced
Network, 35, 62—69.
Enikolopov, R., A. Makarin, and M. Petrova (2016): “Social Media and Protest Participation: Evidence from Russia,” Mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Enikolopov, R., M. Petrova, and K. Sonin (2017): “Social Media and Corruption,”
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.
Feenstra, R. C., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer (2015): “The Next Generation of the
Penn World Table,” American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150—3182.
Fenske, J. (2010): “The Causal History of Africa: A Response to Hopkins,” Economic History
of Developing Regions, 25(2), 177—212.
(2013): “Does Land Abundance Explain African Institutions?,” Economic Journal,
123(573), 1363—1390.
(2014): “Ecology, Trade, and States in Pre-colonial Africa,” Journal of the European
Economic Association, 12(3), 612—640.
Fuchs-Schündeln, N., and T. A. Hassan (2015): “Natural Experiments in Macroeconomics,” in Handbook of Macroeconomics, ed. by J. B. Taylor, and H. Uhlig, vol. 2, pp.
923—1012. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Galor, O., and O. Ozak (2015): “Land Productivity and Economic Development: Caloric
Suitability vs. Agricultural Suitability,” Mimeo, Brown University.
Galor, O., and J. Zeira (1993): “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics,” Review of
Economic Studies, 60(1), 35—52.
Geertz, C. (1967): Old Societies and New States: The Quest for Modernity in Asia and
Africa. Free Press, New York.

31

Gennaioli, N., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2013): “Human
Capital and Regional Development,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 105—164.
Gennaioli, N., and I. Rainer (2007): “The Modern Impact of Precolonial Centralization in
Africa,” Journal of Economic Growth, 12(3), 185—234.
Gibbons, S., H. G. Overman, and E. Patacchini (2015): “Spatial Methods,” in Handbook
of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. by G. Duranton, V. J. Henderson, and W. C. Strange,
vol. 5, pp. 115—168. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Giuliano, P., and N. Nunn (2013): “The Transmission of Democracy: From the Village to
the Nation-State,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 103(3), 86—92.
Gordon, R. G., and B. F. Grimes (eds.) (2005): Ethnologue: Languages of the World. SIL
International, Dallas, TX, 15th ed. edn.
Grosfeld, I., A. Rodnyansky, and E. Zhuravskaya (2013): “Persistent Antimarket Culture: A Legacy of the Pale of Settlement after the Holocaust,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 5(3), 189—226.
Grosfeld, I., and E. Zhuravskaya (2015): “Cultural vs. Economic Legacies of Empires:
Evidence from the Partition of Poland,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 43(1), 55—75.
Grosjean, P. (2011): “The Institutional Legacy of the Ottoman Empire: Islamic Rule and
Financial Development in South Eastern Europe,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 39(1),
1—16.
Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman (1991): Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy.
MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Hall, R. E., and C. I. Jones (1999): “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output Per Worker Than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(1), 83—116.
Harari, M., and E. La Ferrara (2014): “Conflict, Climate and Cells: A Disaggregated
Analysis,” Mimeo, MIT and Bocconi University.
Heldring, L. (2016): “Violence and the State: Evidence from Rwanda’s ’Decade of Atrocities’,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Henderson, V., T. Squires, A. Storeygard, and D. Weil (2017): “The Global Distribution of Economic Activity: Nature, History, and the Role of Trade,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, forthcoming.
32

Henderson, V. J., A. Storeygard, and D. N. Weil (2012): “Measuring Economic Growth
from Outer Space,” American Economic Review, 102(2), 994—1028.
Herbst, J. (2000): States and Power in Africa: Comprative Lessons in Authority and Control.
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Heston, A., and R. Summers (1996): “International Price and Quantity Comparisons: Potentials and Pitfalls,” American Economic Review, 86(2), 20—24.
Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten (2011): “Penn World Table Version 7.0,” Center for International Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of
Pennsylvania.
Hjort, J., and J. Poulsen (2017): “The Arrival of Fast Internet and Employment in Africa,”
NBER Working Paper 23582.
Hodler, R., and P. A. Raschky (2014): “Regional Favoritism,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 995—1033.
Hopkins, A. (2009): “The New Economic History of Africa,” Journal of African History,
50(2), 155—177.
Hsu, F.-C., K. E. Baugh, T. Ghosh, M. Zhizhin, and C. D. Elvidge (2015): “DMSP-OLS
Radiance Calibrated Nighttime Lights Time Series with Intercalibration,” Remote Sensing,
7(2), 1855—1876.
Jedwab, R., and A. Storeygard (2016): “The Heterogeneous Eﬀects of Transportation
Investments: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa 1960-2010,” Mimeo, Tufts University.
Jerven, M. (2013): Poor Numbers: How We Are Misled by African Development Statistics
and What to Do about It. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Johnson, S., W. Larson, C. Papageorgiou, and A. Subramanian (2013): “Is Newer
Better? Penn World Table Revisions and Their Impact on Growth Estimates,” Journal of
Monetary Economics, 60(2), 255—274.
Kiszewski, A., A. Mellinger, A. Spielman, P. Malaney, S. E. Sachs, and J. Sachs
(2004): “A Global Index Representing the Stability of Malaria Transmission,” American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 70(5), 486—498.
Klenow, P. J., and A. Rodríguez-Clare (1997): “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?,” in NBER Macroeconomics Annual, ed. by B. Bernanke,
and J. J. Rotemberg, vol. 12, pp. 73—103. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

33

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2008): “The Economic Consequences of Legal Origins,” Journal of Economic Literature, 46(2), 285—332.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny (1998): “Law and
Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106(6), 1113—1155.
La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer (2008): “The Unoﬃcial Economy and Economic Development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2008(2), 275—352.
Levine, R., and D. Renelt (1992): “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions,” American Economic Review, 2(4), 942—963.
Li, X., D. Li, H. Xu, and C. Wu (2017): “Intercalibration between DMSP/OLS and VIIRS
Night-Time Light Images to Evaluate City Light Dynamics of Syria’s Major Human Settlement durin Syrian Civil War,” International Journal of Remote Sensing, 38(21), 5934—5951.
Logan, C. (2009): “Selected Chiefs, Elected Councillors and Hybrid Democrats: Popular Perspectives on the Co-existence of Democracy and Traditional Authority,” Journal of Modern
African Studies, 47(1), 101—128.
Lowes, S., and E. Montero (2015): “Blood Rubber: The Eﬀects of Labor Coercion on
Development and Culture in the Democratic Republic of Congo,” Working paper, Harvard
University, Department of Economics.
Lucas, R. E. J. (1988): “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 22(1), 3—42.
Manacorda, M., and A. Tesei (2017): “Liberation Technology: Mobile Phones and Political
Mobilization in Africa,” Mimeo, Queen Mary College.
Margo, R. A. (2017): “The Integration of Economic History into Economics,” NBER Working
Paper 23538.
Marx, B., T. Stoker, and T. Suri (2016): “There Is No Free House: Ethnic Patronage in
a Kenyan Slum,” Working paper, MIT, Sloan School of Management.
Mauro, P. (1995): “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3), 681—
712.
Mayshar, J., O. Moav, Z. Neeman, and L. Pascali (2015): “Cereals, Appropriability and
Hierarchy,” CEPR Discussion Paper 10742.

34

McCallum, J. (1995): “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,”
American Economic Review, 85(3), 615—623.
Mellander, C., J. Lobo, K. Stolarick, and Z. Matheson (2015): “Night-Time Light
Data: A Good Proxy Measure for Economic Activity?,” PloS ONE, 10(10).
Michalopoulos, S. (2012): “The Origins of Ethnolinguistic Diversity,” American Economic
Review, 102(4), 1508—1539.
Michalopoulos, S., A. Naghavi, and G. Prarolo (2018): “Trade and Geography in the
Spread of Islam,” Economic Journal, doi:10.1111/ecoj.12557.
Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013): “Pre-colonial Ethnic Institutions and
Contemporary African Development,” Econometrica, 81(1), 113—152.
(2014): “National Institutions and Subnational Development in Africa,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(1), 151—213.
(2015): “On the Ethnic Origins of African Development: Traditional Chiefs and Precolonial Political Centralization,” Academy of Management (Perspectives), 29(1), 32—71.
(2016): “The Long-Run Eﬀects of the Scramble for Africa,” American Economic
Review, 106(7), 1802—1848.
(eds.) (2017): The Long Economic and Political Shadow of History: Vol. 1: A Global
View. VoxEU. PDF e-book.
Michalopoulos, S., L. Putterman, and D. N. Weil (2016): “The Influence of Ancestral
Lifeways on Individual Economic Outcomes in Sub-Saharan Africa,” NBER Working Paper
21907.
Miguel, E., and M. Kremer (2004): “Worms: Identifying Impacts on Education and Health
in the Presence of Treatment Externalities,” Econometrica, 72(1), 159—217.
Moscona, J., N. Nunn, and J. Robinson (2017): “Social Structure and Conflict: Evidence
from Sub-Saharan Africa,” Mimeo, Harvard University.
Murdock, G. P. (1959): Africa: Its Peoples and their Culture History. McGraw-Hill, New
York.
(1967): Ethnographic Atlas: A Summary. University of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh,
PA.
35

Nunn, N. (2008): “The Long Term Eﬀects of Africa’s Slave Trades,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 123(1), 139—176.
(2014): Historical Development, vol. 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Nunn, N., and D. Puga (2012): “Ruggedness: The Blessing of Bad Geography in Africa,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), 20—36.
Nunn, N., and L. Wantchekon (2011): “The Slave Trade and the Origins of Mistrust in
Africa,” American Economic Review, 101(7), 3221—3252.
Osafo-Kwaako, P., and J. A. Robinson (2013): “Political Centralization in Pre-colonial
Africa,” Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(1), 6—21.
Oto-Peralías, D., and D. Romero-Avila (2017): “Historical Frontiers and the Rise of
Inequality. The Case of the Frontier of Granada,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 15(1), 54—98.
Pinkovskiy, M., and X. Sala-i-Martin (2016a): “Lights, Camera... Income! Illuminating the National Accounts – Household Survey Debate,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
131(2), 579—631.
Pinkovskiy, M., and X. Sala-i-Martin (2016b): “Newer Need Not Be Better: Evaluating
the Penn World Tables and the World Development Indicators Using Nighttime Lights,”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staﬀ Report 778.
Pinkovskiy, M. L. (2017): “Growth Discontinuities at Borders,” Journal of Economic
Growth, 22(2), 145—192.
Rappaport, J., and J. D. Sachs (2003): “The United States as a Coastal Nation,” Journal
of Economic Growth, 8(1), 5—46.
Reynal-Querol, M., and J. Montalvo (2016): “Ethnic Diversity and Growth: Revisiting
the Evidence,” Mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.
Romer, P. M. (1990): “Endogenous Technical Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98(5),
S71—S102.
Sachs, J. (2005): The End of Poverty: Economic Possibilities for Our Time. Penguin Books,
New York, NY.

36

Sala-i-Martin, X., G. Doppelhofer, and R. I. Miller (2004): “Determinants of LongTerm Growth: A Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE) Approach,” American
Economic Review, 94(4), 813—835.
Schulze, M.-S., and N. Wolf (2009): “On the Origins of Border Eﬀects: Insights from the
Habsburg Empire,” Journal of Economic Geography, 9(1), 117—136.
Scott, J. C. (2009): The Art of Not Being Governed: An Anarchist History of Upland
Southeast Asia. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
Small, C., F. Pozzi, and C. D. Elvidge (2005): “Spatial Analysis of Global Urban Extent
from DMSP-OLS Night Lights,” Remote Sensing of Environment, 96(3-4), 277—291.
Sullivan, W. T. (1991): “Earth at Night: An Image of the Nighttime Earth Based on Cloudfree Satellite Photographs,” in Light Pollution, Radio Interference, and Space Debris, ASP
Conference Series, ed. by P. Collier, and A. Hoeﬄer, vol. 17, pp. 11—14. IAU Colloquium
112.
Varian, H. R. (2014): “Big Data: New Tricks for Econometrics,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(2), 3—28.
Weidmann, N. B., and S. Schutte (2017): “Using Night Light Emissions for the Prediction
of Local Wealth,” Journal of Peace Research, 54(2), 125—140.

37

