NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNITED STATES-JAPAN
ECONOMIC RELATIONS

Rachel MCCu1Joch

Working Paper No. 2408

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue

Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

Support from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation
is gratefully acknowledged.
The research reported here is part of the NBER's research
program in International
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2408
October 1987

United States-Japan Economic Relations

A B S T R A CT

The bilateral relationship with Japan now dominates American
thinking on the benefits and costs of foreign trade. This paper
reevaluates the past and future course of U.S.-Japan economic
relations.
It identifies six distinct aspects of the
relationship that may underlie the continuing friction:
bilateral imbalance on merchandise
trade, capital flows from
Japan to the United States, the
yen/dollar
exchange rate,
sectoral trade distortions,
Japan's
technological
catch-up, and
societal differences. For each source of conflict,
the main
causes and potential remedies are assessed.
Several important conclusions emerge from the analysis.
First, although the bilateral trade and capital-account
imbalances were produced
primarily by macroeconomic factors and
can therefore be viewed as
"temporary" rather than long-term
developments, elimination of the imbalances without serious
damage may be difficult to achieve. In terms of sectoral
adjustments, the U.S.-Japan relationship is entering a new phase
as the two nations grow more similar in terms of technology base,
abundance of capital and skilled labor, and per capita income.
Two-way trade in technology and in technologybased services will
become increasingly important, while both nations will cope with
similar problems of adjustment to pressure from a new tier of
competitors in Asia and elsewhere. As the
aggregate imbalances
diminish, sectoral trade conflict will be Concentrated
on the two
ends of the technology
spectrum, with issues raised both by
conflicting approaches to the phasing out of uncompetitive
industries and by the nurturing of new technologybased
industries.

Rachel McCulloch
Department of Economics
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02173

October 1987

UNITED STATES-JAPAN ECONOMIC RELATIONS
Rachel McCulloch

Brandeis University and NBER

The bilateral relationship with Japan now dominates American

thinking on the benefits and costs of foreign trade. Japan has
become the model of all things modern and efficient, the standard
against which the United States measures its own economy and

finds itself wanting. But Japan is also firmly established as
the villain in the industrial adjustment woes that have plagued
the United States in recent years; most Americans remain unaware

that Japan has encountered many of the same difficulties in
reducing excess capacity, often in the same industries.

Such paradoxes typify the intense and stormy relationship

between the world's economic superpowers. Against a background
of ever-increasing bilateral imbalances, ever-escalating

protectionist rhetoric, and even some action at the official
level, individual Americans continue to vote with their dollars

for still more Japanese imports. Can U.S. producers hope to
reverse the trend? Can American consumers be persuaded to give
up their Toyotas and their Sonys in favor of domestic goods?

These questions are themselves rapidly becoming obsolete. Thanks
to the recent flood of Japanese direct investments into U.S.

manufacturing industries, it is now often possible to "buy
American" without sacrificing Japanese design and quality.

2

This paper reevaluates the past and future course of U.S.-

Japan economic relations. The first section asks whether there
is indeed a "Japan problem" and, if so, exactly what that problem

is. Section 2 examines the macroeconomic roots of the U.S.Japan bilateral trade imbalance and weighs alternative

macroeconomic remedies. Section 3 deals with trade issues at the

sectoral level. Section 4 reviews the technological rivalry
between the United States and Japan. Section 5 draws some
conclusions and looks to the future of the relationship.

3
1.

Is There a Japan Problem?

Given the surfeit of recent writings, both scholarly and

popular, on the unprecedented size and

continuing growth of the

U.S. -Japan trade imbalance, it may seem odd to ask what the

problem is, let alone whether a problem exists. Yet in some
important respects, Japan is perhaps better seen as part of the
solution rather than the source of the problem. To see why, it
is helpful to examine the various aspects of the U.S. -Japan

economic relationship that may underlie the continuing friction.

Here there are at least six possible candidates:

(1) Growing bilateral imbalance on merchandise trade,
Particularly on trade in manufactured goods

(2) Growing net capital inflows from Japan to the United
States

(3) The yen/dollar exchange rate and perhaps also the
present system of exchange-rate determination

(4) Sectoral nontariff barriers (whether real or imagined)
limiting Japanese imports of U.S. products and Japanese

trade-distorting industrial policies, and export

incentives depriving U.S. firms of sales at home and in
third- country markets

(5) Successful emulation by Japan of the technological
supremacy of U.S. industry
(6)

Social, economic, political, and cultural differences
between the two nations.

4

These categories are not mutually exclusive. Automotive
products loom so large in total bilateral trade that this
"sectoral" issue necessarily has implications for aggregate

imbalances. The narrowing technological gap is intimately linked
to the sectoral composition of trade and is itself affected by

Japanese policies to promote economic growth. And while cultural
and social conditions in, say, Indonesia are equally exotic to an
American observer, Americans are much more interested in -- and
worried about --

contrasts

between Japan and the United States

precisely because of the growing economic rivalry. Still, it is
helpful to sort out the relative importance of each type of
irritant and to examine the main causes and potential remedies in
each.

1.1. Aggregate imbalance

Highly aggregated measures of bilateral interaction are
regarded by most economists as the visible "symptoms" of
underlying macroeconomic conditions -- and, specifically,

caused either by defects of trade or industrial policies at home

or by skillful application of the same abroad. While the
symptoms are themselves problematic, the causes and thus the
effective potential remedies are to be found at the macroeconomic

level. Yet the justification of every new proposal for trade
legislation prominently features the latest hitherto unimaginable

data on the nation's global external imbalance and bilateral
deficit with Japan - -

with

the strong implication that tough new

5

trade policies (or creative new competitiveness policies)
are the
measures required for the United States to redress the present
imbalance.

1.2. Capital inflows

Matching Japanese global surpluses on merchandise trade and
current account are massive foreign investments. The recent
rates have been rivaled only by the petrodollar flood of the
l970s. But the petrodollars
were recycled primarily through the
Eurodollar market and went ultimately to many borrowers. In
contrast, Japanese funds (autodollars?) have in large measure
moved directly into U.S. financial markets. Thus, while there is
no conceptual reason why the nation's largest bilateral
merchandise trade deficit and its largest bilateral capitalaccount surplus should be with the same trading partner, it is

certainly true in this instance. If the oil surpluses had
materialized later, or if U.S. fiscal policy had changed sooner,
it is likely that more liabilities of the U.S. Treasury would
now
be held by Saudi Arabia, and fewer by Japan.
The rapidly growing U.S. official debt to foreigners (or,
indeed, to anyone) raises important issues of intergenerational

equity. However, the concerns of many Americans focus on one
particular component of the capital inflows, direct foreign

investments in U.S. industries. On one hand, state and local
officials vie to attract new investments -jobs and the future
tax base are the main reasons. But
domestic firms worry about

6

new competition as well as the effects on their own labor costs
and taxes.

Apparently oblivious to U.S. official insistence on national
treatment by foreign governments for American subsidiaries
abroad, the president of Ford Motor Company called in early 1987

for further reductions in auto imports from Japan, to compensate
for increased production by Japanese plants in the United States.

In the troubled U.S. semiconductor industry, national security
concerns were raised in objection to the proposed acquisition of
Fairchild Semiconductor by Fujitsu, Japan's largest computer
company.

1

1.3. The dollar/yen exchange rate
The exchange rate, too, is viewed by economists as

fundamentally a symptom rather than a cause. However, the
relationships determining exchange-rate movements are poorly

understood. Professional opinion remains divided particularly on
the appropriate role and effectiveness of official intervention
in foreign-exchange markets, either directly, via purchases or
sales of foreign exchange, or indirectly, via manipulation of
discount rates.

Through 1985, dollar strength offered a plausible
explanation of the nation's growing deficit on merchandise trade.
1

In August 1987, National Semiconductor Corporation
announced that it would buy Fairchild - - at what industry
analysts described as a bargain price, far less than that offered
earlier by Fujitsu. National was one of several U.S. companies
that opposed the sale to Fujitsu.

7

But the subsequent dramatic decline in the dollar failed
to
induce a corresponding turnaround in U.S. trade performance.
Analysts then rushed in to explain the non-event with traditional
J-curves and newer "hysteresis"
effects. While differing in
their microeconomic underpinnings, both theories
suggest that for
foreign trade, what goes up does not necessarily come down,
or at

least not as quickly as

policymakers would like. As a result of
continuing growth in the U.S. trade deficit, a yen/dollar
exchange rate of 160, seen in 1986 by American officials as an
appropriate policy target, had given way to target values of 140
or below by mid-1987.

1.5. Who's the problem?

While the domestic

consequences of large bilateral

imbalances and major exchange-rate

movements surely constitute

unsolved problems for U.S. policymakers, it is difficult to make

a convincing case that the basic fault lies with the Japanese

rather than elsewhere. True, the imbalances reflect mismatch
between the macroeconomic
conditions and policies of Japan and
the United States. But if the main problem is simply the

large

aggregate imbalance, the main cause is macroeconomic policy in
the United States.
Indeed, only Japan's offsetting surpluses permitted the U.S.

economy to enjoy moderate growth during the l980s while
continuing on an unchanged macroeconomic course.

In retrospect,

perhaps the United States should have altered its fiscal policies

8

sooner. Does that mean Japan is at fault for leaving the United
States "free to choose" instead of being forced to confront
immediately the full implications of its actions?

1.6. Sectoral distortions

Although customarily raised along with the issue of growing
bilateral imbalance, sectoral trade distortions present a
conceptually different type of problem for the United States.

The primary effect of such policies is to reduce the mutual

benefits from trade based on comparative advantage. While
individual firms and even industries often stand to gain from
distortive sectoral policies, national gains from export
promotion or import restriction are likely to be the exception
rather than the rule.2

The conclusion that trade policies, whether good or bad,

affect mainly the composition of trade rather than the aggregate
balance stems from a general-equilibrium view of economic

activity. Simply put, although a trade policy may change the
balance of trade for a particular product or even an industry,

offsets arise via induced movements in exchange rates and input
costs, foreign retaliation, and other indirect channels.3
2

For a summary of the practical difficulties in using
trade policy tIstrategicallyt to promote national advantage, see
Richardson (1986).

See McCulloch and Richardson (1986, pp. 61-64). Although
protectionist measures are traditionally condemned as beggar-thyneighbor policies, in reality they often turn out to be beggarthy-brother policies, impairing performance of other industries
in the same country. This is an important distinction for public

9

Likewise, any positive employment effects in a specific
sector are offset by reduced
employment opportunities in other

areas. Moreover, to the extent that the jobs "saved" are in
relatively inefficient firms or in activities where the United
States has lost comparative
advantage, the overall composition of
employment opportunities may be adversely affected.4 Still, this
does not alter the important
economic and political issues raised
by the distribution of the gains from maintaining

relatively open

international markets.

A separate concern is the changing composition of U.S.
production. If the level of domestic
activity in particular
manufacturing industries has important positive effects on other
parts of the economy, loss of market share in such "strategic"
activities could reduce future U.S. industrial competitiveness

across the board. No clear evidence of such externalities is
yet
available, but some fear that further
delay in reversing present
servants, who seem relatively unconcerned about costs inflicted
outside the nation's (or even the congressional district's)
borders. For some examples of
undercutting indirect effects of
trade policies, see Baldwin (1982).
An Opposite argument is sometimes made by analysts
concerned about deindustrialization
of the U.S. economy. They
believe that foreign targeting of basic
and hightechnology
manufacturing industries reduces u.s.
employment opportunities in
"high-valueatI activities. But high
value-added per worker
may simply reflect firms' optimizing
responses
to strong unions,
rather than a technological
characteristic
of
the
industry. It
is far from obvious that
national policy ought to bolster the
resulting wage advantage by limiting imports. In the case of
steel, probably the industry most
targeted worldwide,
employment in the United States andfrequently
other
industrialized
countries has dropped
dramatically while wages remain well above
the U.S. average for comparable
skills and experience.

10

trends may leave the United States at a permanent competitive
disadvantage.

1.7. How important are trade distortions?

The existence of subtle trade-distorting policies and
industrial practices on the part of Japan is acknowledged by

almost all international economists. The more interesting
question is how important such policies are in shaping the
overall relationship between Japan and the rest of the world, and

particularly with the United States. While there are differences
of opinion concerning the importance of such distortions to the
performance of individual sectors (see, for example, Borrus and
Zysman, 1985), there is broad agreement that the consequences for
the size of the aggregate imbalance are minor.

Even when there are significant benefits to be achieved by
negotiating reductions in sectoral trade distortions, it is
crucial that this task be divorced from the more pressing

macroeconomic issues.5 The persistent linkage of aggregate and
sectoral issues allows policymakers to delay needed macroeconomic

remedies and promotes U.S. allegations of bad faith on the part
of Japanese officials when inappropriate means fail to achieve
their stated ends.

Moreover, even the existence of a real distortion does
not assure that "corrective" policies will actually make things
better rather than worse. Examples such as textiles and apparel,
steel, autos, and semiconductors suggest that cartelization, not
active competition based on comparative advantage, is the likely
outcome of sectoral policy initiatives.

11

1.8. Thchno1ogjca rivalry
Perhaps most significant to the long-range development of
the U.S. -Japan relationship is the successful emulation
by Japan
of American technology.based
economic growth. While many nations
have sought to close the technology gap with the United States,
only Japan has come so far so fast.
and adapter of technologies

Once primarily an importer

developed elsewhere, Japan now rivals

the United States in many areas of industrial innovation.

Japan's challenge to American technological supremacy has
important implications for the composition of bilateral trade

flows. Through much of the post-World War II period, access to
superior technology allowed the United States to compete
effectively on world markets while

maintaining average wages well

above those abroad. U.S. industrial exports were
increasingly
concentrated in the hightechnology
industries, while the
remainder of U.S. manufacturing lost
ground to foreign suppliers.
But with the loss of its decisive
technological lead, U.S.
industry can no longer compete on the basis of unique products or
advanced processes alone. As a consequence, earnings in U.S.

manufacturing are becoming more closely linked to those in Japan
and other nations with access to advanced technologies and

to the

capital required to implement them.
Another long-term issue is the influence of the "Japanese
model" of industrial development
on policy choices of developing

nations, especially in Asia. Does the future hold "many Japans"

12

competing with the United States in world markets? South Korea
is often labeled the next Japan because of its successes in
promoting the same export industries -- successes fostered in

part by North American and European trade discrimination directed

at Japan's most competitive export industries. Nationalistic
Koreans reject the implied linkage with its one-time oppressor

but often privately admire Japan's economic strategy. Other
newly-industrializing nations are also studying Japan's
industrial policy and in some cases adopting certain elements.

The spectre of a world economy dominated by many nations all
saving, innovating, and exporting at Japanese rates raises
obvious concerns in the West.

Beyond the important but narrow issue of increased
competition in high-technology manufacturing industries, the
challenge to the U.S. lead in scientific and technological areas
may have implications for the nation's key role in global

security systems. This latter issue is linked to the ambivalence
of the United States and its allies regarding increases in

Japan's military expenditures. Japan's military budget for 1987
broached the "one percent threshhold" relative to gross national
product for the first time since the end of World War II.

1.9. Being different
The final but by no means minor problem area in U.S. -Japan

relations arises from the myriad social, political, and economic
structures of the Japanese nation that contrast so sharply with

13

their U.S. counterparts

While the net contribution of these

differences to relative

economic performance and to the bilateral
imbalances remains largely in the realm of conjecture,
many
serious suggestions for relieving tensions between the two
nations are based on efforts to reduce these differences,
whether
by making the United States more like Japan (higher
savings,

quality circles, a Cabinet1evel Department of Trade and
Industry) or by making Japan more like the United States
(deductability of mortgage interest, shorter work week, bigger

defense budget). Made forcefully, such suggestions in effect
challenge the relevance of traditional notions of national
sovereignty in an increasingly interdependent

world economy.

The importance of the many departures of Japanese

governmental and business practice from Western norms remains an
area of controversy even
among scholars. Overall, political
scientists such as Johnson (1982) seem more willing than
economists to attribute Japanese industrial and trade
successes
to unique structural features. But even economists are divided
on the importance of Japanese industrial policy and
government
firm relationships in comparison to a high savings rate
as key
factors underlying the "Japanese miracle."
Contrasting economic and political systems also complicate
the narrower issue of what constitutes a level playing field
in

trade and investment matters.

Allegations of sectoral trade

distortions often arise from differences in administrative
structure and industrial

organization. So far, neither u.s.

14

trade law nor the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)
has been able to deal effectively with the resulting disputes.
Bilateral negotiations and ad hoc agreements, often short-lived,
remain the major approach for addressing U.S.-Japan sectoral
trade conflicts.

A darker side of the contrasts between the two nations lies

below the surface. The overt U.S. racism of the World War II era
has receded, but subtle racism is a plausible explanation for the
very different official and private attitudes of Americans toward
Japan (and the newly-industrializing "four little dragons" of

Asia) and toward Canada or Europe. Government officials and the
media pass up no opportunity to remind the public of the
gargantuan U.S. deficit on trade with Japan, but how many
Americans realize that the nation's second largest bilateral
deficit is on trade with Canada?6
However, racial prejudice is a two-way street, as Prime
Minister Nakasone's well-publicized gaffe in 1986 amply

demonstrated. In a nation where careful checks of ancestry are
part of the usual preparation for marriage, many Japanese
privately view the eclipse of U.S. industrial might as the
inevitable consequence of its ethnic and racial diversity.
On this last score there may be grounds for some modest
6

Relative to gross national product, the Canadian surplus
on trade with the United States actually exceeds Japan's. But in
early 1987, Canadian government statisticians showed that U.S.
recording procedures have systematically missed certain U.S.
exports, particularly those transported by truck into Canada.
U.S. statistics have thus overstated the U.S. merchandise trade
deficit and particularly the bilateral deficit with Canada.

15

optimism The intensification of

economic ties between the United

States and Japan has promoted a great desire on the
part of each
nation for better
understanding of the other. Even if the

primary motivation on each side springs from the lure of a large
and lucrative foreign
market, the resulting familiarity with a

Previously alien and inscrutible

society can help to smooth those

frictions based on differences alone.

16
2.

Macroeconomic Roots of U.S. International Imbalance
Like an economic Sputnik, the rapid growth of the U.S. trade

imbalance galvanized the American public. To many observers,
escalation of the U.S. trade deficit in the l980s was simply
tangible and dramatic evidence of the nation's declining
industrial competitiveness, in turn reflecting erosion of the
commanding lead in science and technology the United States once

enjoyed. Others variously sought explanations in tradedistorting practices abroad, export disincentives at home, and

poor management practices of U.S. companies. Likewise, Japan's
ever-increasing surpluses were interpreted either as evidence of
Japanese bad faith in complying with agreements to open its
markets to foreign goods or as confirmation of the wisdom of
Japanese private and public economic management.

Each explanation spawned a detailed agenda of private and

public action designed to arrest the decline. As with any broad
policy initiative, both wise and foolish proposals have been

advanced in the name of increased competitiveness. But for
reasons discussed below, most of these proposals would do nothing
to reduce the aggregate imbalance.7

2.1. The U.S. budget deficit

While the competitiveness frenzy continued unabated, an
McCulloch (1985) and McCulloch and Richardson (1986)
examine in detail the types of policies usually recommended to
restore U.S. competitiveness and evaluate their likely effects
(or lack of effects) on the nation's overall trade balance or
current account.

17

alternative analysis offered a very different assessment of the

forces underlying rapid escalation of the U.S. trade deficit.
According to this view, promoted as early as 1982 by the Council
of Economic Advisors, the growth of the trade deficit was the
largely predictable result of a single important macroeconomic
development in the United States: a major increase in the size
of the federal budget deficit.

The corresponding prescription

for restoration of U.S. competitiveness: cut the budget deficit.

The Council's macroeconomic
disbelief and even ridicule,

explanation, initially met by

gained broad acceptance as the

continued tandem rise of the "twin deficits" offered further
circumstantial evidence in support of a linkage. The basic
insight was, at least after the fact,

a rather simple one. The

large increase in the federal deficit translated into a
comparable drop in the nation's total

saving, pushing up U.S.

interest rates. Drawn in by higher rates, foreign funds filled
the gap. But the foreign demand for U.S. assets also drove
up

the value of the dollar,

pricing U.S. goods out of many markets
at home and abroad. Thus, rather
than crowding out domestic
capital formation as some had initially feared, the larger
federal deficit crowded out domestic production of tradable
goods.

Like most simple explanations, this one was too simple. The

analysis focused on the U.S. demand for foreign funds but
slighted important factors that influenced the supply of those
funds to the U.S. market.
While the enlarged federal deficit

18

alone would have put upward pressure on domestic interest rates

and promoted U.S. capital inflows, the actual size of those
inflows was also the result of important "supply" factors in
international capital markets.

2.2. Capital inflows and exchange rates

In addition to its neglect of factors influencing the supply
of funds to U.S. borrowers, the conventional wisdom implied that
the appreciation of the dollar was a necessary consequence of the

inflow of foreign funds. In fact, the theoretical consequences
of a financial transfer for the exchange rate are ambiguous,

depending crucially on spending patterns at home and abroad. The
more similar those spending patterns and the larger the
proportion of total expenditure devoted to tradable goods, the
less the exchange rate would have to move to "effect" the
transfer of current purchasing power to the United States.
Thinking in these terms helps to explain how the dollar

could fall so much with capital inflows still rising. The
prolonged period of a very strong dollar caused permanent changes
in consumer information and in producer costs of serving the U.S.

market. Specifically, at a given exchange rate, more U.S.
consumers would choose foreign products over their domestic
counterparts when priced comparably in dollars, while foreign
producers would be able to set lower dollar prices for goods

aimed at the U.S. market. Both types of changes are hysteresis
effects. They rest on once-and-for-all changes in demand and

19

supply conditions, rather than the short-term

sluggishness,

especially of demand, that underlies the J-curve analysis.8
2.3. The

supply

of foreign funds

If growth in the federal budget deficit explains the
greatly
increased U.S. appetite for foreign funds, it is only one of
many
reason why foreign lenders stood ready to satisfy that appetite.
Other factors influencing the supply of foreign funds to U.S.
capital markets can be grouped into three

categories. Of these,

two apply to lenders

generally (including U.S. lenders, who cut
back their own foreign loans in favor of domestic alternatives),
while the third is specific to the

most important foreign lender,

Japan:

(1) Increased attractiveness of U.S. investments,
reflecting, among others, enhanced tax incentives for
capital formation, financial and industrial
deregulation, repeal of the withholding tax on earnings
of U.S. assets held by foreigners, and successful antiinflationary macroeconomic polic ies

(2) Reduced attractiveness of lending abroad, due to
economic stagnation in much of Europe and the debt
problems and capital flight affecting many lessdeveloped countries

(3) Increased capital outflows from Japan, resulting from
8

On supply-side hysteresis effects arising from economies
of scale and sunk costs, see Baldwin (1986).

20

liberalization of restrictions on capital outflows
(accelerated at the request of the United States as

part of the 1984 dollar-yen agreement9) and lower
Japanese budget deficits.

Even without the large increase in U.S. federal deficits, these
factors would have tended to push the U.S. capital account toward
surplus, putting upward pressure on the international value of
the dollar and downward pressure on U.S. merchandise trade
performance.

2.4. Stock adjustments and continuing flows

A further complication in the link between the U.S. budget
deficit and U.S. borrowing from abroad is that the rise in the
deficit created an ongoing demand for foreign capital, while the
inflows from abroad have reflected both one-time readjustments of
asset holdings in response to new market conditions and ongoing

supply effects. In the specific case of capital inflows from
Japan, the liberalization of capital outflows resulted in a
sizable shift of accumulated Japanese assets into U.S. securities

with higher yields. But the chronic surplus of Japanese private
savings over domestic absorption of those savings (by domestic
capital formation or government deficit spending) translates into

an ongoing supply influence that can be expected to push new

See Frankel (1985) for a review of this agreement. The
agreement was promoted as a means to raise the value of the yen
by increasing its role as a reserve currency. However, the
predictable short-run result, borne out by subsequent events, was
just the opposite.

21

capital into world markets year after year.
Over time, the resulting increases in foreign holdings of
U.S. assets and in U.S. holdings of foreign assets have direct
implications for the composition of the current account and for

the relative value of the dollar. The rising net indebtedness of
the United States should mean rising net outflows of interest and
profits, pushing the U.S. services account toward deficit. For a
given level of net capital inflow, rising debt service entails a
shrinking deficit on merchandise trade and less upward pressure
on the value of the dollar.'0 This compositional effect within

the balance of payments would tend to reinforce the influence of
hysteresis on equilibrium exchange rates.

2.5. Correcting the aggregate imbalance

Given the full set of contributing macroeconomic conditions,
what can be said about the outcomes of alternative corrective

policies? The U.S. external imbalance reflects an excess of
total "absorption" - - spending
(public plus private) for both
consumption and investment purposes -- over production in the
United States, and a corresponding shortfall of absorption

relative to production abroad. Measures to reduce the imbalance
can seek to reduce the U.S. spending excess or to reduce the
10

The assumption that net capital inflows are independent
of current earnings on past investments is, however, suspect.
Tax law in the United States and some other nations tends to
favor reinvestment abroad of current earnings from foreign
investments. Other governmental policies toward international
capital transactions may also link the rate of new investment to
current interest and profits.

22

foreign shortfall.

2.5.1. Reducing U.S. absorption
The most obvious choices for direct U.S. action have become

the bread and butter of national policy debate: raise taxes, cut

government spending, or both. A third alternative for bringing
total U.S. spending into line is to reduce domestic capital

formation. This option, seldom explicitly considered, has
obvious negative implications for the future growth of U.S.

productive capacity. However, it may be chosen by default if
policymakers are unable to cut total public and private spending
for other purposes, or if new taxes enacted to reduce the deficit
also reduce incentives for domestic investment.

Moreover, even a successful effort to reduce the budget
deficit need not produce a comparable reduction in the nation's

demand for capital imports. Although customarily described in
terms of the increased federal deficit, the root of the nation's
increased appetite for foreign funds (or, equivalently, of its

increased deficit on current account) is actually increased
spending --

specifically,

the increase in total domestic

absorption of goods and services. Because changes in the federal
government's plans for taxing and spending usually have important
effects on decisions of state and local governments and of the

private sector, merely reducing the federal deficit does not
necessarily have a comparable effect on total absorption; major

23

offsets are possible.11

2.5.2. Raising foreign absorption
As a practical matter, progress on deficit reduction has
been slow in coming, and conflicts between President Reagan and

the Democratica11ycontrolled U.S. Congress are likely to make
things even more difficult in 1987 and 1988.

Meanwhile, Treasury

Secretary James Baker III has pushed U.S. trading partners,
especially West Germany and Japan, to assume more responsibility

for effecting the desired adjustment. In the case of Japan,
proposals have focused on means to reduce the Japanese savings
surplus by increasing domestic consumption and investment

spending. This could perhaps be accomplished by general economic
stimulation, but the prospects are most favorable for narrowlytargeted policies intended to raise specific components of
Japanese spending.

The two areas mentioned most often in this connection are

housing and public works. For housing, relatively modest changes
in Japanese tax laws and financial regulation could make
mortgage-financed owner-occupied housing far more attractive than
it is today, thereby presumably increasing total expenditures in
11

An ongoing debate concerns the relative effects of taxfinanced and bond-financed government expenditures. The issues
are complex, hinging on such imponderables as the public's
anticipation of future changes in tax rates. An extreme view is
that, because of public anticipation of future tax liability,
bond-financed spending has the same overall effect on today's
absorption as tax-financed spending.

24

that category and probably overall.12

Increased government spending for highways, railroads, and
especially sewers is a second potential area of expanded domestic

absorption. By Western standards, Japanese spending in these
areas is surprisingly low. Fewer than three Japanese households
in five are connected to a central sewer system; incredibly, the
ratio is only about four out of five even in the Tokyo/Yokohama
area, one of the world's most densely populated urban centers.13
But second-guessing such domestic spending decisions seenis of

doubtful efficacy, and of even more doubtful appropriateness.

One last area for a major increase in Japan's domestic

absorption is defense. Currently at a postwar high of just over
one percent of gross national product, Japan's defense
expenditures are, for example, only about half those of neutral

Switzerland and a third those of West Germany.14 Other major
U.S. allies spend still more. Should the United States urge
Japan to share more of the collective burden of global security?
Viewed strictly on its economic merits, this seems a more
appropriate area than housing or sewers for pressure from other
12

Saxonhouse (1985) characterizes the Japanese as
"notorious target savers," with future housing a main target.
This is a critical point, since increased spending in any one
category does not necessarily translate into higher overall
spending (lower saving). Saxonhouse also notes a possible bonus
from increased housing expenditures for other spending: more
living space may lift a major constraint on purchases of
consumer durables.
13

14

Japan 1986, p. 88.
Japan 1986, p. 86.

25

nations. However, proposals for a substantial increase in
Japanese defense spending have so far encountered formidable
political resistance both in Japan and in the United States.
While acknowledging that Japan's capital account surplus

mirrors the nation's imbalance between saving and domestic
spending, some analysts believe that the underlying macroeconomic

imbalance is not appropriately viewed as exogenous. Rapp (1986)
and Balassa (1986) link high Japanese savings to profits

generated by sectoral protection. If this effect were
quantitatively important, import liberalization would, in
addition to its expected effects on sectoral composition of trade
flows, raise Japanese domestic absorption and thus reduce the
aggregate trade surplus.

2.5.3. Redirecting foreign funds
If the United States doesn't want Japan's capital surpluses,

perhaps other borrowers do. An important alternative to
increasing Japanese domestic absorption is redirecting Japan's

foreign lending toward other nations, especially less-developed

nations. Debt problems have led many developing nations to
restrict imports of capital equipment supplied by the United

States and other industrial nations. With more purchasing power
at their disposal, these nations would be able to resume such
imports; U.S. exporters would benefit accordingly.

In the past decade Japan has increased by nearly 50 percent
its share of CNP devoted to official development assistance,

26

while the U.S. share, initially the same (0.24 percent), remained

unchanged. 3ut compared to other prosperous nations, Japan's
spending is still on the low side.

Although the Japanese have in fact continued to step up
their spending for foreign aid, the increases have not always met

with cheers from other donor nations. The problem arises from
informal arrangements that link aid to expenditures for Japanese

goods and services. While little aid is explicitly tied, aid is
rarely committed without specific project plans; potential
borrowers rely on Japanese expert advice in formulating the
plans, which typically call for imports of Japanese capital

equipment and other products. Mixed-credit financing is a
related problem, although Japan has not been the major offender
in this area.

Commercial lending and direct foreign investments in
developing countries are another means by which Japanese surplus

savings could be "recycled." Given the ongoing debt problems of
many developing nations, this route currently looks hazardous to

both potential lenders and potential borrowers. In the longer
term, however, it is likely that "normal" capital-flow relations

between rich and poor nations will be reestablished, with funds
from Japan playing an important role.

2.5.4. Taxing capital imports
Only the net inflow of capital from abroad has kept the
greatly increased federal deficit from pushing U.S. interest

27

rates through the roof. Instead, the U.S. trade deficit has gone
through the roof. Until U.S. domestic absorption can be cut, the
nation will continue to face the same basic choice between high

interest rates and foreign borrowing. Over time, the exact terms
of the trade-off will depend on investors' preferences, but the
United States can tilt that choice by taxing capital imports.'5
Controlling U.S. capital imports would shift a greater part
of the adjustment to higher deficits onto U.S. lenders and
borrowers, rather than allowing much of the "crowding out" to be

exported. From the U.S. perspective, the effect is similar to
what would be obtained via expansion abroad. However, there are
two potentially important differences. First, without specific
expansionary policies in place abroad, imposition of capital
controls by the United States could push the rest of the world

into a deflationary spiral. Second, and perhaps key for some
U.S. officials, capital controls would reverse recent U.S. gains
in penetrating foreign (especially Japanese) markets for
financial services.

15

This has been proposed in recent years by James Tobin
and Rudiger Dornbusch, among others. See Dornbusch and Frankel
(1987).

28
3.

Sectoral Issues

Allegations about Japan's relatively closed markets for
industrial products reflect concerns of much longer standing than

the aggregate imbalances of recent years. The encroachment of
Japanese products into the U.S. market and their displacement of
U.S. exports in markets elsewhere is likewise an old story, not a

new one. However, emergence of a very large bilateral imbalance
has exacerbated those longtime concerns, since the impact of
competition with Japan is concentrated in a small number of U.S.
manufacturing industries.16

Bilateral friction on agricultural trade is also an old

story. However, with U.S. global surpluses on agricultural trade
shrinking rapidly, one consequence has been renewed focus on the
import barriers of Japan, already the largest market for U.S.

agricultural exports. Changes in Japan's current policies in
support of domestic agriculture, and especially of rice farming,
could mean still larger imports of food from the United States.

But, like other industrialized nations, Japan has so far found
reductions in its expensive agricultural support policies

politically unpalatable. Indeed, were the United States to
reform its own costly and distortionary policies toward
agriculture as it has urged the Japanese to do, any increase in
16

Conversely, a return to a more "normal" pattern of
global capital flows should reduce sectoral frictions. Krugman
(1986) and Petri (1987) use this logic to anticipate some
reversal of recent competitive pressures on U.S. industry. Based
on simulation analysis, Petri concludes that output structures in
the United States and Japan could become quite similar by the
l990s.

29

Japanese imports of rice might well come from Thailand or China
rather than from the United States.

3.1. Are exports and imports separate issues?
Are the issues raised by Japan's low imports and high
exports two separate concerns, or are they linked aspects of a
single developmental policy?

Some argue that market closure,

along with government assistance for generic research and
development projects, was an essential element of the Japanese

national policy responsible for subsequent export successes in
motor vehicles and electronics.17

Moreover, as described in the previous section, Japan's
overall trade balance is determined largely by macroeconomic

influences. Any broad import-inhibiting factors, whether
national policy or industrial practice, ought therefore also to

inhibit exports. Conversely, any successful move to liberalize
imports will likewise promote exports - -

although

this is hardly

a result U.S. trade negotiators are likely to stress.18
A third link between exports and imports arises from Japan's

poor endowment of natural resources. For any given trade balance
consistent with macroeconomic conditions, Japan's heavy

17

For example, Borrus, Tyson, and Zysman (1987) make this
argument for the case of the semiconductor industry.
18

If sectoral liberalization does reduce aggregate
Japanese savings, as suggested by Rapp (1986) and Balassa (1986),
the induced rise in Japanese exports would not fully offset the
rise in imports.

30

dependence on imported oil and food means a correspondingly
larger surplus on trade in manufactures (or in services --

but

Japan currently runs a deficit on services trade).19 Still, the
required surplus could be achieved through higher-than-average
manufactured exports, as in the case of West Germany, rather than
lower-than-average manufactured imports (Lawrence, 1987).

Perhaps more important than the direct effect on the
composition of Japan's trade flows, perennial dependence on
imports of raw materials and food has shaped national attitudes,

public and private, toward importing. To many Japanese, their
economy's extreme vulnerability to changes in global market
conditions both for raw-material imports such as oil and for
manufactured exports casts an omnipresent shadow over today's
prosperity.

3.2. Japan's low import share
In terms of conventional trade-distorting government
practices, Japan was formerly a major offender among industrial

nations but now must be counted as one of the most open.2°
19

Krugman (1986) links the "Japan problem" of rapidly
growth of manufactured exports to the United States to large
increases in world oil prices from 1973 until 1984. His analysis
suggests that lower oil prices will translate into a higher value
of the yen and slower growth of Japanese manufactured exports.
20

Komiya and Itoh (1986) provide a detailed accounted of
the gradual liberalization of Japanese imports. Saxonhouse
(1983, 1985) documents the minor importance currently of
conventional instruments of protection. Ahearn (1985) divides
current Japanese import barriers into four categories: formal,
regulatory, strategic, and business and cultural. He concludes
that the most onerous remaining barriers to manufactured imports

31

Foreign products and services, from IBM to McDonald's, are to be

found everywhere. Yet the Japanese ratio of imports to gross
national product and especially of manufactured imports to total
imports remain strikingly low in comparison to other industrial

countries. Many of the "foreign" goods now so conspicuous in
Japanese daily life are in fact produced domestically by local
affiliates or licensees of foreign companies.

Are the low import ratios evidence of subtle trade barriers
or simply a reflection of transport costs and an atypical factor

endowment? Much of the evidence on Japan's "hidden" barriers to
entry is anecdotal (e.g., Rapp, 1986; Balassa, 1986). While
attesting to real frustrations experienced by U.S. producers in
their attempts to serve a potentially lucrative market, such
anecdotes provide little indication of whether public or private
action in Japan differs significantly from that in, say, France.

Christopher (1986) goes further, suggesting that while
disappointed would-be exporters have clear motives for making
their grievances known, successful U.S. exporters and direct

investors wisely shun publicity. Kept from the public eye, their
successes -- and resulting profits -- are less likely to promote

further entry by competing U.S. producers. If so, anecdotal
evidence may be a seriously biased measure of import barriers.

are in the last category, where Japanese public policy has
relatively little direct impact.

32

3.3. Econometric evidence

Several researchers have used econometric methods to
determine whether Japan's trade structure is basically a
reflection of relative costs or has been shaped significantly by

hidden but important barriers to imports. Starting from standard
models linking trade patterns to national factor endowments and
other determinants of relative cost, these researchers examine
the deviations of actual trade flows from those predicted by the
underlying model.

While based on different specifications, data, and time
periods, studies by Saxonhouse (1983, 1985), Bergsten and Cline
(1985), and Noland (1987) all found Japanese trade to be

adequately explained by the same basic determinants as that of
other areas, thus rejecting a major role for import barriers in

Japan compared to its trading partners. In contrast, Zalassa
(1986) found significant shortfalls of Japanese imports relative

to values predicted from a model very similar to Bergsten and

Cline's. Noland conjectures that the conflicting results reflect
differences in the samples and in the definitions of the
independent variables but emphasizes that neither set of

regressions is derived from a formal model. Deviations of actual
from predicted values, ascribed by Balassa to trade policies
applied, may simply indicate misspecification of the regression
equation.

Noland 's own regression equations are derived from an
explicit two-sector model incorporating differentiated products

33

and scale economies, an approach motivated by recent developments
in the theory of international trade (e.g., Helpman and Krugman,

1985). Despite the different theoretical underpinnings, Noland
draws basically the same conclusion as Saxonhouse and Bergsten
and Cline, that Japanese exports, imports, and total trade "do

not appear to be out of the ordinary." But in interpreting his
own results as well as those of earlier researchers, Noland
emphasizes the need for caution in making any strong inference
from the size of residuals, given uncertainty as to specification
of the "true model."21

Although intended to cast light on the extent of Japan's

sectoral barriers to imports, the studies by Bergsten and dine,
Balassa, and Noland all used aggregate trade data, while
Saxonhouse employed industry data but focused on net exports

rather than imports. To focus directly on sectoral anomalies,
Lawrence (1987) used import, export, and production data for 22

manufacturing industries. Like Noland, Lawrence adopted a
theoretical framework incorporating differentiated products and

scale economies. However, while Noland treated manufacturing as
a single sector, in the Lawrence model each manufacturing
industry produces a separate differentiated product.
21

Leamer (1984) gives a more comprehensive discussion of
both specification issues and data problems associated with
empirically relating resource endowments to trade patterns, also
emphasizing the problem of sensitivity. While he acknowledges
the probable importance of scale economies, for practical reasons
his own specification is based on a model with constant returns.
Leamer does not focus on the existence of significant distortions
but concludes from his analysis that resource endowments provide
a "surprisingly good" explanation of the trade data.

34

The critical step in Lawrence's analysis is the assumption

that tastes are similar across countries. With the additional
assumption of no transport costs or trade barriers, a country's
share in each market will then be proportional to its share in
world production and independent of the size of the aggregate
trade balance; larger countries will thus be more "closed" as

measured by trade flows as a share of GNP. The implied
relationship between a country's production and trade in each
industry is used by Lawrence to infer the existence of "unusual
barriers" to imports at the industry level.

Lawrence's data show that the industrialized countries are
remarkably similar in patterns of domestic production and use

(consumption plus investment) by industry. Contrary to the
conventional wisdom, Japan is not unusual in its overall export
performance, although Japan's manufactured exports are highly

concentrated in a small number of industries. But Japan j
atypical in its low manufactured imports and the very minor

extent of intra-industry trade. From his regression analysis of
industry trade and production data, Lawrence concludes that
"unusual barriers reduce Japanese imports of manufactured goods
substantially -- by about forty percent." As Lawrence notes, his

results are not inconsistent with Noland's finding of no

significant anomaly in Japan's aggregate trade. Since
manufactured goods were less than a quarter of Japan's total
imports in 1980, substantial "underimporting" in some sectors
could be masked by the use of aggregate data.

35

Despite his striking result, Lawrence casts doubt on
sectoral trade liberalization as a cure-all for aggregate
imbalances, suggesting that the increase in manufactured imports
thereby produced would be largely offset by an associated rise in

exports. Thus, the main effect would be an expansion of Japan's
intra-industry trade, rather than a dramatic reduction in the
nation's surplus on trade in manufactured goods.

A more basic

issue is, as with the earlier studies, the extent to which

Japan's import shortfalls from Lawrence's predicted values
reflect model misspecification or errors in variables (e.g.,
transport costs, for which Lawrence used mileage) rather than
import barriers.

3.4. Lack of intraindustrv trade

A somewhat different argument made by Borrus and Zysman
(1985) also takes as its starting point Japan's atypically low

level of intra-industry trade. Borrus and Zysman point to the
virtual absence of two-way trade in specific manufactured
products: Japan tends not to import the manufactured goods that
it exports.

According to Borrus and Zysman, past protection from imports
has allowed Japanese producers to achieve a decisive competitive

advantage. Indeed, the resulting advantage is so great that even
when import barriers are no longer in place, foreign firms are
unable to penetrate the domestic market, while Japanese firms can

quickly displace other suppliers in the United States and third-

36

country markets.22 But Borrus and Zysman supply no evidence that
Japan's intra-product and intra-industry trade are systematically
depressed in sectors previously protected by import barriers.
Although the cases of semiconductors and autos are suggestive,

generalization to manufacturing as a whole requires further
support.

A more fundamental issue is, as with any ex post ergo
propter hoc argument, the lack of evidence establishing that past
protection of the Japanese domestic market from imports played a

key role in developing present technological superiority. If a
large and profitable market were the main necessary condition for
developing a decisive competitive advantage, U.S. automakers, not

Japanese, ought to dominate world markets today. That the
Japanese experience with import substitution actually ended with
internationally competitive production and termination of infant
industry protection makes it an exception to the global norm,

But if the Japanese experience is so different from what has been
observed with import substitution elsewhere, perhaps other
Japanese policies, not barriers to imports, were the essential
ingredient.

22

Although Lawrence's data support the contention that
Japanese intra-industry trade in manufactured goods is unusually
low, he attributes this finding to remaining current barriers to
imports, not technological advantages resulting from past
protection.

37
4.

The U.S. Technology Race with Japan

A persistent technology gap between the United States and
other industrialized nations shaped the nation's trade in

manufactured goods for several decades after World War II. Over
this period, large public and private expenditures on research
and development created a continuing flow of new products and

processes. Early access to this superior technology allowed U.S.
firms to remain internationally competitive despite labor costs

far in excess of those abroad. As late as 1980, the U.S. trade
position in high-technology manufacturing was still rising almost
every year, while net trade in other manufacturing followed an
opposite trend.

4.1. Closing the technology gap
The breakdown of trading relationships based on U.S.
technological superiority reflected several major changes in the

global economic environment. First, other industrial nations,
impressed by U.S. economic gains from technology-driven growth,

stepped up their own R&D expenditures. Some of the funds went
for basic research, but much was used to speed the acquisition
and adaptation of technology from abroad, especially from the

United States. At the same time, dramatic improvements in
communications and transportation helped to internationalize both
research and production activities.

The growth of U.S. multinational corporations served as an
important vehicle for the international transfer of new

38

commercial technologies, providing not only access to proprietary
technological information but also to the know-how and financial

capital needed to implement the new technologies. The
technology-disseminating activities of multinationals, while
profit-motivated, were in many cases actively encouraged by host
countries' policies toward direct investments.

The closing of the technology gap between the United States
and its commercial rivals meant increased competition on other

dimensions of cost. Labor productivity and earnings rose rapidly
abroad, while the growth of U.S. earnings slowed. Although the
catch-up abroad probably benefited the nation as a whole by
raising foreign demand for U.S. goods and services and by opening
the possibility of importing as well as exporting new

technologies, some U.S. workers clearly lost ground. In a number
of U.S. manufacturing industries, real earnings actually fell for

the first time in the postwar period as U.S. producers attempted
to remain internationally competitive.

4.2. Japan's technological development
In contrast to most other industrial nations, Japan

virtually excluded foreign investments in industries targeted for
development during its period of technological catch-up.
Instead, it relied primarily on licensing to acquire critical

technologies from abroad. Imports of technology were controlled
by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry (MITI), which
prepared lists of desired technologies and reviewed most

39

licensing proposals.23 As a supplement to MITI's role as
"doorkeeper" to technology imports, the Ministry of Finance
insured access of innovating firms to financial capital.24
Some developing countries have modeled their own policies
toward imported technologies on those of Japan, particularly
screening of licensing agreements and allocation of capital.

However, none are in a position to duplicate the commitment of
skilled workers that facilited Japan's success in adapting

imported technologies. In 1969, two decades into its catch-up
phase, Japan employed about 30 scientists and engineers per
10,000 workers in the labor force, less than half the comparable
figure for the United States but comparable to the major European

nations.25 Fifteen years later the Japanese proportion of
scientists and engineers in the workforce had more than doubled,
closely approaching the United States figure, while the European

nations had more modest increases. Japanese spending for
research and development (R&D) tells a similar story. Although
23

Harris (1985) gives a comprehensive review of past and
current Japanese policies toward international technology
transfers.
24

Yamamura (1986) suggests that the role of the Ministry
of Finance (MOF) was perhaps the most essential element of
Japan's pro-growth policy in this period. Given the underdeveloped state of Japanese domestic capital markets, their
insulation from world financial markets, and regulated belowmarket-clearing interest rates on loans, MOF exercised enormous
economic leverage over domestic firms as a consequence of its
ability to allocate loans in a situation of chronic excess
demand.
.
.
Science
Foundation
Science and Technology Data
Book 1987, pp. 37-38.
25

National

40

Japan is only average among industrial nations in its overall
proportion of gross national product devoted to R&D, it now
enjoys the world's highest ratio of nondefense R&D to GNP.

As with trade in manufactured goods, Japan has in recent
years greatly liberalized its policies toward technology imports

while rapidly expanding its own technology exports. Japan's
"technological balance of payments," recording payments and
receipts of royalties and licensing fees for the use of
trademarks, copyrights, and patents, still shows a large deficit.

However, this is mainly a reflection of agreements made in

earlier years during Japan's catch-up phase. Japan's gross
receipts from technology exports have grown steadily. By 1984
Japan was the third, after the United States and the United
Kingdom, in earnings from foreign use of its technology.26
Like other technologically advanced nations, Japan has also
increased its direct investments abroad, pairing financial
capital, superior technology, and managerial know-how with the

lower labor costs of developing countries. Current or
anticipated import barriers have provided the main motivation for
recent Japanese direct investments in the other industrialized
nations, but even these investments may entail substantial

transfers of technology.27 For Japanese investments in U.S.
high-technology industries, there is likely to be a two-way flow,
26
27

Japan 1986, p. 26.

Bhagwati (1982) has pointed out that some direct foreign
investments may be used to head off new protection rather than in
anticipation of producing inside the restricted market.

41

with the Japanese gaining speedier access to state-of-the-art
technical information while themselves disseminating superior
methods of management and organization.

4.3. Japanese productivity and trade

Bilateral comparisons of industry-level productivity and
trade performance confirm Japan's catch-up to the technological

level of the United States. In their comparison of productivity
levels for 28 industries, Jorgenson, Kuroda, and Nishimizu (1986)

found that by 1979 nine Japanese industries had already closed
the productivity gap with the United States; in the remaining
nineteen industries the difference narrowed over the period

studied. The analysis indicated that Japan's rising productivity
levels were strongly influenced by major increases in the

relative capital intensity of production as well as improved
technology.

A recent study of U.S. -Japanese trade patterns in 1977

(Audrestch and Yamawaki, 1986) found bilateral U.S.-Japanese
trade structurally different from trade between the United States

and other countries. In contrast to the consistent empirical
result that U.S. export strength is greatest in the hightechnology industries with relatively large employment of skilled

workers, U.S. trade performance in its bilateral trade with Japan
was negatively related to the skill level of the U.S. labor

force. A possible interpretation of this finding is that at
least in trade with Japan, the U.S. technological lead is no

42

longer an important factor; an abundance of skilled workers and a
lower wage premium for technical skills can give Japan a cost
advantage over the United States in these industries.

However, the experience of Japanese-owned auto plants in the
United States has shown that neither massive capital investments
nor state-of-the-art technologies are essential ingredients of

the Japanese cost advantage, In autos, Japanese producers
operating in the United States have achieved lower costs than
their indigenous counterparts while typically using less capital

per worker and no highly advanced production technology. This
raises the possibility that at least in the auto industry, a
significant aspect of the Japanese competitive advantage is
"technological" only in a very broad sense that includes
organizational and managerial know-how.
But recent findings of Lipsey and Kravis (1986) suggest that

Japan's advantage in auto production may not be typical. In
terms of overall manufacturing exports, Lipsey and Kravis found
that U.S. multinational corporations have maintained a virtually
unchanged share of world totals since 1966; declining exports
from U.S. production have been offset by rising exports from

subsidiaries abroad. These results imply that loss of U.S.
international competitiveness in manufacturing as a whole cannot
be attributed to deficiencies in U.S. management skills or

technology. However, in the case of transport equipment, the
United States did lose substantial ground; by 1983, both the

43

United States as a country and U.S. multinationals had lost about
a quarter of their 1966 global market shares.28

28

The atypical performance of the auto industry relative
to U.S. manufacturing as a whole points up the danger in
generalizing from the experience of a single sector, even a very
important one, as Halberstam (1986) does in his comparison of
Ford and Nissan.

44
5.

Looking Ahead

Japan's rapid growth during much of the postwar period has

been based on technological catch-up. The slowing of that growth
in recent years reflects, among other things, the completion of

the catch-up phase. Can the Japanese policies and institutions
that facilitated successful importation and adaptation of

existing technologies work as well in producing new ones? Some
claim that the Japanese educational system, in comparison to its
American counterpart, ensures a uniformly high standard of
performance but systematically crushes individuality and

creativity. However, it is too early to judge whether these
differences have any implications for scientific innovation, and
in any case both systems are in the throes of significant change.

The increasing economic intimacy between the two nations has
itself served as one major impetus for change.

I have argued that the rapidly growing bilateral imbalances
between the United States and Japan were produced by

macroeconomic conditions, not trade or industrial policies. In
this sense, the imbalances can be viewed as "temporary" factors

rather than long-term developments. But elimination of the
imbalances without serious damage to the U.S. economy and those

of its trading partners may be difficult to achieve.

If Japanese

investors turn away from U.S. financial markets before the United

States is able to reduce domestic absorption, U.S. interest rates
will be forced upward, with potentially disastrous consequences
for the economy.

45

In terms of sectoral adjustments, the U.S.-Japanese

relationship may well be entering a new phase. As the nations
grow more similar in terms of technology base, abundance of

capital and skilled labor, and per capita income, intra-industry

trade is likely to grow. In particular, two-way trade in
technology and in technology-based services should become

increasingly important as Japan moves from adaptation into

innovation. In the mature industries and even some that are now
considered "high-technology" sectors, both Japan and the United
States will be faced with increasing competition from a new tier
of competitors in Asia and elsewhere.

For both nations, problems of sectoral adjustment will
continue to generate strong pressures for import protection and
other forms of assistance to industries losing ground to

newcomers. Sectoral trade conflict between the United States and
Japan will be concentrated on the two ends of the industrial
spectrum in terms of technological sophistication, with issues

raised both by contrasting approaches to the phasing out of
industries losing their comparative advantage and by contrasting
approaches to the nurturing of new industries.

Could the United States return to its one-time position of

unquestioned technological preeminence? Even with vastly
increased resources allocated to research and development, this
kind of advantage probably can no longer be sustained - United States or any country -

- in

by

the

a world that has become highly

interdependent. The commercial advantage of being first in

46

innovation has been undermined by the greatly increased speed
with which new technical knowledge becomes available to potential

competitors all over the globe. This does not mean that research
and development has become less important. On the contrary,
technological improvements will continue to provide the basis for
a rising standard of living both in the United States and abroad.

However, the benefits of R&D efforts can no longer be counted
mainly in terms of the advantages conferred to one nation's
industries over competitors elsewhere.

