                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      URBAN REVIVAL IN AMERICA, 2000 TO 2010

                                         Victor Couture
                                        Jessie Handbury

                                      Working Paper 24084
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24084


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           November 2017, Revised June 2019




We thank Prottoy Aman Akbar, Hero Ashman, Yue Cao, Allison Green, Yizhen Gu, Jeffrey
Jacobs, Hae Nim Lee, Ellen Lin, Daniel Means, and Jungsoo Yoo for outstanding research
assistance. We thank David Albouy, Nate Baum-Snow, Don Davis, Jonathan Dingel, Gilles
Duranton, Ed Glaeser, Andy Haughwout, Erik Hurst, Jeffrey Lin, Hal Martin, Christopher
Palmer, Jordan Rappaport, and Owen Zidar, as well as participants at the 2014 Urban Economics
Association Meeting, the 2015 Duke-ERID Conference, the 2016 Stanford-SITE Conference, the
2016 NBER SI, the 2017 Chicago BFI Conference and numerous seminars for useful comments.
Jessie Handbury thanks the Research Sponsors’ Program of the Wharton Zell-Lurie Real Estate
Center and the Wharton Dean’s Research Fund, and Victor Couture thanks the Fisher Center for
Real Estate and Urban Economics for generous financial support. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Victor Couture and Jessie Handbury. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Urban Revival in America, 2000 to 2010
Victor Couture and Jessie Handbury
NBER Working Paper No. 24084
November 2017, Revised June 2019
JEL No. R23

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper documents and explains the striking rise in the proclivity of college-educated
individuals to reside near city centers since 2000. We show that this recent urban revival is driven
almost entirely by younger college graduates in larger cities. With a residential choice model, we
quantify the role of jobs, amenities, and house prices in explaining this trend. We find that the
rising taste of young college graduates for non-tradable service amenities like restaurants and
nightlife accounts for more than 40 percent of their movement toward city centers.
Complementary data shows a corresponding rise in young college graduate expenditures on and
trips to non-tradable services. We then link changes in both consumption and urbanization to
secular trends of top income growth and delayed family formation amongst young college
graduates.


Victor Couture
University of California, Berkeley
Haas School of Business
2220 Piedmont Avenue
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
couture@berkeley.edu

Jessie Handbury
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1463 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
handbury@wharton.upenn.edu
This paper documents and seeks to explain the striking reversal in the fortunes of urban America
since 2000. We show that, after decades of suburbanization, the college-educated population
started urbanizing in most large U.S. cities between 2000 and 2010.1 This reversal was entirely
driven by rapid growth in the population of young college graduates near city centers. Contrary
to claims of empty nesters urbanizing, we find that older college-educated cohorts continued to
suburbanize up to 2010.
    Various hypotheses could explain the distinct urbanization of young college graduates.
Downtowns might be becoming more attractive to young college graduates with, for example,
the centralization of high-skilled jobs, reduced urban crime rates, improved amenities, and new
housing developments. Even without such changes in the environment, young college gradu-
ates might be increasingly attracted to stable features of downtowns, such as short commutes
to existing jobs and proximity to consumption amenities, as their income and opportunity cost
of time increase and family sizes decrease. In reality, many of these factors may be working
simultaneously.
    Our goal is to quantify the relative importance of these mechanisms in explaining the urban-
ization of the young and college-educated. To this end, we assemble a rich database at a fine
spatial scale and estimate a residential choice model. This model is flexible enough to allow for
the various competing hypotheses above and permits an intuitive linear decomposition of the
predicted young-college urbanization rate into components associated with each factor.
    Our analysis reveals an important role for high initial density of non-tradable service con-
sumption amenities like restaurants and nightlife in explaining the urbanization of young college
graduates. Recent changes in well-studied characteristics like job density and public amenities
(school, crime, and transit) explain only a small portion of the distinctive urbanization of young
college graduates, even though these characteristics are often important determinants of loca-
tional choices across all tracts and in the broader population.
    The intuition behind these results is simple: an important explanatory factor for urban re-
vival must 1) be highly prevalent near city centers relative to elsewhere, and 2) strongly attract
young college graduates relative to other age-education groups. Our data reveal that high non-
tradable service density is a persistent feature differentiating downtowns from the suburbs na-
tionwide. Our model estimates suggest that locations with a high initial density of non-tradable
services have become increasingly attractive to young college graduates, but not so much to
their older college-educated counterparts, or to the non-college educated. Overall, our model
    1
      This suburbanization has been extensively studied, such as in Glaeser et al. (2004), Baum-Snow (2007), and
Boustan (2010). The reversal of this trend was already apparent in the 1990s and before in a handful of gateway
cities like New York, Chicago, Boston and San Francisco. Carlino and Saiz (2008) also show that, while central
cities do not experience a revival in the 1990s, some recreational districts were already seeing college-educated
growth by the 1990s. Guerrieri et al. (2013) document gentrification near high-income neighborhoods in the early
2000s. Our finding is that urban revival emerges as a distinct widespread phenomenon in the 2000s, and is local to
areas smaller than the central city.


                                                        1
implies that the persistent urban density of non-tradable service amenities accounts for over 40
percent of young college-educated urbanization from 2000 to 2010, more than any other factor
in our model.
    In the context of our model, the increasing attraction of young college graduates to locations
with high initial densities of non-tradable services reflects rising preferences for these amenities.
Complementary data on household expenditures and trips support this structural interpretation.
Consistent with our model estimates, the young and college-educated allocate a higher share
of spending and trips to non-tradable service amenities like restaurants and nightlife than other
age-education groups, and they increased those shares by the most since 2000. We caution
against interpreting these changing allocations and the increasing taste for proximity to non-
tradable services as reflecting shifts in deep underlying preference parameters.2 Instead, we
posit that these changes are driven by external forces, such as delayed marriage and family
formation, and top income growth amonst young college graduates.
    In the final part of the paper, we document increasing shares of young college graduates
in unmarried households without children and in higher income brackets, population segments
that are historically more urbanized and spend more on and travel more to non-tradable services.
All else constant, this changing composition of young college graduates across family types
and income brackets mechanically predicts almost thirty percent of the observed growth of the
young college-educated population downtown relative to the surburbs between 1990 and 2014.3
    Overall, we make three main contributions. First, we document urban revival in space
and time and identify the young and college-educated as the key population segment behind
this trend. Second, we demonstrate the relevance of non-tradable services in explaining this
trend using a number of complementary datasets on location choices, establishment locations,
expenditures, and trips. Finally, we link both urban revival and changes in non-tradable service
consumption to secular trends in household formation and top income growth.
    Our analysis contrasts with existing work on residential choice in the U.S. in three important
ways. First, our empirical approach incorporates a broad set of competing explanatory factors to
quantify their relative importance. This comprehensive approach distinguishes our work from
a concurrent set of papers on central city gentrification. Our results support concurrent work
finding that the reduction in urban crime (Ellen et al., 2017) and rising distaste for commut-
ing (Su, 2018; Edlund et al., 2016) each play a role in explaining the urbanization of young
college graduates.4 Like Baum-Snow and Hartley (2017), however, we identify rising amenity
    2
      Becker (1965), for example, describes the pitfalls of explaining new trends with a changing utility function.
    3
      Our family formation results are similar using data from 2000 to 2010. We prefer to use the longer 1990-
2014 time period for this part of our analysis because the recessions of 2001 and 2009 obscures any income trends
between 2000 to 2010, and because unlike the tract level Census tables that we use in our regression analysis, the
IPUMS micro-data allows us to look at the interaction of age and education in 1990.
    4
      Edlund et al. (2016) and Su (2018) propose longer hours worked by college-educated workers after 1970
as an explanation for their centralization, providing evidence that these longer hours have increased the distaste


                                                        2
values are the primary driver of downtown gentrification. We further demonstrate the distinct
importance of non-tradable services relative to other types of residential amenities.5
     Second, we document the important role of consumption amenities in residential choice
within CBSAs. Following Glaeser et al. (2001) and Moretti (2012), academics have debated the
relative importance of consumption versus production in explaining college-educated location
choices. Diamond (2016) shows that local labor demand shocks matter more than amenities in
the cross-city college-educated location choice. Our contribution is to establish the empirical
relevance of consumption amenities for within-city sorting behavior, as posited in Brueckner
et al. (1999). Glaeser et al. (2004) demonstrate that the share of college-educated individuals
is a key determinant of economic success across cities since 1980. The new within-city trends
that we study may have similarly far-reaching implications.
     Existing empirical work on within-city residential choice in the U.S. has focused on mea-
suring the willingness-to-pay for public amenities like schools and crime (see, e.g., Epple and
Sieg, 1999 and Bayer et al., 2007). To study the distinct role of consumption amenities within
CBSAs, we build tract-level density indexes capturing proximity to consumption amenities in
various types of non-tradable services and tradable retail. The localized nature of these density
indexes matters, as one may move to the Bay Area primarily for job opportunities, but choose
to live in the center of San Francisco for the consumption amenities. Relative to the growing
literature using microdata to study the role of consumption amenity density in location choice
(Glaeser et al., 2018; Teulings et al., 2018), we construct a new instrument for changes in our
consumption amenity density indexes, drawing from a recent IO literature on the determinants
of entry and exit for various types of retail establishments (e.g., Igami and Yang, 2016).6
     Finally, our empirical framework relates to but is methodologically distinct from existing
work studying within-CBSA location choices. For instance, our model differs from Bayer
et al. (2007)’s important application of McFadden (1973) and McFadden (1978)’s random util-
ity model to neighborhood choice in the Bay Area in 1990. Unlike Bayer et al. (2007), we derive
our indirect utility from a primitive Cobb-Douglas consumer optimization problem, and we add
for commuting. Our results indicate that this loss of leisure time may have had a larger impact on valuation for
proximity to non-tradable service amenities useful in outsourcing home production, as in Murphy (2018), than on
valuation for proximity to jobs. Ellen et al. (2017) find that the 1990s crime drop predicts central city gentrification
in the 2000s. We also find that reduced crime in the 1990s contributes to the urbanization of young college
graduates after 2000.
     5
       In Baum-Snow and Hartley (2017), amenities are an unobserved residual that compensate for differences
in employment opportunities and house prices à la Rosen (1979) and Roback (1982). Behrens et al. (2018) also
identify specific “pioneer” industries whose overrepresentation in a block predicts subsequent gentrification in New
York City. These cultural, recreational, and creative industries tend to employ the same young, college-educated,
single workers that we show to be driving urban revival.
     6
       Glaeser et al. (2018) use data from Yelp to show that entry of consumption amenity establishments like cafes
predicts gentrification in the form of house price growth and rising college-educated share. Teulings et al. (2018)
use the “Proximity of Amenities" data by Statistics Netherlands to include the number of restaurants near a zipcode
centroid in a residential choice model. Neither instrument for amenity density.


                                                           3
a time dimension, a CBSA dimension, and many additional neighborhood characteristics. We
obtain simpler first-difference linear regressions that control for time-invariant unobservables
and permit the linear decomposition we use to assess the relative importance of different factors
in explaining the urbanization of young college graduates.
    The rest of the paper is divided as follows. We describe the data in section 1. Section 2
presents the stylized facts on urban revival. Sections 3 and 4 present the residential choice
model and our empirical application of this model to identifying the key drivers behind the
urbanization of the young and college-educated. Section 5 presents various robustness checks
on our results and section 6 provides external validity for the changing preferences for non-
tradable service amenities that we find to drive urban revival. Section 7 investigates the causes
of these changing preferences and section 8 concludes.


1       Data
The main geographical unit in our analysis is a census tract within a Core-Based Statistical
Area (CBSA). We construct constant 2010-boundary CBSAs using constant 2010-boundary
tracts from the Longitudinal Tract Data Base (LTDB). We define the city center of each CBSA
using the definitions provided by Holian and Kahn (2012), obtained by entering the name of
each CBSA’s principal city into Google Earth and recording the returned coordinates.
    To establish the stylized facts on recent urban growth that motivate our empirical analysis,
we assemble a database describing the residential locations of U.S. individuals at a decennial
frequency. Tract-level population counts are from the decennial censuses of 1980 to 2000 and
the American Community Survey (ACS) 2008-2012 aggregates, downloaded from the National
Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS). These local population counts are avail-
able by education in all years, and by age and education level from 2000 onwards.
    To estimate our residential choice model, we pair the age-education-tract level population
counts with datasets describing access to jobs, consumption amenities, and house prices in the
vicinity of each census tract in 2000 and 2010. To measure job density by wage group, we
use the LEHD Origin-Destination Employment Statistics (LODES) datasets for 2002 and 2011.
The LODES data provide counts of people who live and work in a given census block pair by
three different nominal wage groups: high-wage workers earning more than $3,333 per month,
middle-wage workers earning $1,251 to $3,333 per month, and low-wage workers earning less
than $1,250 per month.7
    7
     In 2002 and 2011, 27 and 37 percent of workers were considered high-wage, respectively. To address confi-
dentiality issues, the LODES data are partially synthetic. We describe the generation of synthetic data in Appendix
A, and show how aggregation of census block data at the tract level ensures that 90 percent of the LODES data are
unaffected by this procedure.



                                                        4
    To measure consumption amenity density, we pair a geo-coded census of establishments in
2000 and 2010 from the National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) with a dataset contain-
ing travel times between these establishments and census tract centroids by foot from Google
Maps.8 We calculate indexes measuring four types of consumption amenities: two non-tradable
services (restaurants and nightlife) and two types of tradable retail (food and apparel). We also
measure consumption amenity diversity as an inverse-Herfindahl index using the most refined
industry classification available in the NETS (at the SIC8 level, e.g., Korean restaurants). Fi-
nally, we use the smartphone visit data, described further in Couture et al. (2019), to calculate
an amenity quality index that captures the presence of restaurant chains preferred by a given
age and education group.
    Our primary measure of housing costs for 2000 and 2010 is the Zillow House Value Index
for two-bedroom homes, which measures median house prices at the zip code level. In robust-
ness checks, we use alternative house price indices, rental prices using HUD’s Fair Market Rent
Series for one-, two-, and three-bedroom homes (available at the county level), and the median
age of the housing stock from the 2000 census and the 2008-2012 ACS, to measure one aspect
of housing quality and new housing developments.9
    We complement these three main tract-characteristic datasets with information on public
amenities (transit times, violent crime per capita, school district rankings) and natural amenities.
Our measure of transit performance at the tract-level comes from Google Maps in 2014, and
is the average travel time of a five-mile trip from a tract centroid to a random set of NETS
establishments. We measure violent crime (murder, rape, robbery, and aggravated assault) at
the police district-level using the Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) data for 2000 and
2010. We measure school quality using within-state rankings of school districts in 2004 and
2010 from SchoolDigger.com.10 There are typically multiple tracts within a particular police
and school district. We match these areas to 2010 tract boundaries using Census shapefiles.11
    8
       The popularity of the Walk Score, which rates neighborhoods by how walkable they are, hints at the impor-
tance of such highly localized indexes in location decisions.
     9
       We match zip codes to 2010 tract geography using a crosswalk from the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD). Our alternative price indices include Zillow’s per square foot index; the FHFA house
price index, a weighted, repeat-sales index calculated by using Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac mortgage securitiza-
tions as described in Bogin et al. (2018); and finally a hedonic price index calculated using DataQuick data and the
model from Ferreira and Gyourko (2011).
    10
       While we believe that SchoolDigger.com is the most comprehensive database available, we have school rank-
ing data for less than half of our CBSAs’ sample of tracts. SchoolDigger.com compiles test scores and provides
a ranking of each school district within each U.S. state. The ranking averages over test scores in different fields
for schools from grades 1 through 12. We use the inverse of that ranking in percentile for 2004 - the earliest year
available - and for 2010 in the school district that a tract falls into as our measure of school quality in 2000 and
2010.
    11
       This mapping projects 11,044 police districts to 57,095 census tracts, and 12,956 school districts to 24,283
census tracts. Police districts are mostly cities and, while CBSAs consist of many cities, the central city in most
CBSAs is larger than the downtown experiencing urban revival. In some cases like Houston and Atlanta, police
districts are at the county level, so the parts of the respective central city in different counties report different


                                                         5
Data on natural amenities, like the precipitation, hilliness, and coastal proximity of each census
tract, are from Lee and Lin (2018).
    To investigate recent trends in family formation, income growth, expenditures, and travel
that can explain the changing preferences of young college graduates, we use counts of in-
dividuals by family type and income bracket within each age-education group. These counts
come from the 5% Integrated Public Use Micro-data Series (IPUMS) sample of the 1990 and
2000 censuses and the 5% IPUMS sample from 2012-2016 ACS surveys, as well as micro-data
from the 1996 to 2016 Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and the 2001 and 2009 National
Household Transportation Survey (NHTS). We design a procedure for allocating individuals in
IPUMS to constant geography urban and suburban areas. See Appendix A for further detail on
all data sources and spatial concordance procedures.


2     Stylized Facts
In this section, we establish a number of stylized facts about changes in the within-city location
choices of Americans between 1980 and 2010 to motivate our empirical analysis. Figure 1
shows how tract population growth varies with distance from the city center in all CBSAs, for
different population groups in different decades.12 In these plots, distance from the city center is
weighted by aggregate population, and normalized to equal 1 at the outer edge of each CBSA.
For example, a tract at a distance of 0.2 is further from its CBSA center than 20 percent of
that CBSA’s total population in the base year. The dashed horizontal line shows the average
population growth across all tracts.
    The first row of Figure 1 tells an unequivocal story of continuing suburbanization of the
general population. In all three decades since 1980, population growth is slower than average in
the innermost tracts containing approximately half of the initial population and faster than aver-
age in tracts further out. These plots also reveal the remarkable stability of the urban population
over recent decades: the near-zero intercept of each plot implies that there was, on average, no
population growth in tracts nearest to the center of CBSAs in all decades between 1980 and
2010.
    The second row of Figure 1 tells a different story for the college-educated population. While
the aggregate population growth curve slopes upwards from the city center, the college-educated
curve slopes downwards. Between 2000 and 2010, in particular, the college-educated popula-
tion grew 15 percentage points faster than in the near suburbs, at distance 0.2. The downward
numbers. Our results are robust to using a sub-sample containing only those CBSAs where the largest police
district contains less than 30 percent of the CBSA population.
    12
       We weight the kernel regression by initial tract population to ensure that local growth estimates are indepen-
dent of tract size.



                                                         6
slope was more subtle in the 1980s and 1990s. Over these decades, the college-educated pop-
ulation grew around 5 percentage points faster at the city center than at distance 0.2. It was
only after 2000 that the city center saw higher college-educated population growth than the av-
erage observed across all tracts. Together with the stable center city population documented in
the first row of the figure, this downtown college-educated population growth is sufficient to
generate meaningful change in the composition of downtown tracts.
     The third row of Figure 1 breaks down college-educated growth by age group since 2000, the
earliest time period for which tract-level age-by-education group population tables are available
from the Census. The plot shows that the urbanization of the college-educated in U.S. cities
is explained almost entirely by growth in the two younger age groups: “young” 25-34 year-
olds and, to a lesser extent, “middle-aged” 35-44 year-olds. Contrary to claims by the popular
press that retiring baby boomers are urbanizing, the older 45-64 and 65+ year-old (not shown)
college-educated groups are still rapidly suburbanizing.13 The young age group exhibits the
sharpest gradient with nearly 40 percent growth near city centers relative to around 15 percent
growth outside of distance 0.2. The young college-educated curve is also different in that it does
not have a significant uptick in the suburbs: the young are the only group of college graduates
that do not exhibit faster than average population growth in the suburbs.
     In section 7, we use IPUMS data to investigate location choices by age-education group
over a longer time period from 1990 to 2014. This micro-data helps illustrate how sharply age-
and skill-biased urban revival has been. Figure 2 plots changes in the share of college graduates
and non-college graduates living downtown by age. For the college-educated, the change in the
share living downtown is highest for the young, with over 40 percent growth in the late 20s,
and declines sharply for older cohorts, with zero growth in the urban share at age 40 and an
approximate 20 percent decline in the urban share for all ages from 50 upwards. By contrast,
the urban share of the non-college educated decreased by approximately 20 percentage points
over the same period for all age groups. These facts align with our conclusion that urban revival
is led by the young and college-educated.14
     The urbanization of the young and college-educated is explained by changes in their loca-
tions in large CBSAs, in particular.15 In fact, the urbanization of the college-educated is not
   13
       The popular press also emphasizes the urbanization of “millennials,” those born from 1980 to the late 1990s,
but this generation is too young to drive urban revival, which shows even in 2005-2009 ACS data. The oldest
millennials, born in 1980, are only 30 in 2010. Rappaport (2015) suggests that aging baby boomers will support
strong demand for multi-family units, but that these downsizing households will remain close to their original
suburban locations. This is consistent with our finding that baby boomers do not contribute to urban revival.
    14
       IPUMS data allows us to define age-education group prior to 2000, but forces us to restrict our sample to
27 CBSAs in which we can define constant geography downtowns out of Public Use Micro Areas with enough
confidence in both 1990 and 2014. These downtowns are defined such that they contain 10% of each CBSAs
population closest to the city center in 2000.
    15
       Online Appendix Figure A.1 replicates Figure 1 separately for two sets of cities: the 50 largest by population
in 2000 and those remaining.


                                                         7
occuring in small cities (outside of the largest 50 in 2000), where the center city growth of even
the 25-34 year-old college-educated population is below its average rate across all locations in
these cities. To further characterize college-educated growth across large cities, we define a
downtown in each CBSA as the set of tracts closest to the city center accounting for 5 percent
of a CBSA’s population. For each CBSA, we compare population growth in these “downtown”
areas with population growth in the surrounding suburbs. In the 1980s and 1990s, fewer than
10 of the largest 50 CBSAs saw their college-educated population grow faster downtown than
elsewhere in the CBSA. In the 2000s, this number almost tripled, to 28 of the 50 largest CB-
SAs. The acceleration in the urbanization of the college-educated from the 1990s to the 2000s
occurred as the set of CBSAs experiencing downtown college-educated growth spread from a
handful of gateway cities in the 1990s, like New York, Chicago and San Francisco, to almost
every other large cities in the 2000s. Strikingly, in the 2000s young college graduates grew
faster downtown than elsewhere in the CBSA in 23 of the 25 largest CBSAs. The exceptions
are Riverside, CA, whose downtown is small, and Detroit.16 These patterns are robust to a num-
ber of downtown definitions, but are too localized to show up in a simple comparison of central
cities with surrounding areas.17
    Despite being localized and concentrated in larger CBSAs, these urbanization trends are
strong enough to have an aggregate impact. About 150 million Americans live in the 50 largest
CBSAs. In these large cities, downtowns accounting for five percent of the population experi-
enced 24 percent of the total increase in the young college-educated population between 2000
and 2010. Our stylized facts are also robust to using a different city center definition (i.e., de-
fined as Central Business Districts from the 1982 census of retail trade), age-income groups
instead of age-education groups, and alternative datasets, such as the LODES data of commute
by wage groups. We see the same patterns from 2000 to 2007 (using the earliest ACS data
available, 2005-2009), showing that urban revival starts before the Great Recession.
    The objective of the rest of this paper is to find the factors driving the 2000-2010 popula-
tion growth gradients by age-education groups documented in Figure 1, with a sharp focus on
explaining the remarkable growth of the young and college-educated near city centers. Data
constraints force us to use 2000 as a base period for most of our model analysis. Fortunately,
this is early enough to capture the period of widespread urban revival that we observe in almost
   16
      Rust-belt cities like Cleveland and Detroit provide interesting case studies. Cleveland experienced “urban
revival” despite a declining downtown population (a 12 percent drop from 2000 to 2010), thanks to changes in
downtown composition (78 percent growth in young-college graduates from 2000 to 2010). Detroit also has
a downtown population that declines as it shifts towards the young and college-educated. However, Detroit’s
downtown had the sharpest population drop and the smallest young college-educated growth of any large city.
Detroit’s downtown still shows promise of future revival: its youngest college-educated group - 18-24 year-olds, a
very small group - urbanized quickly from 2000 to 2010.
   17
      Online Appendix C proposes different ways of tabulating the data shown in Figure 1. It compares downtown
growth - using various downtown definitions - to that in the rest of the CBSA to document the scope of urban
revival across cities.


                                                        8
all large US cities since 2000.18 To investigate the secular trends driving urban revival in section
7, we can consider a longer time period starting in 1990. The same external forces driving urban
revival since 2000 may also explain some of the shoots of urban revival observed in the largest
CBSAs in the 1990s.


3        Residential Choice Model
To explain the changing residential location choices of different age-education groups, we spec-
ify a discrete choice model. The model delivers an estimating equation capturing the effects of
changes in the environment (jobs, amenities, and house prices) from 2000 to 2010, as well as
initial 2000 levels in these variables, on changes in the share of an age-education group living
in a given tract.
    Each individual i in group d selects a tract j in CBSA c in which to reside in year t and
chooses how to allocate their expenditure between units of housing H, consumption amenities
A, and a freely-traded outside good Z in order to maximize the following Cobb-Douglas utility
function:
                                                  d(i) d(i)  d(i)
                                     i      i
                                   Ujct = αjct H βHt AβAt Z βZt

subject to a budget constraint:

                                       d(i)
                                    wjct = pHjct H + pAjct A + Z,
         d
where wjct  is the wage net of commute costs, which we assume to be common to all individuals
in group d residing in tract j, pHjct is the price of housing, and pAjct is a price index for con-
                                                                             i
sumption amenities that varies with transport costs to these amenities. αjct     reflects the utility
that an individual receives for residing in tract j in CBSA c at time t, regardless of their expen-
diture in that location. This taste shifter captures utility from public amenities (ajct ), as well as
unobserved group- and individual-specific tastes:
                                                                     
                            i          d(i)          d(i)  d(i)
                           αjct = exp βat ln ajct + µjc + ξjct + εijct .

The public amenities that we consider include school quality, crime, and the benefits from liv-
ing amongst one’s own type (i.e., homophily) and from population density, more generally.
The group-specific tastes for each tract are represented by the sum of two group-specific terms:
a time-invariant component µdjc , and a time-varying component, ξjct d
                                                                       . The individual-specific
    18
    Other current work on central city gentrification corroborates our findings. Baum-Snow and Hartley (2017)
show that downtowns are becoming richer, more educated and more white and also pin down the beginning of
widespread and rapid downtown gentrification in year 2000.



                                                     9
tastes, εijct , take a nested-logit structure with tracts nested by CBSA with a within-group corre-
lation parameter σ d .19
    After solving the Cobb-Douglas utility maximization problem, each individual i chooses its
residential tract j to maximize its indirect utility:

           i       d(i)      d(i)      d(i)                d(i)                d(i)               d(i)     d(i)
(1)      Vjct = βwt ln wjct − βAt ln pAjct − βHt ln pHjct + βat ln ajct + µjc + ξjct + εijct ,

where βw ≡ βH + βZ + βA .
   This utility maximization problem, outlined in Berry (1994), yields a linear equation for the
share s̃djct of individuals in group d who choose tract j relative to a base tract j̄:20



(2)      ln s̃djct = βwt
                      d              d
                         ln w̃jct + βAt             d
                                        ln Ãjct − βHt ln p̃Hjct + µdjc + ξ˜jct
                                                                            d
                                                                                + ξ˜w,jct
                                                                                    d
                                                                                          + σ d ln s̃dj|ct ,

where X̃j = Xj − Xj̄ , we normalize µjc¯ to equal zero, and the final term ln s̃dj|ct is a “nested-
logit” term equal to the share of group d choosing tract j within CBSA c in year t. To sim-
plify the presentation, we use the vector Ãjct to denote the sum of the public and consumption
                  d                     d
amenity terms, βAt   ln (1/pAjct ) + βat  ln ajct . wjct denotes a vector of time-varying accessibility
                                                                            d
to jobs in three different wage brackets, which we use to proxy for wjct       , the group’s wage net of
                   d
commute costs. ξw,jct    reflects the residual variation in the wages earned by group d individuals
residing in location j.
    Differencing this equation between 2000 and 2010, the two years in our data, we obtain our
estimating equation:

(3) ∆ ln s̃djc = βw,2010
                  d                    d
                         ∆ ln w̃jc + ∆βw                 d
                                         ln w̃jc,2000 + βA,2010               d
                                                                ∆ ln Ãjc + ∆βA ln Ãjc,2000
                      +βpdH ,2010 ∆ ln p̃H jc + ∆βpdH ln p̃H jc,2000 + σ d ∆ ln s̃dj|c + ∆ξ˜jc
                                                                                            d
                                                                                               + ∆ξ˜w,jc
                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                         + djc ,

where ∆X = X2010 − X2000 for both variables and coefficients.21 Note that fixed tastes for
unobserved time-invariant tract characteristics like nice weather or historical architecture cancel
out in first-difference. The error term is the sum of any unobserved changes in the perceived
    19
       This implies that individual-specific taste shocks, εijct , are themselves the weighted sum of two shocks,
εijct = ψct i
              (σ d(i) ) + (1 − σ d(i) )νjct
                                         i                                     i
                                             . Tract-specific taste shocks, νjct  , are independent draws from the extreme
                                                         i
value distribution, while CBSA taste shocks, ψct , are independent draws from the unique distribution such that
  i
ψct (σ d(i) ) + (1 − σ d(i) )νjct
                                i
                                   is also an extreme value random variable. The parameter 0 ≤ σ d < 1 governs the
                                                   i
within-group correlation in the error term ψct       (σ d(i) )+(1−σ d(i) )νjct
                                                                           i
                                                                                . As σ d approaches zero, the model collapses
to a standard logit model.
    20
       The steps of this derivation are standard and we present them in online Appendix E.                       
    21                 d                   d                    d                               d           d
       Note that βA,2010     X2010 − βA,2000     X2000 = βA,2010      (X2010 − X2000 ) + βA,2010       − βA,2000   X2000 =
  d                      d
βA,2010  ∆X + ∆βA          X2000 and that βpH ≡ −βH because house price enters our regressions as a positive num-
ber.



                                                            10
residential quality of tract j for group d (i.e., labor supply shocks ∆ξ˜jc
                                                                          d
                                                                            ), unobserved changes in
the wages earned by group d individuals residing in tract j (i.e., labor demand shocks ∆ξ˜w,jc    d
                                                                                                      ),
and an additional term djc capturing any remaining measurement error.
    We derived equation 3 from Cobb-Douglas preferences, so it delivers an intuitive structural
interpretation of regression coefficients that we will use to interpret our results. In this inter-
pretation, coefficients on changes in characteristics from 2000 to 2010 (e.g., ∆Ãj ) capture the
                                                             d
preference levels of demographic group d in 2010 (i.e., βA,2010    ), while coefficients on initial lev-
els of characteristics (e.g., Ãj,2000 ) capture changes in the preferences of demographic group d
                               d
from 2000 to 2010 (i.e., ∆βA,2010    ).


4     Empirical Strategy
In our model, changes in residential location decisions are driven by either changes in location
characteristics (including prices), ∆X̃jc , or changes in the preferences of the relevant demo-
                                              d
graphic group for these characteristics, ∆βX     . The young and college-educated might be moving
downtown either because characteristics of downtown tracts changed in ways correlated with
                                          d
their preferences (i.e., Corr(∆X̃jc , βX,2010   ) > 0) or because their preferences tilted towards
                                                                                      d
characteristics in which downtown tracts were already advantaged (i.e., Corr(∆βX        , X̃jc,2000 ) >
0). Our analysis therefore relies on two key ingredients: 1) data on the initial levels and changes
in the characteristics of tracts at different distance from the city center, and 2) estimates of the
parameters reflecting both the levels and change in the preferences of the young and college-
educated for these characteristics. We now present data summarizing the initial levels and
changes in tract characteristics. We then outline our estimation procedure, identification strat-
egy, and baseline parameter estimates. Finally, we bring these two ingredients together to quan-
tify the contribution of each factor in explaining the urbanization of young college graduates.


4.1    Recent Spatial Trends in Jobs, House Prices, and Amenities
Figures 3 and 4 show how key tract characteristics vary with distance to the city center. Panel
A of each figure shows the kernel density plot of the 2000 logged level of a variable and Panel
B shows a kernel density plot of the log change from 2000 to 2010, with kernel weights based
on the 2000 tract share of young and college-educated individuals. The data presented include
all tracts in our estimation sample of 355 CBSAs for which a variable is available. We provide
details on the construction of all variables in Appendix B.
     Figure 3 presents gradients from the city center for job density, house prices, and public
amenities (school quality and crime). Job density is an inverse distance-weighted average of the
number of jobs in tracts surrounding each residential tract in 2002 and 2011, computed using

                                                  11
the three wage groups in the LODES data. The leftmost plots show gradients from the city
center for the initial level and change in the high-wage job density (>$3,333 per month, the
dashed line) and the low-wage job density ($1,250/month or less per month, the solid line). The
density of both job types is highest near the city center, but only high-wage jobs have grown
faster near the city center over the last decade.
    The middle panel shows similar gradients for house prices, plotting our main two-bedroom
price index (dashed) as well as the Zillow per square foot price index (solid). Houses are more
expensive away from the city center in 2000, but less so when prices are measured on a per-
square-foot basis. House price growth from 2000 to 2010 displays a strongly negative gradient
from the city center, especially on a per square foot basis.22
    The rightmost panel shows that public amenity levels are lower near the city center, with
lower-ranked schools (dashed, not logged) and more violent crime per capita (solid). Schools
near the city center have dropped even further in state district rankings from 2004 to 2010.
Violent crime rates are decreasing everywhere from 2000 to 2010 as expected, but particularly
towards the city center and in the “middle-distance” suburbs.23
    Figure 4 presents similar gradients for two representative consumption amenities: restau-
rants (dashed) and food stores (solid). From left to right, the plots show measures of amenity
density, diversity, and quality, respectively. The density and diversity indexes are the travel-cost
weighted average number and diversity of restaurants in the vicinity of a census tract calcu-
lated using the CES price index methodology from Couture (2016). The quality variable is only
available for restaurants, and uses the methodology and smartphone visit data used in Couture
et al. (2018). This quality index is high if restaurants in a tract belong to chains that young col-
lege graduates favor with high visit probabilities, after controlling for spatial variation in their
choice sets.24
    The density of restaurants and food stores is highest near the city center, but has grown
faster in the suburbs from 2000 to 2010. Rising consumption amenity density is therefore
unlikely to explain urban revival. Unlike density, restaurant diversity in 2000 is relatively low
downtown and highest in the near suburbs, while restaurant quality follows a distinct non-
monotonic pattern, being highest downtown and in the city outskirts. Between 2000 and 2010,
restaurant quality, and diversity of both restaurants and food stores increased faster near city
   22
       The relative increase of the two-bedroom index relative to the per square foot index further out towards city
outskirts indicates that these increases reflect growth in suburban home sizes over this period.
    23
       Other public amenities referenced above and controlled for in our estimation below - population density and
proximity to members of one’s own age-education group - have developed between 2000 and 2010 as shown in
the population gradients of Figure 1. The young and college-educated are the most urbanized group in 2000, so
proximity to young college graduates is highest near city centers. Access to transit, defined at the tract-level, is
also highly urbanized. The variables that we use to control for these factors in estimation are defined in Section
4.2.1 and 5, respectively.
    24
       See Appendix B for more details on the construction of these indexes. Our measure of restaurant quality is
for 2012 instead of 2010, as in Couture et al. (2018).


                                                        12
centers.
    Finally, it is worth noting that the strong centrality of consumption amenity density is not
a recent phenomenon. A comparison of the amenity density gradients for restaurants and food
stores in 1992 (the earliest year NETS data is available), 2000, and 2010 reveals that the urban-
ized nature of restaurant and food store density did not emerge in recent history. If anything,
amenity density growth was even faster in the suburbs relative to downtown in the 1990s than
it was in the 2000s.25


4.2     Estimation
Our base specification of the estimating equation (3):

      ∆ ln s̃djc = βw,2010
                    d                    d
                           ∆ ln w̃jc + ∆βw                 d
                                           ln w̃jc,2000 + βA,2010               d
                                                                  ∆ ln Ãjc + ∆βA ln Ãjc,2000
                    +βpdH ,2010 ∆ ln p̃H jc + ∆βpdH ln p̃H jc,2000 + σ d ∆ ln s̃dj|c + ∆ξ˜jc
                                                                                          d
                                                                                             + ∆ξ˜w,jc
                                                                                                  d
                                                                                                       + djc

includes job densities, consumption amenity densities, and the “two-bedroom” house price in-
dex to reflect wjc , Ajc , and pH jc , respectively. The dependent variable is the 2000 to 2010 log
change in the share of age-education group d that lives in tract j of CBSA c relative to a base
tract. We also include in Ajc variables measuring natural amenities, distance to the city center,
local demographics, and population density to control for unobserved endogenous amenities as
described below. In robustness checks below, we further add to Ajc explanatory variables for
specific observable public amenities, such as school quality, crime, and transit times, and other
dimensions of the spatial distribution of consumption amenities, such as diversity and quality
of establishments.26

4.2.1    Identification

Identifying the effect of neighborhood characteristics on residential choice is challenging. The
first-difference regression controls for time-invariant tract characteristics that could be corre-
lated with our regressors. However, our regressors could still be correlated with unobserved
changes in perceived tract quality (∆ξ˜jcd
                                           ) or local wage premia (∆ξ˜w,jc
                                                                        d
                                                                            ). We address the re-
sulting omitted variable bias concerns with controls and reverse causality concerns with instru-
ments, each of which is described in turn below.

Controls We include a series of controls to help pick up changes in, or changing tastes for,
unobserved tract characteristics. First, we control for the change and level of the share of
   25
     See online Appendix Figure A.2.
   26
     These variables are excluded from our base specification because we either have no instrument for them or
only limited spatial coverage.


                                                      13
one’s own type in nearby tracts (homophily) and the change and the level of population density
in nearby tracts. We exclude the same tract (j) from each of these measures since it would
mechanically co-vary with our dependent variable, but we do include the 2000 levels of the
share of one’s own type and population density in the same tract as independent controls.27
We also control for natural amenities within 1 mile of the tract centroid. Finally, given the
urbanization of young college graduates, one might worry that their location choice correlate
with initial levels of variables that are urbanized, non-tradable service amenities in particular.
We include a control for the distance to the city center to alleviate concerns that coefficient on
amenity levels are simply picking up the increasing taste of the young and college-educated
for another centralized unobserved amenity. With this control, our coefficients are identified
by location choices conditional on distance to the city center. Further controls are included in
robustness checks.

Instruments Unobserved shocks subject our change variable coefficients to reverse causality
concerns. For instance, an influx of young college graduates in response to unobserved shocks
to tract quality or nearby wages may attract amenities and jobs and raise house prices. We
address such concerns with instruments described herein. We focus our attention on the most
novel of these, the instrument for the change in consumption amenity density.

    Consumption Amenity Density The key challenge to identifying coefficients on changes
in amenity density is that they may correlate with changes in unobserved demand factors that
we do not control for, such as the entry of amenities not in our model. We therefore design an
instrumental variable that predicts amenity firm entry using supply side drivers.
    The main idea is that firms consider local supply factors when deciding where to open new
establishments. Different firms put different weights on these supply factors. For instance,
Subway may be less likely to open new stores near existing ones than, say, McDonalds, because
it has stronger concerns about cannibalizing existing store sales. We exploit such differences
in firm’s national business expansion strategies within finely-categorized industries to predict
differences in aggregate amenity entry in each tract, in a way that is plausibly orthogonal to the
determinants of people’s location choice modeled in equation 3.
    The supply factors that we try to capture are those highlighted by an existing literature.
Igami and Yang (2016), for example, show that firms do not want to open establishments too
close to their own preexisting outlets or their direct competitors. In addition to such cannibal-
ization and competition concerns, firms also consider positive spillovers. Establishments from
   27
     We measure proximity to one’s own type as the inverse distance-weighted average of the population share
of demographic group d in all tracts excluding tract j in year t, and nearby population density as the inverse
distance-weighted average population density in all tracts excluding tract j in year j.



                                                     14
complementary product types in close proximity provide foot traffic (Shoag and Veuger, 2018),
while proximity to upstream suppliers and a firm’s own establishments, at a wider margin, can
help reduce distribution and marketing costs (Holmes, 2011). To capture each of these factors,
we estimate the following reduced-form model of establishment entry and exit at the tract-level
for each SIC8 category in our amenity data:
(4)                                                                                          
                             X                                sic6|8 sic6|8     sic4|6 sic4|6
  sic8  sic8    sic8
nj10 −nj00 = α +                           βdist nj00,dist + βdist nj00,dist + βdist nj00,dist +εsic8
                                             sic8 sic8
                                                                                                 j .
                         dist∈{[0,1],[1,2],[2,4],[4,8]}


The dependent variable is the change in the number of establishments within a given SIC8 code
in tract j. The regressors characterize the business environment in the vicinity of tract j in 2000.
                             sic6|8        sic4|6
Specifically, nsic8
                 j00,dist , nj00,dist and nj00,dist denote the number of establishments within distance
interval dist from the centroid of tract j that fall in the same SIC8, in the same SIC6 but not
the same SIC8, and in the same SIC4 but not the same SIC6. For instance, nsic8             j00,[0,1] captures
the number of direct competitors an sic8 firm faces in tract j, i.e., the number of establishments
that are very close both geographically and in the same finely-defined industry space (e.g.,
                                                            sic8
other Korean restaurants located within 1 mile). β[0,1]          reflects the marginal effect of such direct
                               28
competitors on net entry.
     The estimation results summarized in Table 1 indicate that competition and cannibalization
concerns are strong predictors of establishment entry and exit in the vast majority of the 350
SIC8 codes used to define our four consumption amenity indexes. In 92 percent of SIC8 codes,
the presence of establishments in the same SIC8 within 0-1 miles significantly reduces entry in
a tract. Our estimated coefficients are larger for some establishment types that have stronger
cannibalization concerns: this cross-industry heterogeneity will work alongside spatial hetero-
geneity in the pre-existing business landscape to provide variation in our instrument, once we
condition for the aggregate initial level of amenity density in our second stage.
     We also see heterogeneity in the strength of agglomeration forces across SIC8 categories.
Proximity to establishments in related but less similar product spaces tends to yield positive
agglomeration externalities, but not in all SIC8 categories: the coefficient on the number of
                                                                            sic6|8
establishments within 1 mile in the same SIC6 but not SIC8 (β[0,1] ) and in the same SIC4 but
              sic4|6
not SIC6 (β[0,1] ) are positive and significant in about 50 percent of cases and negative and
significant in about 10 percent of cases.
     Our instruments for the change in the amenity density index are built analogously to the
original variable, but replacing the actual tract-level establishment counts for each amenity cat-
   28
      We also run analogous entry regressions at the chain level (e.g., McDonalds) and find that cannibalization and
competition concerns are even stronger for chains. Our results (available on request) also suggest that agglomera-
tion economies operate largely within chains. Chains tend to enter markets that they have already penetrated, even
if they avoid locating right next to an existing outlet.



                                                          15
egory in 2010 with their predicted values. The 2010 predicted tract-level establishment count
for an amenity category (i.e., restaurants, food stores, etc.) is the observed tract-level establish-
ment count in 2000 adjusted by the sum of the fitted values of the net entry regression above
across all of the SIC8 categories within the broader amenity category.
    First stage statistics presented in Table 4 indicate that these instruments are relevant. A
valid instrument must also be exogenous, i.e., uncorrelated with the error terms in equation 3
conditional on other regressors. The exclusion restriction could be violated if the instrument
correlates with supply shocks that affect the unobserved group-specific wage premia ∆ξ˜w,jc      d
                                                                                                    ,
but it is hard to find a story such that this would be true, especially for the college-educated
groups who are unlikely to work in restaurants and food stores.
    The instrument is robust to changes in local demand because the cross-tract variation in
the instrument is determined by tract-invariant, national coefficient estimates interacted with
the local, but predetermined, business mix. A violation of the conditional exclusion restric-
tion would require that demand factors not controlled for in equation 3 drive differences across
firms in their estimated business expansion strategies. For instance, the same unobserved de-
mand factors could drive both the difference in cannibalization concerns between Greek and
Korean restaurant firms, and the difference in the propensity of some age-education groups to
enter areas with initally more Greek than Korean restaurants. There is no particular reason to
expect this, but we cannot entirely exclude these stories. To alleviate these concerns, equation
3 includes a large array of demographic and amenity level controls, similar to what retailers
would consider in their demand-side market analysis.

    Housing Prices To overcome the endogeneity of house price changes, we exploit the cor-
relation between housing prices and exogenous natural amenities identified by Lee and Lin
(2018). We expect geographic features like oceans and mountains to act like anchors impos-
ing supply constraints on land, thereby driving up relative house price levels, as described in
Gyourko et al. (2013). These supply constraints may also amplify the reaction of house prices
to demand shocks, so we also use these natural amenities as instruments for changes in house
prices. Our vector of geographic features includes the log Euclidean distances (in km) of the
centroid of tract j from the coast of an ocean or Great Lake, from a lake, and from a river,
the log elevation of the census tract centroid, the census tract’s average slope, an indicator for
whether the tract is at high risk of flooding, the log of the annual precipitation, and the log
July maximum and January minimum temperatures in the tract averaged over 1971 and 2000.29
As in Bayer et al. (2007), our instrument for tract j uses geographic features of tracts one to
   29
      Such instruments have been criticized by Davidoff (2016) in the context of cross-CBSA regressions. David-
off (2016) shows that geographical supply constraints are correlated with demand factors and that constrained
cities like New York and San Francisco also have more productive workers. Our within-CBSA instrument is less
vulnerable to this criticism.


                                                      16
three miles away, controlling for the average geographic features of tracts within one mile. The
key exclusion restriction is that geographic features further than one mile away from a tract do
not impact demand for living in that tract, conditional on the geographic features within one
mile. As an additional instrument for changes in housing prices (and for the levels of local
demographic shares), we include historical tract-level 1970 population shares, by age and by
education group.
    In a robustness check, we exploit the Cobb-Douglas preference structure to simply dif-
ference out the CEX housing expenditure share of each age-education group from the utility
function. Endogeneity of housing is then no longer an issue because housing variables are used
to adjust the left-hand side variable and are excluded from the right-hand side regressors. This
approach, taken in Baum-Snow and Hartley (2017), replaces a reliance on assumptions related
to instruments with a reliance on assumptions about the demand structure.

    Employment Density The simultaneous determination of work and residential locations
is a key identification concern in residential choice model estimation. This problem is straight-
forward: young and college-educated workers can reduce their commute costs by moving to
areas experiencing an influx of firms hiring them. At the same time, firms may move closer
to a young, educated talent pool, which is often cited as justification for new downtown of-
fices by employers like Amazon, Twitter or Google (Johnson and Wingfield, 2013). We follow
Diamond (2016), amongst others, and instrument for changes in our job amenity indexes with
standard Bartik instruments. The LODES data include jobs in our three wage groups by 20
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) sectors. This industry breakdown al-
lows us to obtain Bartik predictions of wage group-specific employment growth that depend on
the industrial composition of each tract, and on national industry growth.

    Homophily and Population Density Controls We instrument for the change in popula-
tion density in nearby tracts using the 1970 population density in the same tract and its inverse
distance-weighted average across nearby tracts. Similarly, we instrument for the change in the
share of the same demographic group in nearby tracts using tract-level 1970 population shares,
by age and by education group, in the same tract as well as in nearby tracts (using an inverse-
distance weighted average).

    Nested-Logit Within-CBSA Share Instrumenting the change in the nested-logit share of
type d individuals within CBSA c who live in tract j, ∆sdj|c , requires exogenous factors affect-
ing the attractiveness of tract j relative to all other tracts in its CBSA c. For each instrument
described above, we compute instr(∆sdj|c ) as the average difference between the instrument in



                                               17
tract j and that in all other tracts k in CBSA c:
                                               P
                                                   k∈cj and k6=j (instrj   − instrk )
                           instr(∆sdj|c ) =                                             ,
                                                                Nc j

where Ncj is the number of tracts in the same CBSA c as tract j.30

4.2.2   Regression Results

Table 2 presents regression results for the nested-logit model (equation 3) for the three college-
educated age groups shown in Figure 1: 25-34, 35-44, and 45-64 years of age. Panel A presents
coefficient estimates for a specification where we instrument only for the nested-logit within-
CBSA share variable, which might otherwise cause collinearity issues. We refer to these esti-
mates as our “OLS” estimates.31 In Panel B, we instrument for all change variables, as described
above. Table 4 provides first-stage statistics for all instrumented variables. The reduced-form
and conditional Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) first-stage statistics all reject that the instru-
ments are irrelevant.
    Each panel shows coefficient estimates for three broad sets of location characteristics: house
prices, job density, and consumption amenities. For the sake of parsimony, this base specifica-
tion includes two representative consumption amenity density indexes for restaurants and food
stores (the non-tradable service and the tradable retail amenity with the largest CEX expendi-
ture and NHTS trip shares). All specifications also include the controls described in Section
4.2.1 above. To facilitate comparisons of coefficients across variables and specifications, the
presented coefficients are standardized. For example, the positive IV coefficient of 0.265 on
the change in high-income jobs means that moving up one standard deviation in the tract-level
distribution of this change induces a 0.265 standard deviation increase in the share of young
college-educated individuals living in a tract.
    For each age group, the first column shows coefficients on the 2000 to 2010 first-difference
                             d
in each variable (i.e., the βX,2010 coefficient on a variable ∆X̃jc ) and the second column shows
                                                                                 d
coefficients on the 2000 value of the corresponding variables (i.e., the ∆βX       coefficient on a
variable X̃jc,2000 ). We adopt the structural interpretation derived from the model in section
3. The coefficient on a variable in change has an interpretation as a preference parameter in
         d
2010, βX,2010 . A positive sign denotes attraction to this tract characteristic. The coefficient on
a variable in initial level has an interpretation as a change in preference from 2000 to 2010,
    d
∆βX   . In subsequent sections, we demonstrate the external validity of this interpretation and
   30
      In the discrete product choice case, Berry (1994) suggests instrumenting for the within-nest shares with
characteristics of firms producing other products in the nest. Our instruments are the analog of these competitor
characteristics where, in our setting, products are tracts and nests are CBSAs.
   31
      Our main results hold without taking this precaution.


                                                       18
the robustness of our coefficient estimates to alternative specifications and controls for omitted
variables. Here, we highlight a few key features of these estimates that provide confidence in
their internal validity.
    The first observation that we make is in comparing the OLS coefficients (panel A) with their
IV counterparts (panel B). The OLS coefficients on the change in the house price index, the
density of food stores, and the nearby young college share (our homophily control) are shifted
downward in the instrumented specification, likely due to classic endogeneity bias (unobserved
amenities and reverse causality). The OLS coefficients for jobs and restaurant density are of
the same sign as their IV counterparts but smaller in magnitude, likely as a result of attenuation
bias.32 Below we demonstrate that these differences in magnitude do not impact our main results
on the relative importance of various factors in explaining urban revival, which are robust to
whether we use the OLS or IV coefficient estimates. With this in mind, we turn the focus our
discussion to the instrumented coefficient estimates.
    The IV coefficients (panel B) generally have the expected sign. The coefficients on the
variables in changes imply that the young and college educated have a distaste for high house
prices and proximity to low- and middle-wage jobs (i.e., those paying less than $3,333 a month),
conditional on proximity to other amenities. These positive amenities include proximity to high-
wage jobs, restaurants, nearby population density, and nearby concentration of their peers. The
relatively large standardized coefficient on the change in high-wage job density is consistent
with the important role that job location plays in the household location decisions of the young
and college-educated.33
    Turning to the coefficients on variables in initial levels, the coefficients in column 2 of
panel B provide evidence of statistical and economically relevant increases in the preference of
the young and college-educated for proximity to restaurants between 2000 and 2010 and, to a
lesser extent, evidence of their declining preference for proximity to food stores. The coefficient
estimate on the level of high-wage job density indicate that young college graduate preferences
for proximity to high-wage jobs also increased over this period, albeit to a much smaller degree.
    The relative magnitudes of the coefficient estimates across age and education groups also
make sense. All three college-educated age groups have a similar estimated distaste for high
house prices, though they tend to be less sensitive to house prices than households without a col-
   32
       Though measurement error has been shown to generate bias of the magnitude suggested here in, for example,
crime data (Chalfin and McCrary, 2018), we also check to make sure that our IV coefficients are not being driven
by outlier observations. Online Appendix Figure A.3 presents our key coefficient of interest on the 2000 level of
restaurant density re-estimated dropping one CBSA at a time from our main sample. While the IV coefficients
vary when dropping Boston and Las Vegas, in particular, the estimates never drop below 0.12 with t-statistics of at
least 6.
    33
       The mild distaste for proximity to food stores may not be that surprising. The fact that most jurisdictions
have zoning regulations preventing commercial use near residential areas supports the notion that built amenities
that one rarely visits are indeed dis-amenities.



                                                       19
lege degree (Table 3 replicates Table 2 for the non-college educated). College-educated 25-34
year olds have the strongest preferences for proximity to high-wage jobs of any age-education
group in both OLS and IV. They also have the strongest taste and change in taste for restau-
rant density in both OLS and IV. Section 6 shows that our estimated patterns in preferences
for restaurant density are consistent with the relative levels and trends of trips and expenditures
across different age-education groups.


4.3     Decomposition Analysis
An important objective of our paper is to compare the relative power of various factors in ex-
plaining the changing location choices of the young and college-educated. To this end, we
combine the coefficients estimated above with the spatial distribution of each variable in urban
relative to suburban areas from section 4.1. Intuitively, a variable contributes to urban revival
if: 1) young college graduates like it, and 2) it is highly prevalent downtown. In terms of our
empirical framework, such a variable has: 1) a positive regression coefficient for young college
graduates in Table 2, and 2) a negative gradient from the city center in Figure 3 or 4.

4.3.1    Does the Model Predict Urban Revival?

Before studying the estimated contribution of each variable individually, we first look at their
collective performance fitting the particular urbanization of young college graduates relative to
other age-education groups. Our regression equation 3 predicts the log change in the share of a
given demographic group d living in a given tract j relative to a fixed base tract:
                                                         X
(5)                                        ∆\
                                            ln s̃djc =        cd X̃
                                                              β k jc,k
                                                          k


where X̃jc,k is the value a characteristic k takes in tract j relative to the base tract and βcd is
                                                                                               k
the estimated coefficient on that regressor for group d. The dashed curves in Figure 5 plot this
fitted value of predicted growth against distance to the city center for each age-education group,
while the solid curves plot the corresponding population growth gradient observed in the data.
To make a fair comparison, the predicted curve is based on the aggregate contribution of all
regressors in our base IV specification (Table 2), except for the distance to city center and the
                                                                                      P cd
within-CBSA share controls, which would provide a good fit mechanically (i.e., k β          k X̃jc,k
                               d
for all k except distjc and ∆sj|c ). Each curve is normalized to zero at the outer edge of CBSAs
to facilitate comparisons across age-education groups.34
   34
     Under this normalization, the log change in the population share of a tract relative to a base tract is equal
to the tract population growth depicted in Figure 1. The role that the regression coefficients and characteristic
gradients play in shifting the population growth curves shown in Figure 1 is derived in online Appendix E.


                                                       20
    Figure 5 shows that our model successfully matches the overall shape and ordering of the
population growth gradients for all six age-education groups, i.e., 25-34 year old college gradu-
ates and, to a lesser extent, 35-44 year old college graduates are moving downtown, while older
college graduates and all three age groups of non-college-graduates are moving to the suburbs.
The predicted growth at the city center (relative to growth at the edge) captures approximately
one third of the relative urban population growth (or decline) observed in the data for each age-
education group. We emphasize that the moments used to generate these predictions are not
targeted by our model.

4.3.2   Which Variables Explain Urban Revival?

The contribution of each individual regressor k to the predicted shift of a demographic group d
towards tract j in CBSA c in expression (5) is β cd X̃ . Figure 6 presents a kernel plot splitting
                                                   k jc,k
out the contribution of each explanatory variable k in pulling young-college graduates towards
tracts at different population-weighted distances from the city center, again using coefficients
from our base IV specification in Table 2. The left-hand plot shows the contribution of the
change variables, and the right-hand plot shows that of initial level variables. Again, to make
comparisons of contribution across variables easier, we normalize the contribution of each vari-
able at the outer edge of a CBSA to zero. As a result, the intercept of each plot with the city
center provides a ranking of each variable according to the importance of its contribution to
urbanizing a given group.
    As an example of how to interpret these plots, consider the urbanizing contribution of change
in high-wage job density. The change in high-wage job density has a large positive standard-
ized coefficient, so it is an important determinant of location choice for young college gradu-
ates. However, changes in high-wage job density contribute little to urbanizing young college
graduates, because of their relatively flat gradient shown in Figure 3. That is, young college
graduates value proximity to high-wage jobs, but these have not been growing much faster in
urban relative to suburban areas.
    Figure 6 shows the key result of the paper: the initial density of restaurants, a non-tradable
service, is the most important contributor to the urbanization of the young and college-educated.
Restaurants are representative of non-tradable services more generally: when we replicate this
exercise including additional consumption amenities, we find that the level of our other non-
tradable amenity, nightlife, is similarly identified as a top contributor to urban revival. Using
our structural interpretation of the regression coefficients, the model suggests that the main con-
tributing factor to the rising share of young college graduates near city centers is an increasing
preference for urbanized non-tradable service amenities.
    Table 5 quantifies these results. The table summarizes the contribution of the initial levels of


                                                21
non-tradable services density in urbanizing young college graduates.35 The first row of column 1
shows that, in our baseline specification, the initial level of restaurant density ranks first amongst
all of the variables included in the model, with the highest and most positive intercept in Figure
6. The initial level of restaurant density accounts for 45 percent of the total contribution of
all variables that make a positive contribution to the predicted urbanization of young college
graduates.36 In the base OLS specification, the level of non-tradable (restaurant) service ranks
fourth with a 17 percent contribution. This contribution rises to 48 percent (ranked first) if we
ignore the contributions of the highly endogenous variables for share of young college graduates
in nearby tracts and population density in nearby tracts, as shown in columns 3 and 4. Other
rows of Table 5 show the robustness of these conclusions for different specifications discussed
later in the paper.
    One way to characterize this analysis is as an attempt at distinguishing the role of changes
in characteristics from the role of changes in the willingness to pay for those characteristics
in explaining the difference in the spatial distribution of the young and college-educated be-
tween 2000 and 2010. This can be thought of as an application of the Oaxaca (1973) de-
composition commonly employed in the labor literature attempting to understand wage differ-
entials between two worker types (see, for example, Card and Krueger, 1992). Fortin et al.
(2011) highlights that this decomposition is sequential, in the sense that the order of the de-
composition matters for the conclusion. In our case, this implies that the use of the 2000
level variables, rather than 2010 level variables, could matter. For the purposes of estima-
tion, we use the 2000 level variables since they are less subject to reverse causality biases
than the 2010 level variables, which are mechanically correlated with the 2000-2010 change
variables. Using the parameter estimates obtained from this base specification, our contribu-
tion plots are almost invariant to whether
                                            we decompose the log share using 2000 shares as in
 \      d
             P         \d           d
∆ ln s̃jc = k∈K1 βk,2010 − ∆βk ∆X̃jc,k + k∈K2 ∆β
                                                  P         dd X̃
                                                               k jc,k,2000 or using 2010 shares as in
                                d
                             
∆\ ln s̃djc = k∈K1 β\   d                          dd
             P                           P
                        k,2010 ∆X̃jc,k +    k∈K2 ∆βk X̃jc,k,2010 .



4.3.3    Why Did Urban Revival Happen Primarily in Larger Cities?

In the urbanizing contribution plots above, the spatial distribution of each variable comes from
our estimation sample of all tracts in all CBSAs. However, our stylized facts document that the
urbanization of the young and college-educated is primarily a large city phenomenon. Figure
7 shows that non-tradable service levels can explain this as well. The plot on the left shows
   35
      See online Appendix Figure A.4 for the y-axis intercepts of each of the variables in Figure 6.
   36
      The denominator in this share is the sum of the positive y-axis intercepts in Figure 6 that are used to generate
our model fit in Figure 5 (recall that this excludes the nested-logit within-CBSA share term and the distance to
city center control). In absolute magnitude, the contribution of non-tradable service initial levels to young college
graduate growth near city centers is 1.3 times larger than the actual growth documented in Figure 1. However,
other factors are also pushing against the urbanization of young college graduates.


                                                         22
the contribution of initial level of restaurant density to urbanizing young college graduates for
four groups of CBSAs ranked by population: top 10, top 11 to 50, top 50 to 100, and all other
CBSAs. We find that the initial level of restaurant density indeed provides a stronger urbanizing
push in larger CBSAs, which have a higher relative density of restaurants (as well as nightlife)
near their city centers relative to surrounding areas than smaller cities.


5        Robustness
We now present various robustness exercises. First, we demonstrate the robustness of our results
to alternative model specifications and additional controls. Then we explore the role of other
factors for which our data is more limited, and therefore choose not to include in our main
analysis.


5.1      Alternative Specifications
Tables 6 presents the robustness of our base specification for our key demographic of interest
(college-educated 25-34 year olds) to alternative specifications. Specifically, between columns
1 through 4 and columns 5 through 8, we switch from a standard nested-logit specification to
a multinominal logit specification that permits the use of CBSA fixed effects. The first two
columns in each set show the specifications in IV and the second two columns in each set
show the specifications in OLS. Notably, the qualitative patterns in the coefficients estimated in
the CBSA fixed-effect specification are broadly consistent with those estimated in the baseline
nested specification.37 Table 5 shows that, as in the nested specification, the inital level of non-
tradable services is one of the top contributors to the urbanization of young college graduates
in both the OLS and IV non-nested CBSA fixed-effect specifications, ranking second amongst
all variables in both cases.38


5.2      Omitted Consumption Amenities
It is important to establish that our amenity density coefficients are measuring preferences for
proximity to restaurants and food stores, rather than to other amenities not controlled for in our
    37
      The magnitudes of all of the standardized coefficients increase, since their relative explanatory power is not
dampened by the presence of the within-CBSA share that plays no role in the non-nested specification.
   38
      The CBSA fixed-effect specification fails to deliver a clear top contributor to the urbanization of young college
graduates. The most important contributor in OLS is change in share of same type nearby, while the most positive
contributor in IV is the high wage job density, which makes almost no contribution in OLS. Unlike other competing
variables, non-tradable service levels show up as either the most, or one of the most important contributors to urban
revival across a broad range of specifications and identifying variation.




                                                         23
base specification. To that end, Table 7 adds a series of controls for other amenities to our base
specification.
    First, we confirm that the estimated preference patterns of young college graduates for non-
tradable services and tradable retail generalize to consumption amenities other than restaurants
and food stores. Columns 3 and 4 add nightlife and apparel stores to the set of amenities in
our base IV specification (replicated in columns 1 and 2 for convenience). We choose these
two amenities because, like restaurants and food stores, they have reasonable counterparts in
the expenditure and travel data that we use to study external validity. The coefficients suggest
that the growing attraction of young college graduates towards restaurants and their weakening
attraction to food stores is indicative of a general trend towards non-tradable services and away
from tradable retail.39
    Columns 5 and 6 demonstrate the robustness of our estimates to tract-level endogenous
controls for the level and change in the diversity of food stores and restaurants, described above
in section 4.1. The coefficients on the diversity controls are positive and statistically significant,
but adding them has little impact on the coefficient estimates from our baseline specification.
Columns 7 and 8 add controls for our restaurant quality index, which takes a high value if a
tract contains restaurant chains preferred by the young and college-educated. The coefficients
on the level and change of the quality index are not statistically different from zero. This result
may not be surprising, given that we already include direct controls capturing the number of
other young college graduates nearby. As expected, the quality variables become positive and
significant once we remove these nearby population density and share of same type controls in
Columns 9 and 10. This provides some reassurance that our homophily and density controls
indeed capture unobservable factors, like the the quality of amenities, that could otherwise
confound our estimates.
    Panel B in Table 5 shows the contribution of the level of non-tradable (restaurant) density
to the urbanization of the young and college-educated remains high when we add controls for
amenity quality and diversity. The young and college-educated are attracted to the increasing
quality and diversity of restaurants downtown but this mechanism does not drive our main result.
Instead, increases in the relative diversity and quality of downtown restaurants work alongside
the changing taste for non-tradable density to attract young college graduates downtown. It
is worth noting that we see much faster increases in restaurant diversity and quality near their
city centers relative to their suburbs in larger cities, where we have also seen the strongest
urbanization of young college graduates.
    Finally, we address the concern that our 2000 amenity index levels reflect recent establish-
ment entry and exit caused by expectations of future demographic shifts. To this end, columns
   39
     The growing taste for non-tradable services is not limited to food and beverage-related establishments. We
estimate similar preference patterns for density in personal service establishments and gyms.


                                                      24
11 and 12 of Table 7 substitute the 2000 levels and 2000-2010 changes in our restaurant and
food store density indexes with 1992 levels and 1992-2010 changes, respectively.40 Our coeffi-
cients are very similar. This is not surprising given the stability of the amenity density gradients
shown in Figure A.2.


5.3      Crime, School, and Transit
Public amenities like school quality, crime rates, and transit availability are important determi-
nants of residential location choices. The well-documented decline in central city violent crime
since 1990 (e.g., Levitt, 2004) is also a potential explanation for urban revival. Anecdotal evi-
dence suggests that school quality drives the suburban location choice of families with children.
Transit availability is, on the other hand, a prominent characteristic of city centers.
    Table 5 documents that the initial level of non-tradable services is still the most important
determinant of urbanization for the young and college-educated even after including controls
for each of these public amenities to our base IV specification. The same is true in the cor-
responding OLS regression and if we add the public amenities together, although we run into
power issues since the sample in which all three public amenity variables is available is limited.
    Together these results indicate that our baseline results are not biased by the omission of
these public amenity variables. Nevertheless, the role of public amenities implied by the co-
efficients on these variables and the changes in their urban-suburban gradients documented in
Section 4.1 are worth noting.
    Table 8 reports coefficients on controls for the changes and initial levels in local school
district rankings and per capita violent crime, and for 2014 level of the transit time of a five-
mile trip, when added to our base IV specification for each of the six age-education groups we
study. Adding these public amenities variables reduces our sample size, yet we can still identify
meaningful differences in the attraction of each age-education group towards (or away from)
these neighborhood characteristics.
    The sign of the coefficient on change in violent crime per capita is negative and signif-
icant for all college-educated age groups. Others (e.g., Kneebone and Raphael, 2011) have
documented that the decline in urban crime was faster in the 1990s, the decade preceding the
widespread urban revival that we document. To test the Ellen et al. (2017) hypothesis that
college-educated individuals move to central cities that experienced a prior decline in crime,
we also use 1990 crime levels and 1990-2010 changes in crime in place of our 2000 and 2000-
2010 variables. There too we find a negative coefficient on the longer-run change in crime
that, combined with the relative reductions in urban crime over the longer period, contributes
to urbanizing the young and college-educated. However, this contribution is still negligible
  40
       1992 is the earliest year for which data is available from NETS.


                                                         25
compared to that of non-tradable service levels, explaining 1 percent of the urbanization of
young college graduates. Even if we allowed for as much as the five-fold downward attenuation
bias that Chalfin and McCrary (2018) find when using the same UCR data, the contribution
of the crime variables would still be less than one fifth of the contribution of non-tradable
amenities.41,42 One could also think that reductions in crime make having a large number of
non-tradable amenities, like restaurants and bars, within walking distance more attractive for
the young and college-educated. We do not find any evidence that this is the case, however
(the estimated coefficient on a control interacting the 1990s reduction in crime with the 2000
level of restaurant density is a statistical zero). Finally, as noted in Edlund et al. (2016), there
is anecdotal evidence that central locations in large European cities are also experiencing rising
demand from the young and college-educated, despite not having had the high rates and subse-
quent decline in crime that U.S. central cities experienced. Combined, these pieces of evidence
do not preclude a significant role of crime decline in generating favorable conditions for urban
revival, but they suggest that the root of the widespread, recent urbanization of young college
graduates lies elsewhere.
    We also find that improvements in school quality are unlikely to be a major factor in urban
revival. Figure 3 showed that the relative ranking of schools near city centers worsened from
2004 to 2010. The young and college-educated show no preference for highly ranked school
districts in Table 8, unlike the middle-aged and older college-educated. While these preferences
and trends in relative school quality might anchor the older college graduates to the suburbs,
they do not help to explain why the young started moving downtown.
    Finally, our transit performance index in 2014 (the only year for which we have tract-level
transit travel times) is correlated with a positive influx of the young and college-educated,
though less so than for older college graduates and the non-college educated. This accords
with evidence that transit accessibility plays a role in the urbanization of low-income house-
holds (LeRoy and Sonstelie, 1983; Glaeser et al., 2008). The implied increasing taste for short
public transit commutes to downtown, meanwhile, only contributes 3% of the urbanization of
the college-educated, compared with the 46% contribution of the change in taste for proximity
to non-tradable services.
   41
       The direction of the endogeneity bias is in theory ambiguous, but Autor et al. (2017) show that gentrification
reduces crime. This suggests that the endogeneity bias works in the opposite direction to the attenuation bais,
pushing our coefficient on crime change in the direction of finding a larger negative impact on the location choice
of college-educated groups. Our positive coefficient estimates on change in crime for non-college-educated groups
is also consistent with this direction of bias.
    42
       We note two differences between our approach and that in Ellen et al. (2017) that help to reconcile our
results. First, we focus on the younger college-educated group in particular and on areas smaller than central
cities, motivated by the stylized facts in section 2. Second, our empirical approach infers a general aversion to
violent crime regardless of the area, rather than assigning specific aversion to “central city” crime to different
groups.




                                                        26
5.4      Alternative Housing Cost Data
The house price index in our base specification is the Zillow House Value Index for two-
bedroom homes, which measures the median value of two-bedroom homes in at the zipcode
level. This index does not capture rental units that are prevalent in urban areas, and it depends
on the average size and quality of housing units, as well as on market supply and demand con-
ditions. We test the robustness of our results to our treatment of house prices in four different
ways. First, we include the median age of housing units in a tract to capture the amount of
new housing development as a proxy for quality. Second, we include HUD’s Fair Market Rent
Series, in addition to the Zillow house price index. Third, we try different measures of house
prices in place of the Zillow two-bedroom index. These include Zillow’s per square foot index
and Ferreira and Gyourko (2011)’s hedonic price index that controls for more housing charac-
teristics. We also run a specification where the change in house prices is measured using the
FHFA tract-level repeat sales index (keeping the Zillow two-bedroom index as our measure of
the relative level of house prices across tracts, since the FHFA index does not compare house
price levels). Finally, we use the Cobb-Douglas preference structure to remove endogenous
housing prices by differencing out CEX group-specific housing expenditure shares from utility
and running regressions on these housing-adjusted shares. Panel C in Table 5 shows that, in all
cases, initial levels of non-tradable services still make the largest contribution to urban revival.43
    In an online Appendix F we investigate the possibility that urban revival is explained by
limited mortgage credit availability following the housing crisis and recession of 2007-2009,
which pushed individuals into urbanized rental housing. We find no support for this hypoth-
esis in the ACS and IPUMS data, which instead suggests that urban revival starts before the
recession, during a period of rising homeownership rates.


6        External Validity
In this section, we corroborate our regression results with complementary data documenting
patterns in travel to amenities, expenditures on amenities, and commutes to work.

Travel and Expenditure Data

NHTS trip data and CEX expenditure data on restaurants and nightlife support our key regres-
sion finding that non-tradable service amenities play an especially and increasingly important
role in the location choices of young college graduates relative to other age-education groups.
    43
     Online Appendix Table A.5 shows the underlying regression coefficient estimates used in calculating these
contribution factors.




                                                     27
    Figure 9 shows CEX expenditure shares and NHTS trip shares separately for all six age-
education groups, in 2010 levels and in 2000 to 2010 changes, along with 95 percent confidence
bands.44 Expenditure and trip allocations to restaurants are shown in Panel A, while allocations
to nightlife are shown in Panel B.45 The top row of bar charts in each panel show the 2010 level
of expenditure and trip shares for each age-education group and the bottom row of bar charts in
each panel show how these gaps developed over the preceding decade. For instance, the top left
chart in Panel A shows that young college graduates spent 25 percent more of their expenditure
on restaurants than old college graduates. The lower left chart in Panel A shows that more than
half of this gap emerged between 1998 and 2014, over which time the restaurant expenditure
share of the young increased almost three times as much as that of the old.
    More broadly, in 2010, the young and college-educated allocated more of their expenditures
and trips to restaurants and nightlife than any of the other five age-education groups. The young
and college-educated also increased their expenditures on and trip shares to both restaurants
and nightlife over the preceding decade. In fact, the young and college-educated increased their
restaurant trip and nightlife expenditure shares by more than any other age-education group, and
these differential trends are statistically significant. Notably, the young and college-educated
increased their spending on nightlife by over 50%, and they were the only group to increase
their trip share to restaurants, in a period when all groups were taking relatively fewer such
trips. Young college graduates raised their restaurant expenditure share and nightlife trip share
by more than all but one age-education group, with similar increases in restaurant expenditures
to the middle-aged college graduates and in nightlife trips to young non-college graduates.
    These patterns do not replicate for tradable retail like food and apparel stores (see Figure
A.4). For instance, the young and college-educated have the lowest expenditure share on food
stores of any age-education group, and the second lowest trip share to buy goods (groceries,
clothing, and hardware).
    Of course, expenditure and trips shares may not capture preferences if travel costs decline
with proximity to consumption amenities, and if the young and college-educated live closer
   44
       The NHTS takes place roughly every 7 years, so we use the 2001 and 2009 NHTS, which are two consecutive
surveys with exactly the same trip definitions (trip definitions are different in the previous and subsequent NHTS
surveys in 1995 and 2017). We show CEX data for 1998 and 2014 instead of 2000 and 2010 to avoid measuring
expenditures right before and right after recessions, which cause temporary declines in expenditures on luxury
goods like non-tradable services. Importantly, the ranking of young college graduates across groups discussed
below is exactly the same if we use the 2000-2010 instead of 1998-2014 CEX. To maximize sample size, we
aggregate quarterly CEX data over 5 years (i.e., 1996-2000 and 2012-2016). 1996 is the earliest year available on
the CEX website (https://www.bls.gov/cex/pumd_data.htm, accessed 1 April 2019).
    45
       CEX expenditures on “restaurants” include all food away from home, except alcohol. The CEX reports
expenditures at the household (“consumption unit”) level, so we attribute the expenditure shares of the house-
hold to its individual members by age and education status. The NHTS records all trips on a single survey day
separately for all members of participating households. We define as “nightlife” trips to “Go out/Hang out: en-
tertainment/theater/sports event/go to bar” and expenditures on “alcohol away from home”. All details appear in
Appendix A.


                                                       28
to these amenities in 2010. Using confidential geo-coded NHTS trip data, we verify that the
patterns documented above persist after controlling for the amenity density in a traveler’s resi-
dential tract.
    This increase in young college graduates’ expenditure and trip shares to non-tradable ser-
vices, in absolute value and relative to other groups, supports our structural interpretation of
the model’s coefficients on non-tradable services initial levels. That is, CEX and NHTS data
lend credence to our regression finding that young college graduates experienced a change in
their preferences for non-tradable services that is positive and larger than that of other groups.
The importance of residential amenities in location choice should not come as a surprise. In the
2009 NHTS travel data, high-income individuals in the urban areas of large cities on average
take more trips to non-tradable service amenities than commute trips to work.

Commute Data

We now use LODES commute data by wage groups between 2002 and 2011 to corroborate our
regression results that residential amenities play a role in urban revival, which we observe even
after conditioning on changing job locations and changing tastes towards short work commutes.
    Figure 8 shows recent changes in commute patterns - the percent change in the number
of workers living and working at different distances from the city center - from the LODES
data by wage groups between 2002 and 2011.46 Consistent with Figure 1, Panel A shows
that the aggregate workforce has been suburbanizing. In particular, residential suburbanization
has outpaced workplace suburbanization, with faster worker population growth in the suburbs
than downtown holding fixed workplace distance from the city center. Panel B, meanwhile,
shows that high-wage workers in large cities have instead centralized both their workplaces and
residences. Here too, the residential shift has outpaced the workplace shift, but in the opposite
direction: holding fixed distance from workplace to city centers, high-wage employees are
moving their residences closer to city centers in large CBSAs.
    Overall, average commute length increased slightly for high-wage workers from 2002 to
2011, with the largest increase for those living near the city center, due in part to the rising share
of reverse commuters (workers living close to the city centers of large CBSAs but working in
the outskirts). The longer commutes that high-wage workers are willing to incur to live near
city centers are consistent with our main finding in this paper on the increasing attractiveness
of downtown residential amenities. Though based on the location patterns of a different set
of people than our main census results (LODES high-wage workers are a much larger group
   46
      Residential distance from the city center is fixed within each row of the matrix and workplace distance from
the city center is fixed within each column. The row/column distance bins are: 0-1, 1-2, 2-4, 4-8, 8-16, 16-32, and
32+ miles from the city center. The bars to the left of each cell depict the relative magnitude of the population
growth.



                                                       29
than the young and college-educated), these commuting results support our conclusion that
residential amenities contribute to urban revival.


7        Explaining Changing Tastes for Non-Tradable Services
Our model estimates suggest that young college graduates’s rising propensity to locate near
non-tradable service amenities plays an important role in America’s recent urban revival. In this
section, we propose that the changing socioeconomic characteristics of young college graduates
can explain their rising collective tastes for non-tradable services and, in turn, their urbanization.
As an example, if rich and single young college graduates spend more on and travel more to
amenities like restaurant and nightlife, then delayed family formation and top income growth
may explain their urbanization and rising collective tastes for non-tradable services.47
    We first document differences across family types and income brackets in young and college-
educated households’ propensity to reside downtown, and in the mix of consumption amenities
that they spend on and travel to. We then investigate the potential for changes in the composi-
tion of the young and college-educated across family types and income brackets to mechanically
explain 1) the urban growth of young college graduates in general, and 2) the growth in their
expenditure and travel to non-tradable service amenities.

Location choice, travel, and expenditure across family types and income brackets

Our analysis uses IPUMS microdata, where we can decompose the population into age-education-
family types and age-education-income brackets not available in tract-level census tables used
in our analysis above. We limit our attention to the 27 large CBSAs whose PUMAs (IPUMS
geographic units) are small enough for us to construct constant geography downtowns in 1990
and 2014, as outlined in Appendix A. We assign individuals to four family types: 1. Unmarried
with no children, 2. Married with no children, 3. Youngest child younger than 5 years old, 4.
Youngest child older than 5 years old. Household income is adjusted to reflect a “per capita”
equivalent using the modified OECD equivalence scale and deflated to 1999 dollars. We use
IPUMS data from 1990 to 2014, rather than from 2000 to 2010, since the recessions of the
early and late 2000s obscure income trends.48 To study the role of changing family types and
incomes in explaining the changing trip and expenditure patterns documented in the external
validity section above, we split the NHTS and CEX microdata for each age-education group
into the same four family types, and into income brackets as fine as allowed by the coarser
income definitions in the NHTS data.
    47
      In online Appendix F, we review and find limited support for alternative explanations for changing tastes for
non-tradable services, such as changes in the technology available to access information on these amenities.
   48
      Our main family type results hold using 2000 to 2010 data.


                                                       30
    Figure 10 shows that, between 1990 and 2014, the young and college-educated popula-
tion shifted towards the segments of the population that demonstrate the highest tendency to
live downtown and consume non-tradable services. Specifically, Panel A shows that between
1990 and 2014, the young and college-educated were delaying childbirth and marriage, and
experiencing income growth at the top of the distribution. The population share of unmarried
and childless individuals grew by 10 percentage points, from 44 to 54 percent of young col-
lege graduates, while the population share earning more than $150,000 (in 1999 dollars) almost
doubled from 2.3 to 3.8 percent.49 Panel B shows that in 1990, the unmarried/childless and
higher income segments were the most urbanized segments of the young college-educated pop-
ulation. Similarly, Panel C shows that in 2000, the earliest year we have NHTS data, these
same segments of the population had the largest expenditure (CEX) and travel (NHTS) shares
on restaurants and nightlife. For instance, unmarried and childless households spend almost
twice as much on restaurants as households with young children, and four times as much on
nightlife.50
    One may worry that unmarried/childless and richer individuals patronize non-tradable ser-
vices only because they live close to such amenities. Using confidential geo-coded NHTS data,
we find that the higher propensity of unmarried/childless, and rich indivisuals to travel to non-
tradable services relative to that of individuals living in other types of households persists almost
entirely after controlling for the non-tradable service density near a traveler’s residence.

Impact of family and income shift on urbanization

We now investigate whether changes in family or income composition from 1990 to 2014 can
explain the urbanization of young college graduates. Together, Panels A and B of Figure 10
show that the composition of young college graduates is shifting from suburbanized family
types, such as families with children, towards the only urbanized type, the unmarried with
no children. Between 1990 and 2014, young college graduates also moved to the ends of the
income distribution, both of which disproportionately reside downtown. As a result, shifts in the
composition of young college graduates across family types and income brackets mechanically
explain their urbanization over this period. A simple shift share analysis reveals that changes
in family types predict 20 percent of the actual difference between the urban and suburban
population growth of the young and college-educated, and changes in the income distribution
    49
       Figure A.5 in online Appendix C provides similar family type shares for additional years (1990, 2000, 2010,
and 2014), and demonstrates that delayed family formation accelerates after 2000.
    50
       Our finding that non-tradable services like restaurant and nightlife are luxury goods for young college grad-
uates corresponds to Engel curve estimates in Aguiar and Bils (2015). They use CEX data from 1994 to1996 to
construct Engel curve estimates for the general population in 20 expenditure categories and find that both ”en-
tertainment” and ”restaurants” have expenditure elasticities higher than 1. Entertainment has the second highest
elasticity at 1.74 (the highest is cash contributions, such as charitable donations), and restaurants have the seventh
highest elasiticty at 1.32.

                                                         31
predict an additional 10 percent. In absolute terms, these two forces together mechanically
predict a large 19 percentage point gap between urban and suburban young-college growth over
the last 25 years (30 percent of the actual 64 percentage point urban-suburban gap in young-
college growth over the same period).51
    Three remarks are in order here. First, more than 70 percent of the impact of shifting
family types occurs after 2000, a period over which delayed family formation exerts a stronger
urbanization pull on young college graduates than on any other age-education group. Second, a
shift-share analysis is unlikely to entirely explain a gap as large as the 64 percentage point gap
between the downtown and suburban young-college population growth observed from 1990 to
2014 in the 27 large CBSAs for which we have constant geography downtowns. Endogenous
change in these areas must be happening simultaneously, such as the rise in the quality and
diversity of downtown restaurants that we document. Third, to fully capture the impact of rising
income inequality on location choices given that both rich and poor households are initially
urbanized, one needs to model how shifts in the income distribution impact urban house prices
and endogenous luxury amenities.52 Couture et al. (2018) pursue this structural approach to
specifically investigate the impact of top income growth on the urbanization of high income
households. In that model, non-tradable service amenities, which we identify here as the most
important driver of urban revival, play the key role in driving the rich downtown as their incomes
rise.

Impact of family and income shifts on travel and expenditures to non-tradable services

We can perform a similar shift-share analysis to explain changes in collective tastes for non-
tradable service amenities. Figure 1 shows that young college-educated family types with the
highest propensity to spend on and travel to restaurants and nightlife (unmarried and childless)
are growing, while types with the lowest propensity (families with children) are shrinking.
As a result, a family type shift-share analysis correctly predicts the upward shift in travel and
expenditures to restaurant and nightlife documented in Figure 9. Magnitudes of the predicted
growth range between 15 and 56 percent of actual growth. In all cases, either the young college
or young non-college-educated have the fastest predicted growth.53
   51
       We note that our income measure is adjusted for family size, so these family formation and income change
are separate trends by construction. As a result, considering changes in the interaction of family type and income
group predicts 27 percent of the actual urbanization.
    52
       For instance, a shift share analysis can make counterfactual urbanization predictions for other groups, and
changes in the income distribution predicts the urbanization of the non-college-educated, but because the share of
poor non-college-educated households is growing, and the poor are also overrepresented in urban areas (Glaeser
et al., 2008).
    53
       Ideally we would also produce results with 1990 level of travel and expenditure share, but these are not
available so we use 2000 levels. We cannot directly use the NHTS and CEX to measure changes in family and
income types across surveys, because these samples are much too small in size and not stratified for this purpose.



                                                       32
    Delayed family formation pushed the young, both college and non-college educated, to-
wards non-tradable services. Shifts in the income distribution, however, make different pre-
dictions for college and non-college educated. Skilled biased income growth from 1990 to
2014 predicts a large decline in trip and expenditure shares to luxury non-tradable services like
restaurant and nightlife for non-college educated groups. The young and middle-age college
educated, meanwhile, have much higher predicted growth from shifts in the income distribu-
tion (though it is still close to zero because the share of both rich and poor college-educated
households is rising).54
    To summarize, we find that, due to delayed family formation and top income growth, young
college graduates increasingly live in households with high propensity for co-locating with,
spending on, and traveling to non-tradable services. Together, these facts illuminate our key
regression finding that increasing preferences for non-tradable services play a key role in the
recent urbanization of the young college educated.


8     Discussion
Urban revival currently attracts considerable media attention and interest from the general pub-
lic. Using census data, we show that this revival is indeed happening in almost all large U.S.
cities, and is driven by the location decisions of the young and college-educated. While the rest
of the country continues to suburbanize, the young and college-educated flock downtown.
    We evaluate the importance of various explanations for this trend. We find that diverging
preferences for non-tradable services like restaurants and nightlife explain the diverging loca-
tion decisions of the young and college-educated relative to other groups. Travel and expendi-
ture shares of the young and college-educated also diverge from that of other groups, lending
further credence to our model’s results.
    It is, of course, important to identify the source of such changing preference parameters.
Our investigation highlights the role of delayed family formation and top income growth. The
young and college-educated are increasingly likely to be unmarried and childless, and to earn
income in the highest bracket, which are the two segments with the strongest demand for urban
living and non-tradable service amenities.
    It is striking that the classic factors used to explain residential location decisions (e.g., jobs,
                                         P
We compute this percentage change as (sn,14 − sn,90 )xn,00 )/x00 , where sn,14 is the share of families of type
n in 2014 and xn,00 is the expenditure (or travel) share for type n in 2000. We compute change in family types
and income brackets for all households in IPUMS (to match our NHTS and CEX samples), but results are similar
using our sample of 27 CBSAs with constant geography.
   54
      A similar shift share analysis by race predicts the reverse, i.e., large declines in non-tradable service travel
and expenditures that are in general not less negative for the young and college-educated. A racial shift-share
analysis does correctly predict urbanization, since whites are initially suburbanized and shrinking as a share of the
population, but the predicted impact is small.


                                                         33
housing, and schooling) struggle to explain urban revival. If the key factor at play is indeed
a changing preference for urban non-tradable consumption amenities, then there are important
consequences for the sustainability and welfare implications of urban revival. Consumption
amenities are endogenous, and diverging preferences mean that while high-quality non-tradable
services may compensate the young and college-educated for high housing prices near city
centers, these amenities fail to compensate the poorer households already living there. These
poorer households may either be displaced or incur high housing costs for downtowns offering
fewer of the amenities that suit their less luxurious tastes. We are exploring these welfare
implications in complementary work (Couture et al., 2018).




                                             34
References
Aguiar, M. and M. Bils (2015). Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequality?
  American Economic Review 105(9), 2725–56.

Autor, D. H., C. J. Palmer, and P. A. Pathak (2017). Gentrification and the Amenity Value
  of Crime Reductions: Evidence from Rent Deregulation. Working Paper 23914, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Baum-Snow, N. (2007). Did Highways Cause Suburbanization? The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 122(2), 775–805.

Baum-Snow, N. and D. Hartley (2017). Accounting for Central Neighborhood Change, 1980-
  2010. Working Paper 2016-09, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Bayer, P., F. Ferreira, and R. McMillan (2007). A Unified Framework for Measuring Preferences
  for Schools and Neighborhoods. Journal of Political Economy 115(4), 588–638.

Becker, G. S. (1965). A Theory of the Allocation of Time. The Economic Journal 75(299),
  493–517.

Behrens, K., B. Boualam, J. Martin, and F. Mayneris (2018). Gentrification and Pioneer Busi-
  nesses.

Berry, S. T. (1994). Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation. The RAND
  Journal of Economics 25(2), 242–262.

Bogin, A., W. Doerner, and W. Larson (2018). Local House Price Dynamics: New Indices and
  Stylized Facts. Real Estate Economics.

Boustan, L. P. (2010). Was Postwar Suburbanization White Flight? Evidence from the Black
  Migration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 417–443.

Brueckner, J. K., J.-F. Thisse, and Y. Zenou (1999). Why is Central Paris Rich and Downtown
  Detroit Poor?: An Amenity-Based Theory. European Economic Review 43(1), 91–107.

Card, D. and A. B. Krueger (1992). School Quality and Black-White Relative Earnings: A
  Direct Assessment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107(1), 151–200.

Carlino, G. A. and A. Saiz (2008). Beautiful City: Leisure Amenities and Urban Growth.

Chalfin, A. and J. McCrary (2018). Are US Cities Underpoliced? Theory and Evidence. Review
  of Economics and Statistics 100(1), 167–186.

Couture, V. (2016). Valuing the Consumption Benefits of Urban Density.

Couture, V., J. Dingel, J. Handbury, and A. Green (2019). Quantifying Social Interactions Using
  Smartphone Data.

Couture, V., C. Gaubert, J. Handbury, and E. Hurst (2018). Income Growth and the Distribu-
  tional Effects of Urban Spatial Sorting.

                                              35
Davidoff, T. (2016). Supply Constraints are Not Valid Instrumental Variables for Home Prices
  Because They are Correlated with Many Demand Factors. Critical Finance Review 5(2),
  177–206.
Diamond, R. (2016). The Determinants and Welfare Implications of U.S. Workers’ Diverging
  Location Choices by Skill: 1980-2000. American Economic Review 106(3), 479–524.
Edlund, L., C. Machado, and M. Sviatchi (2016). Bright Minds, Big Rent: Gentrification and
  the Rising Returns to Skill. Working Paper 21729, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Ellen, I. G., K. M. Horn, and D. Reed (2017). Has Falling Crime Invited Gentrification?
Epple, D. and H. Sieg (1999). Estimating Equilibrium Models of Local Jurisdictions. Journal
  of Political Economy 107(4), 645–681.
Ferreira, F. and J. Gyourko (2011). Anatomy of the Beginning of the Housing Boom: US
  Neighborhoods and Metropolitan Areas, 1993-2009. Working Paper 17374, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Fortin, N., T. Lemieux, and S. Firpo (2011). Decomposition Methods in Economics. In Hand-
  book of Labor Economics, Volume 4. Elsevier B.V.
Glaeser, E. L., M. E. Kahn, and J. Rappaport (2008). Why Do the Poor Live in Cities? The
  Role of Public Transportation. Journal of Urban Economics 63(1), 1–24.
Glaeser, E. L., H. Kim, and M. Luca (2018). Nowcasting Gentrification: Using Yelp Data to
  Quantify Neighborhood Change. In AEA Papers and Proceedings, Volume 108, pp. 77–82.
Glaeser, E. L., J. Kolko, and A. Saiz (2001). Consumer City. Journal of Economic Geogra-
  phy 1(1), 27–50.
Glaeser, E. L., A. Saiz, G. Burtless, and W. C. Strange (2004). The Rise of the Skilled City
  [with Comments]. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Urban Affairs, 47–105.
Graham, M. R., M. J. Kutzbach, and B. McKenzie (2014). Design Comparison of LODES and
  ACS Commuting Data.
Guerrieri, V., D. Hartley, and E. Hurst (2013). Endogenous Gentrification and Housing Price
  Dynamics. Journal of Public Economics 100, 45–60.
Gyourko, J., C. Mayer, and T. Sinai (2013). Superstar Cities. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 5(4), 167–199.
Holian, M. J. and M. E. Kahn (2012). The Impact of Center City Economic and Cultural
  Vibrancy on Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Transportation.
Holmes, T. J. (2011). The Diffusion of Wal-Mart and Economies of Density. Economet-
  rica 79(1), 253–302.
Igami, M. and N. Yang (2016). Unobserved Heterogeneity in Dynamic Games: Cannibalization
  and Preemptive Entry of Hamburger Chains in Canada. Quantitative Economics 7(2), 483–
  521.

                                             36
Jaffee, D. and J. M. Quigley (2011). The Future of the Government Sponsored Enterprises: The
  Role for Government in the U.S. Mortgage Market. Working Paper 17685, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Johnson, K. and N. Wingfield (2013). As Amazon Stretches, Seattle’s Downtown Is Reshaped.
  The New York Times.

Kneebone, E. and S. Raphael (2011). City and Suburban Crime Trends in Metropolitan Amer-
  ica. Technical report, Brookings Institution.

Lee, S. and J. Lin (2018). Natural Amenities, Neighbourhood Dynamics, and Persistence in the
  Spatial Distribution of Income. The Review of Economic Studies 85(1), 663–694.

LeRoy, S. F. and J. Sonstelie (1983). Paradise Lost and Regained: Transportation Innovation,
  Income, and Residential Location. Journal of Urban Economics 13(1), 67–89.

Levitt, S. D. (2004). Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s: Four Factors that Explain
  the Decline and Six that Do Not. Journal of Economic Perspectives 18(1), 163–190.

McFadden, D. (1973). Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior. In Frontiers
 in Econometrics, pp. 105–142. New York: Academic Press.

McFadden, D. (1978). Modelling the Choice of Residential Location. In A. Karlqvist (Ed.),
 Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning Models. New York: Elsevier North-Holland.

Moretti, E. (2012). The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Murphy, D. (2018). Home Production, Expenditure, and Economic Geography. Regional Sci-
 ence and Urban Economics 70, 112–126.

Neumark, D., J. Zhang, and B. Wall (2007). Employment Dynamics and Business Reloca-
  tion: New Evidence from the National Establishment Time Series. Research in Labor Eco-
  nomics 26, 39–83.

Oaxaca, R. (1973). Male-Female Wage Differentials in Urban Labor Markets. International
  Economic Review 14(3), 693–709.

Parrott, J. and M. Zandi (2013). Opening the Credit Box.

Rappaport, J. (2015). Millennials, Baby Boomers, and Rebounding Multifamily Home Con-
  struction. Working Paper 2637622, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

Roback, J. (1982). Wages, Rents, and the Quality of Life. Journal of Political Economy 90(6),
  1257–78.

Rosen, S. (1979). Wage-Based Indexes of Urban Quality of Life. In P. M. Mieszkowski and
  M. R. Straszheim (Eds.), Current Issues in Urban Economics. John Hopkins University Press.

Sanderson, E. and F. Windmeijer (2016). A Weak Instrument F-Test in Linear IV Models with
  Multiple Endogenous Variables. Journal of Econometrics 190, 212–221.


                                             37
Shoag, D. and S. Veuger (2018). Shops and the City: Evidence on Local Externalities and Local
  Government Policy from Big-Box Bankruptcies. Review of Economics and Statistics 100(3),
  440–453.

Small, K. and E. Verhoef (2007). The Economics of Urban Transportation (2 edition ed.). New
  York: Routledge.

Stock, J. H. and M. Yogo (2005). Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV Regression. pp.
  80–108. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Su, Y. (2018). The Rising Value of Time and the Origin of Urban Gentrification.

Teulings, C. N., I. V. Ossokina, and H. L. de Groot (2018). Land use, worker heterogeneity and
  welfare benefits of public goods. Journal of Urban Economics 103, 67–82.




                                             38
Tables and Figures

                Table 1: Tract-level Predicted Establishment Entry at the SIC8 Level


                                                    Percentage of SIC8-Specific Coefficients
                                                  Negative and    Positive and    Not Significant
                                                   Significant    Significant      at 10% Level

                  Same SIC8
                      Within 0-1 miles                92%              1%              7%
                      Within 1-2 miles                53%              9%              39%
                      Within 2-4 miles                23%             25%              42%
                      Within 4-8 miles                17%             41%              42%

                  Same SIC6, Different SIC8
                      Within 0-1 miles                6%              53%              41%
                      Within 1-2 miles                14%             26%              61%
                      Within 2-4 miles                16%             19%              65%
                      Within 4-8 miles                23%             22%              55%

                  Same SIC4, Different SIC6
                      Within 0-1 miles                17%             52%              32%
                      Within 1-2 miles                20%             23%              57%
                      Within 2-4 miles                19%             15%              66%
                      Within 4-8 miles                29%             21%              49%



Notes: This table provides the percentage of the 350 SIC8-level regressions in which each of the listed
explanatory variables in the net entry regression (Equation 4) was either negative and significant at the 10 percent
level, positive and significant at the 10 percent level, or neither.




                                                        39
Table 2: Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results for All College-
Educated Age Groups

                                                               Panel A: OLS
                                                25-34 Year-Olds                 35-44 Year-Olds                 45-65 Year-Olds
                         Coefficient on:      ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000
               Structural Interpretation:     d
                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d

          Variable (Xjc )                       [1]         [2]                 [3]         [4]                 [5]         [6]
          House Price Index                 0.026***      -0.024***         -0.002        0.007***          -0.005***     0.005***
                                            (0.002)       (0.002)           (0.001)       (0.002)           (0.001)       (0.001)
          Low Wage Job Density              -0.031***     -0.014**          -0.034***     -0.069***         0.002         -0.080***
                                            (0.006)       (0.006)           (0.005)       (0.005)           (0.003)       (0.003)
          Med. Wage Job Density             -0.006        0.047***          0.040***      0.097***          0.046***      0.142***
                                            (0.008)       (0.008)           (0.006)       (0.006)           (0.004)       (0.004)
          High Wage Job Density             0.051***      -0.040***         0.000         -0.030***         -0.025***     -0.040***
                                            (0.005)       (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.002)
          Restaurant Density                0.023***      0.044***          0.010***      0.009**           0.004***      -0.001
                                            (0.003)       (0.006)           (0.002)       (0.004)           (0.002)       (0.003)
          Food Store Density                0.009***      0.008             0.014***      0.013**           0.013***      -0.008**
                                            (0.003)       (0.007)           (0.002)       (0.005)           (0.002)       (0.004)
          (Nearby) Population Density       0.066***      0.042***          0.050***      0.067***          0.046***      0.039***
                                            (0.003)       (0.006)           (0.002)       (0.005)           (0.002)       (0.004)
          (Nearby) Share of Same Type       0.090***      0.161***          0.070***      0.164***          0.033***      0.089***
                                            (0.003)       (0.008)           (0.002)       (0.007)           (0.001)       (0.004)
          Population Density                              -0.091***                       -0.116***                       -0.095***
                                                          (0.006)                         (0.006)                         (0.005)
          Share of Same Type                              -0.113***                       -0.104***                       -0.071***
                                                          (0.005)                         (0.005)                         (0.003)
          Distance to City Center                         -0.008***                       -0.017***                       -0.015***
                                                          (0.002)                         (0.002)                         (0.001)
          Within-CBSA Share                 0.652***                        0.732***                        0.801***
                                            (0.013)                         (0.011)                         (0.007)

          Observations                               22,911                          22,789                          23,386

                                                                Panel B: IV
                                                25-34 Year-Olds                 35-44 Year-Olds                 45-65 Year-Olds
                         Coefficient on:      ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000
               Structural Interpretation:     d
                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d

          Variable (Xjc )                       [1]         [2]                 [3]         [4]                 [5]         [6]
          House Price Index                 -0.038***     -0.028***         -0.044***     -0.005**          -0.038***     0.004***
                                            (0.005)       (0.002)           (0.004)       (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.001)
          Low Wage Job Density              -0.063***     0.040***          -0.028**      -0.029***         -0.016**      -0.071***
                                            (0.012)       (0.007)           (0.012)       (0.007)           (0.007)       (0.004)
          Med. Wage Job Density             -0.167***     -0.045***         -0.018        0.056***          0.079***      0.146***
                                            (0.017)       (0.011)           (0.016)       (0.010)           (0.009)       (0.006)
          High Wage Job Density             0.265***      0.015***          0.073***      -0.020***         -0.031***     -0.041***
                                            (0.014)       (0.006)           (0.013)       (0.006)           (0.007)       (0.003)
          Restaurant Density                0.155***      0.184***          0.042**       0.044**           0.013         0.013
                                            (0.025)       (0.023)           (0.021)       (0.020)           (0.012)       (0.011)
          Food Store Density                -0.038***     -0.104***         0.007         -0.011            0.008         -0.011
                                            (0.013)       (0.019)           (0.011)       (0.018)           (0.006)       (0.010)
          (Nearby) Population Density       0.065***      0.059***          0.045***      0.069***          0.073***      0.052***
                                            (0.009)       (0.011)           (0.009)       (0.010)           (0.005)       (0.006)
          (Nearby) Share of Same Type       0.056***      0.108***          0.127***      0.205***          0.017***      0.066***
                                            (0.010)       (0.014)           (0.007)       (0.011)           (0.003)       (0.005)
          Population Density                              -0.093***                       -0.136***                       -0.089***
                                                          (0.008)                         (0.010)                         (0.006)
          Share of Same Type                              -0.103***                       -0.121***                       -0.055***
                                                          (0.008)                         (0.006)                         (0.003)
          Distance to City Center                         -0.009***                       -0.009***                       -0.010***
                                                          (0.003)                         (0.002)                         (0.001)
          Within-CBSA Share                 0.704***                        0.693***                        0.839***
                                            (0.017)                         (0.015)                         (0.007)

          Observations                               22,911                          22,789                          23,386


Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates and associated standard errors for our main residential tract choice
regression (Equation 3). Only the change in the share of type within CBSA who live in tract is instrumented in our “OLS” specification (Panel
A), while all change variables are instrumented in our IV specification (Panel B). Instruments are described in Section 4.2.1 of the paper.
Columns 1 and 2, 3 and 4, and 5 and 6 report coefficients estimated for 25-34 year old, 35-44 year old, and 45-65 year old college educated
households, respectively. In all regressions, observations are at the tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share of group
d that resides in tract j in 2000.
Table 3: Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results for All Non-College
Educated Age Groups

                                                               Panel A: OLS
                                                25-34 Year-Olds                 35-44 Year-Olds                 45-65 Year-Olds
                         Coefficient on:      ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000
               Structural Interpretation:     d
                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d

          Variable (Xjc )                       [1]         [2]                 [3]         [4]                 [5]         [6]
          House Price Index                 -0.013***     -0.019***         -0.009***     -0.007***         -0.007***     -0.024***
                                            (0.003)       (0.004)           (0.001)       (0.002)           (0.001)       (0.002)
          Low Wage Job Density              -0.041***     -0.045***         -0.057***     -0.089***         0.002         -0.046***
                                            (0.012)       (0.012)           (0.005)       (0.005)           (0.005)       (0.004)
          Med. Wage Job Density             -0.050***     0.004             0.092***      0.137***          -0.021***     0.062***
                                            (0.017)       (0.015)           (0.007)       (0.006)           (0.006)       (0.006)
          High Wage Job Density             0.046***      -0.021**          -0.001        -0.015***         0.025***      -0.022***
                                            (0.011)       (0.009)           (0.004)       (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.003)
          Restaurant Density                0.001         0.001             -0.002        -0.029***         -0.003        -0.028***
                                            (0.006)       (0.012)           (0.002)       (0.005)           (0.002)       (0.004)
          Food Store Density                0.049***      0.075***          0.034***      0.072***          0.021***      0.043***
                                            (0.007)       (0.015)           (0.003)       (0.006)           (0.002)       (0.005)
          (Nearby) Population Density       0.066***      0.042***          0.050***      0.067***          0.046***      0.039***
                                            (0.003)       (0.006)           (0.002)       (0.005)           (0.002)       (0.004)
          (Nearby) Share of Same Type       0.125***      0.288***          0.071***      0.088***          0.057***      0.080***
                                            (0.005)       (0.022)           (0.002)       (0.011)           (0.002)       (0.011)
          Population Density                              -0.083***                       -0.031***                       -0.061***
                                                          (0.012)                         (0.005)                         (0.005)
          Share of Same Type                              -0.103***                       -0.048***                       -0.079***
                                                          (0.007)                         (0.003)                         (0.003)
          Distance to City Center                         0.021***                        0.010***                        -0.008***
                                                          (0.004)                         (0.001)                         (0.001)
          Within-CBSA Share                 0.289***                        0.720***                        0.704***
                                            (0.025)                         (0.009)                         (0.007)

          Observations                               23,682                          23,690                          23,758

                                                                Panel B: IV
                                                25-34 Year-Olds                 35-44 Year-Olds                 45-65 Year-Olds
                         Coefficient on:      ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000             ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000
               Structural Interpretation:     d
                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d              d
                                                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d

          Variable (Xjc )                       [1]         [2]                 [3]         [4]                 [5]         [6]
          House Price Index                 -0.031***     0.011***          -0.049***     0.012***          -0.079***     -0.002
                                            (0.009)       (0.004)           (0.004)       (0.002)           (0.004)       (0.002)
          Low Wage Job Density              -0.093***     -0.045***         -0.115***     -0.067***         -0.064***     -0.015**
                                            (0.019)       (0.012)           (0.011)       (0.007)           (0.010)       (0.007)
          Med. Wage Job Density             0.014         0.037**           0.061***      0.097***          -0.073***     0.010
                                            (0.028)       (0.016)           (0.017)       (0.010)           (0.014)       (0.008)
          High Wage Job Density             0.095***      0.033***          0.105***      0.022***          0.122***      -0.009*
                                            (0.022)       (0.010)           (0.013)       (0.006)           (0.011)       (0.005)
          Restaurant Density                0.105***      0.112***          0.086***      0.086***          -0.035*       -0.018
                                            (0.040)       (0.036)           (0.023)       (0.022)           (0.021)       (0.019)
          Food Store Density                0.002         -0.025            -0.035**      -0.040**          -0.021*       0.016
                                            (0.026)       (0.033)           (0.015)       (0.020)           (0.013)       (0.016)
          (Nearby) Population Density       0.065***      0.059***          0.045***      0.069***          0.073***      0.052***
                                            (0.009)       (0.011)           (0.009)       (0.010)           (0.005)       (0.006)
          (Nearby) Share of Same Type       0.263***      0.225***          0.172***      0.036***          0.121***      0.044***
                                            (0.010)       (0.019)           (0.006)       (0.013)           (0.005)       (0.013)
          Population Density                              -0.056***                       -0.044***                       -0.072***
                                                          (0.010)                         (0.006)                         (0.006)
          Share of Same Type                              -0.092***                       -0.045***                       -0.078***
                                                          (0.006)                         (0.003)                         (0.004)
          Distance to City Center                         -0.005                          -0.005**                        -0.019***
                                                          (0.003)                         (0.002)                         (0.002)
          Within-CBSA Share                 0.521***                        0.744***                        0.737***
                                            (0.022)                         (0.010)                         (0.009)

          Observations                               23,682                          23,690                          23,758


Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates and associated standard errors for our main residential tract choice
regression (Equation 3). Only the change in the share of type within CBSA who live in tract is instrumented in our “OLS” specification (Panel
A), while all change variables are instrumented in our IV specification (Panel B). Instruments are described in Section 4.2.1 of the paper.
Columns 1 and 2, 3 and 4, and 5 and 6 report coefficients estimated for 25-34 year old, 35-44 year old, and 45-65 year old non-college
educated households, respectively. In all regressions, observations are at the tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share
of group d that resides in tract j in 2000.
                     Table 4: First Stage for Base IV Specification for 25-34 Year Olds

                                                       Reduced-Form F Stat            Conditional SW F Stat            Under-ID SW Chi-2
 Endogeneous Variable Name                                     [1]                             [2]                            [3]
 Change in House Price Index                                     592.1                            82.4                           3963
 Change in Low Wage Job Density                                  286.0                            73.3                           3524
 Change in Med. Wage Job Density                                 231.7                           130.8                           6289
 Change in High Wage Job Density                                 383.1                            52.7                           2536
 Change in Restaurant Density                                     43.0                            14.2                            684
 Change in Food Store Density                                    209.6                            27.3                           1312
 Change in Nearby Population Density                             342.5                           54.5                            2622
 Change in Nearby Share of Same Type                             289.2                           134.0                           6442
 Change in Within CBSA share                                     66.8                             29.5                           1420

Notes: This table reports the first-stage statistics for each of the instrumented variables in our main IV specification for the young and
college-educated (the second stage estimates are reported in columns 1 and 2 of Panel B of Table 2). Column 1 reports the reduced-form
first-stage statistics, column 2 reports the first-stage SW conditional F-statistic from Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016), and column 3 reports
an under-identification test, also from Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016). Sanderson and Windmeijer (2016) do not report critical values for
their F-statistic and recommend the use of Cragg-Donald critical values from Stock and Yogo (2005), which are unavailable for regressions
with more than two endogenous variables. The standard rule of thumb is that an F-statistic smaller than ten is weak, in the sense that either the
bias of the IV estimator is larger than 10 percent of the bias of the OLS estimator at the 5 percent confidence level or else that a 5-percent
Wald test rejects hypotheses at more than the 10-percent level (Stock and Yogo, 2005).




                                                                      42
Table 5: Share of Non-Tradable Services’ Urbanizing Contribution Across Specifications for
the Young and College-Educated

                                                                        Rank    Share       Rank     Share
                                                                         [1]     [2]         [3]      [4]


          Panel A: Basic Set of Controls

               Base IV Specification                                      1      45%          1      72%
               Base OLS Specification                                     4      17%          1      48%
               Non-nested IV with CBSA Fixed Effects                      2      19%          2      23%
               Non-nested OLS with CBSA Fixed Effects                     2      20%          1      59%

          Panel B: Base IV Specification with Additional Amenity controls

               Adding Density of Nightlife and Apparel Stores             1      28%          1      51%
               Amenity Diversity and Quality                              1      42%          1      73%
               1992 Amenity Density in Place of 2000                      1      51%          1      75%
               Adding School Quality                                      1      31%          1      65%
               Adding Crime                                               1      43%          1      79%
               Adding Crime (1990 Crime in place of 2000)                 1      41%          1      77%
               Adding Transit                                             1      44%          1      69%

          Panel C: Base IV Specification with Alternative Housing Index

               Adding Housing Age Control                                 1      36%          1      65%
               Adding HUD Fair Market Rent Control                        1      28%          1      60%
               Ferreira/Gyourko Hedonic Index                             1      42%          1      72%
               Zillow Per Square Foot Index                               1      36%          1      65%
               FHFA Index for House Price Changes                         1      41%          1      63%
               Housing on the LHS                                         1      50%          1      78%


Notes: This table reports statistics characterizing the contribution of the increasing taste for non-tradable services
towards the urbanization of 25-34 year old college graduates depicted in the bottom left plot in Figure 1. Columns
1 and 2 compare the contribution of the level of non-tradable service density in explaining the centralizing
tendency of 25-34 year old college graduates to that of all variables used in our prediction. Column 1 reports the
rank of the contribution of non-tradable service density, while column 2 reports its share amongst all variables
that provide a positive contribution. Columns 3 and 4 remove from consideration the population density and share
of own type controls. The contribution of any given variable is defined as the y-axis intercept of the contribution
curve of a given variable, as depicted in Figure 6 for the Base IV Specification and described in Section 4.3 of the
paper. The other specifications listed are outlined in Section 5 of the paper. Non-tradable service density is
measured using only restaurant density in all but the specification with the density of nightlife and apparel stores,
where non-tradable services include both restaurant and nightlife density.




                                                         43
                                             Table 6: Robustness of Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results

                                                                                    Base (Nested)                                                        Non-Nested CBSA FE
                                                                         IV                                  OLS                                   IV                                 OLS
                                   Coefficient on:             ∆Xjc           Xjc,2000              ∆Xjc           Xjc,2000              ∆Xjc            Xjc,2000            ∆Xjc            Xjc,2000
                                                               d                   d                d                   d                d                    d              d                    d
                        Structural Interpretation:            βX,2010          ∆βX                 βX,2010          ∆βX                 βX,2010           ∆βX               βX,2010           ∆βX
                   Variable (Xjc )                              [1]             [2]                  [3]             [4]                  [5]              [6]                [7]              [8]
                   House Price Index                        -0.038***         -0.028***          0.026***         -0.024***           -0.190***         -0.035***          0.034***        -0.039***
                                                            (0.005)           (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)             (0.064)           (0.010)            (0.006)         (0.007)
                   Low Wage Job Density                     -0.063***         0.040***           -0.031***        -0.014**            -0.814***         -0.370***          -0.056**        -0.076***
                                                            (0.012)           (0.007)            (0.006)          (0.006)             (0.183)           (0.072)            (0.022)         (0.027)
                   Med. Wage Job Density                    -0.167***         -0.045***          -0.006           0.047***            -0.466**          -0.833***          -0.053          0.022
                                                            (0.017)           (0.011)            (0.008)          (0.008)             (0.238)           (0.313)            (0.033)         (0.043)
                   High Wage Job Density                    0.265***          0.015***           0.051***         -0.040***           1.139***          1.303***           0.005           -0.009
                                                            (0.014)           (0.006)            (0.005)          (0.004)             (0.359)           (0.397)            (0.022)         (0.036)
                   Restaurant Density                       0.155***          0.184***           0.023***         0.044***            0.576***          0.595***           0.078***        0.125***
                                                            (0.025)           (0.023)            (0.003)          (0.006)             (0.108)           (0.099)            (0.008)         (0.017)
                   Food Store Density                       -0.038***         -0.104***          0.009***         0.008               0.095*            -0.077             0.036***        0.054***
                                                            (0.013)           (0.019)            (0.003)          (0.007)             (0.050)           (0.080)            (0.008)         (0.021)




44
                   (Nearby) Population Density              0.065***          0.059***           0.066***         0.042***            -0.051            -0.120**           0.100***        0.055***
                                                            (0.009)           (0.011)            (0.003)          (0.006)             (0.057)           (0.055)            (0.008)         (0.020)
                   (Nearby) Share of Same Type              0.056***          0.108***           0.090***         0.161***            0.323***          0.613***           0.199***        0.488***
                                                            (0.010)           (0.014)            (0.003)          (0.008)             (0.061)           (0.059)            (0.007)         (0.017)
                   Population Density                                         -0.093***                           -0.091***                             -0.324***                          -0.280***
                                                                              (0.008)                             (0.006)                               (0.023)                            (0.015)
                   Share of Same Type                                         -0.103***                           -0.113***                             -0.396***                          -0.325***
                                                                              (0.008)                             (0.005)                               (0.015)                            (0.008)
                   Distance to City Center                                    -0.009***                           -0.008***                             -0.036*                            -0.076***
                                                                              (0.003)                             (0.002)                               (0.020)                            (0.006)
                   Within-CBSA Share                        0.704***                             0.652***
                                                            (0.017)                              (0.013)

                   CBSA Fixed Effects                                    No                                   No                                   Yes                                 Yes

                   Observations                                       22,911                               22,911                                22,911                              24,228

     Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates and associated standard errors for our main residential tract choice regression (Equation 3) estimated for 25-34 year old college
     graduates. Columns 1 through 4 replicate our base OLS and IV specifications (the first two columns of Panels A and B, respectively, of Table 2). Columns 5 through 8 show estimates from alternate
     non-nested specifications (in OLS and IV, respectively) that replace the within-CBSA share term from our base nested-logit specification with CBSA fixed effects. In all specifications, observations are at the
     tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share of group d that resides in tract j in 2000. All change variables are instrumented as described in Section 4.2.1 of the paper.
                              Table 7: Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results with Different Amenity Controls

                                                      Base             With More Amenities       With Amenity Diversity            With Amenity Diversity and Quality             Amenity Base Year = 1992
                            Coefficient on:     ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000       ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000         ∆Xjc      Xjc,2000           ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000       ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000           ∆Xjc       Xjc,Base
                  Structural Interpretation:    d
                                               βX,2010     ∆βXd         d
                                                                       βX,2010    ∆βX d           d
                                                                                                 βX,2010      ∆βXd             d
                                                                                                                              βX,2010     ∆βXd         d
                                                                                                                                                     βX,2010       ∆βX d           d
                                                                                                                                                                                  βX,2010       ∆βX d

             Variable (Xjc )                      [1]       [2]           [3]      [4]              [5]        [6]               [7]       [8]           [9]        [10]            [11]         [12]
             House Price Index                 -0.038***   -0.028***   -0.029***   -0.028***     -0.045***    -0.030***      -0.010**     -0.025***     -0.015***   -0.021***     -0.037***   -0.028***
                                               (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.005)     (0.003)       (0.005)      (0.002)        (0.005)      (0.003)       (0.004)     (0.002)       (0.005)     (0.002)
             Low Wage Job Density              -0.063***   0.040***    -0.086***   0.032***      -0.075***    0.031***       -0.092***    -0.009        -0.122***   -0.004        -0.055***   0.044***
                                               (0.012)     (0.007)     (0.013)     (0.008)       (0.013)      (0.007)        (0.012)      (0.008)       (0.011)     (0.006)       (0.012)     (0.007)
             Med. Wage Job Density             -0.167***   -0.045***   -0.079***   -0.021*       -0.163***    -0.040***      -0.069***    0.024**       -0.127***   0.011         -0.166***   -0.054***
                                               (0.017)     (0.011)     (0.016)     (0.011)       (0.018)      (0.011)        (0.015)      (0.010)       (0.014)     (0.009)       (0.018)     (0.011)
             High Wage Job Density             0.265***    0.015***    0.220***    0.022***      0.273***     0.020***       0.185***     -0.006        0.286***    0.018***      0.258***    0.020***
                                               (0.014)     (0.006)     (0.014)     (0.007)       (0.015)      (0.006)        (0.012)      (0.006)       (0.010)     (0.005)       (0.014)     (0.006)
             Restaurant Density                0.155***    0.184***    0.101***    0.106***      0.164***     0.170***       0.234***     0.223***      0.183***    0.136***      0.193***    0.246***
                                               (0.025)     (0.023)     (0.031)     (0.030)       (0.027)      (0.024)        (0.035)      (0.030)       (0.023)     (0.020)       (0.022)     (0.027)
             Food Store Density                -0.038***   -0.104***   -0.004      -0.044*       -0.042***    -0.124***      -0.057***    -0.129***     -0.021**    -0.082***     -0.048***   -0.112***
                                               (0.013)     (0.019)     (0.016)     (0.024)       (0.013)      (0.020)        (0.014)      (0.022)       (0.009)     (0.015)       (0.015)     (0.025)
             Nightlife Density                                         0.048***    0.040***
                                                                       (0.011)     (0.011)
             Apparel Store Density                                     -0.039**    -0.041**
                                                                       (0.017)     (0.017)
             Restaurant Diversity                                                                0.055***     0.014**        0.081***     0.029***      0.074***    0.022***
                                                                                                 (0.015)      (0.006)        (0.016)      (0.006)       (0.012)     (0.005)




45
             Food Store Diversity                                                                0.047***     0.024**        -0.031**     -0.031***     0.028*      0.007
                                                                                                 (0.016)      (0.011)        (0.015)      (0.011)       (0.016)     (0.011)
             Restaurant Quality                                                                                              -0.001       -0.001        0.024***    0.009***
                                                                                                                             (0.007)      (0.003)       (0.005)     (0.002)
             (Nearby) Population Density 0.065***          0.059***    0.064***    0.040***      0.059***     0.056***       0.058***     0.065***                                0.051***    0.047***
                                         (0.009)           (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.013)       (0.010)      (0.012)        (0.011)      (0.012)                                 (0.008)     (0.011)
             (Nearby) Share of Same Type 0.056***          0.108***    0.093***    0.148***      0.058***     0.093***       0.086***     0.131***                                0.067***    0.119***
                                         (0.010)           (0.014)     (0.011)     (0.015)       (0.011)      (0.015)        (0.011)      (0.015)                                 (0.010)     (0.013)
             Population Density                            -0.093***               -0.095***                  -0.086***                   -0.097***                 -0.029***                 -0.115***
                                                           (0.008)                 (0.009)                    (0.009)                     (0.010)                   (0.007)                   (0.009)
             Share of Same Type                            -0.103***               -0.115***                  -0.103***                   -0.115***                 -0.063***                 -0.113***
                                                           (0.008)                 (0.008)                    (0.008)                     (0.009)                   (0.004)                   (0.007)
             Distance to City Center                       -0.009***               -0.003                     -0.006**                    0.002                     -0.003                    -0.007**
                                                           (0.003)                 (0.003)                    (0.003)                     (0.003)                   (0.002)                   (0.003)
             Within-CBSA Share                 0.704***                0.656***                  0.721***                    0.712***                   0.846***                  0.694***
                                               (0.017)                 (0.019)                   (0.018)                     (0.019)                    (0.014)                   (0.016)

             Observations                            22,911                    22,911                     22,911                     20,379                     20,379                       22,911


     Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates and associated standard errors for our main residential tract choice regression (Equation 3) estimated for 25-34 year old college
     graduates. Columns 1 and 2 replicate columns 1 and 2 of our base IV specification from Panel B of Table 2. The remaining columns present variants of this specification adjusting how consumption amenities
     are modeled. Columns 3 through 10 include additional controls for amenity density, diversity, and quality. Columns 11 and 12 use 1992 as the base year for the restaurant and food store density variables,
     while keeping 2000 as the base year for all other variables. In all specifications, observations are at the tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share of group d that resides in tract j in
     2000. All change variables except for diversity and quality are instrumented as described in Section 4.2.1 of the paper.
Table 8: Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results Including School, Crime
and Transit

                                      Violent Crime Rate                                School Quality                              Transit Time
                                 2000-10       2000                              2000-10     2000                                  2014
                                 Change       Level      Obs.                    Change      Level               Obs.              Level      Obs.
 Demographic Group                 [1]          [2]      [3]                       [4]         [5]               [6]                [7]        [8]
 College-Educated:
      25-34 Year-Olds -0.005*                    0.005          18,949           0.003          -0.002          10,107          -0.011***         22,911
      35-44 Year-Olds -0.004**                   0.001          18,831           0.009***       -0.005**        10,025          -0.010***         22,789
      45-65 Year-Olds -0.005***                  0.000          19,345           0.008***       0.010***        10,306          -0.014***         23,386
 Less than College Education:
      25-34 Year-Olds 0.012***                   0.019***       19,637           0.012*         0.001           10,462          -0.017***         23,682
      35-44 Year-Olds 0.005**                    0.017***       19,627           0.001          0.000           10,469          -0.017***         23,690
      45-65 Year-Olds 0.011***                   0.025***       19,686           -0.006*        -0.008**        10,495          -0.022***         23,758

Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates on public amenity variables added to the IV specification of our
main residential tract choice regression (Equation 3) as described in Section 5. Columns 1 and 2 show the estimated coefficients on the change
and level of violent crime when these variables are added to the main specification (columns 1 and 2 of Panel B of Table 2). Each row shows
the estimates based on a different demographic group d. Column 3 shows the number of observations in each of these regressions. Columns 4
and 5 similarly show the estimated coefficients on the change and level of school quality when added to the main IV specification. Column 7
shows the estimated coefficients on the 2014 transit time variable when added to the main IV specification. In all specifications, observations
are at the tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share of group d that resides in tract j in 2000.




                                                                     46
                                                                    Figure 1: Population Growth at Various Distances from the City Center


                                                                                                             All Individuals, By Decade
                                                              1980−1990                                                    1990−2000                                              2000−2010




                                      10 15 20 25
                                                                                         10 15 20 25
                                                                                                                                                          10 15 20 25




                                      5
                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                          5




                                      0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                          0
                                                    0   .2   .4       .6    .8       1                 0      .2          .4       .6     .8          1                 0   .2   .4       .6    .8         1




                                                                                                       College−Educated Individuals, By Decade
                                                              1980−1990                                                    1990−2000                                              2000−2010




                                      80
                                                                                         80
                                                                                                                                                          80




                                      60
                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                          60




                                      40
                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                          40




                                      20
                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                          20




                                      0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                          0




47
                                                    0   .2   .4       .6    .8       1                 0      .2          .4       .6     .8          1                 0   .2   .4       .6    .8         1




              Population Growth (%)
                                                                                 College−Educated Individuals from 2000−2010, by Age Group
                                                              Age 25−34                                                    Age 35−44                                              Age 45−64




                                      60
                                                                                         60
                                                                                                                                                          60




                                      40
                                                                                         40
                                                                                                                                                          40




                                      20
                                                                                         20
                                                                                                                                                          20




                                      0
                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                          0




                                                    0   .2   .4       .6    .8       1                 0      .2          .4       .6     .8          1                 0   .2   .4       .6    .8         1




                                                                                                Tract−level growth rate                        95% Confidence Band


                                                                    Distance to City Center (cumulative share of CBSA pop. in base year)


     Notes: Each figure shows a non-parametric kernel fit of percent change in tract population at different distances from the city center. Each kernel regression observation is weighted by initial tract population.
     Distance from the city center is measured as the cumulative share of CBSA population in the base year. The top row of plots presents kernels for the percent change in total population between 1980 and 1990,
     1990 and 2000, and 2000 to 2010. The second row is similar but for the college-educated population. The final row presents kernels for the 2000-2010 percent change in the college-educated population in
     three age brackets. The shaded region around kernel fit depicts the 95% confidence interval. The dashed row in each plot shows the average population growth rate for the relevant demographic group over the
     relevant decade. Data are from the 1980–2000 decennial censuses and the 2008–2012 ACS.
                                               Figure 2: Percent Change in Urban Share by Age and Education (1990-2014)
                                          40
     Change in Urban Share (%, 1990−2014)
    −20           0            20




                                               20               30               40               50                    60
                                                                                      Age

                                                                           No College              College


Notes: The figure shows the percent change between 1990 and 2014 (2012-2016 ACS) of the average urban share of college and non-college
educated individuals by age. The data comes from the IPUMS Public Use Microdata Sample and is restricted to the set of 25-64 year-olds in
the 27 CBSAs where we can define constant geography urban areas in 1990 and 2012-2016. The urban area of each CBSA is the set of tracts
closest to city center that constitute 10% of the total CBSA population in 2000. See refap:data for further description of methodology.




                                                                                 48
           Figure 3: Initial Level and Change in Job Density, Housing Prices, and Public Amenities at Various Distance from the City Center


                                                                                                                                Panel A: Initial Levels (2000)
                                               Job Density                                                                                 Housing Prices                                                                                   Public Amenities
                                  High Wage (dashed) vs. Low Wage (solid)                                                       2bd (dashed) vs. Per Square Foot (solid)                                                            School (dashed) vs. Crime (solid)




                                                                         7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               55




                                                                                                                   11.9
                                                                                                                                                                           4.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −4.8




                          7.25
                                                                                                                                                                                             4.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            −5




                                                                                                                        11.85




                                                                                            6.95




                                7.2
                                                                                                              11.8
                                                                                                                                                                                  4.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               45




                                                                                   6.9




                       7.15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −5.2




                                                                                                                                                                           Log House Price (psf)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Log Violent Crime




                                                                                                                                                                           4.6




                                                                                                       Log House Price (2bd)
                                                                                                      11.75




              7.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40




                                                                          Log Job Density (Low)




              Log Job Density (High)
                                                                         6.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −5.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                   School Quality Percentile




                                                                                                                   11.7
                                                                                                                                                                           4.55




                          7.05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               35




                                                                         6.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −5.6




                                                                                                                                  0      .2    .4     .6     .8     1
                                       0   .2    .4     .6    .8     1                              Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                                                             0    .2     .4     .6    .8     1




                                                                                                   Panel B: Percentage Change (2000 to 2010)




49
                                               Job Density                                                                                 Housing Prices                                                                                   Public Amenities
                                  High Wage (dashed) vs. Low Wage (solid)                                                       2bd (dashed) vs. Per Square Foot (solid)                                                            School (dashed) vs. Crime (solid)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6




                                                                                                                   .36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −.2




                                                                         −.215




                          .27
                                                                                                                                                                           .4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4




                                                                                                                       .34




                               .26
                                                                                                                                                                                          .38
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     −.25




                                                                                                                                                                                   .36




                       .25
                                                                                                              .32
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2




                                                                                                                                                                             .34




                .24
                                                                                                                                                                           Log Change (psf)




                                                                                                        Log Change (2bd)
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Change (School)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −.3




                                                                                                      .3



                                                                              Log Change (Low)




              Log Change (High)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Log Change (Crime)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0




                                                                                                                                                                           .32




                          .23
                                                                         −.235 −.23 −.225 −.22
                                                                                                                                                                           .3




                                                                                                                   .28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               −2




                          .22
                                                                         −.24
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −.35




                                                                                                                                  0      .2    .4     .6     .8     1
                                       0   .2    .4     .6    .8     1                              Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                                                             0    .2     .4     .6    .8     1




     Notes: Panel A shows a non-parametric kernel fit of the log of job density, log house price, log per capita violent crime and school ranking in 2000 plotted against the young-college population-weighted
     distance from the city center for all tracts in our estimation sample. Panel B shows a similar kernel of percent changes from 2000 to 2010. The shaded region around kernel fit depicts the 95% confidence
     interval. The job data is from LODES in 2002 and 2011, the house price data is from Zillow.com, the crime data is from UCR, and school data is from SchoolDigger.com (see Appendix A for details on data
     sources).
     Figure 4: Initial Level and Change in Restaurant and Food Store Density, Diversity, and Quality Indexes at Various Distance from the City
     Center


                                                                              Panel A: Initial Levels in Restaurants (dashed) and Food Stores (solid)
                                                                Density (2000)                                                                                           Diversity (2000)                                                                                             Quality (2000)




                                                                                                                                                          3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.03




                                                                                          −3.25




                                               −2.25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.02




                                                                                                                                                          3.3




                                                                                                               −3.3




                                               −2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1.01




                                                                                                                                                          3.2




                                                                                                   −3.35




                                               −2.35
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1




                                                                                                                                                          3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Log Diversity Index (Food)
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.2




                                                                                          Log Density Index (Food)
                                                                                          −3.4




                                               −2.4
                                                                                                                       Log Diversity Index (Restaurant)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .99
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Log Quality Index (Restaurant)




              Log Density Index (Restaurant)
                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4.1




                                               −2.45
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .98




                                                                                          −3.45
                                                                                                                                                                0   .2       .4    .6       .8   1
                                                       0   .2      .4    .6      .8   1                               Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                                                                                  0   .2        .4     .6        .8   1




50
                                                                          Panel B: Percentage Change in Restaurants (dashed) and Food Stores (solid)
                                                           Density (2000−2010)                                                                                      Diversity (2000−2010)                                                                                           Quality (2000−2012)




                                                                                                                                                          .7




                                               .005
                                                                                          .035
                                                                                                                                                                                                     −.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .12




                                                                                                                                                          .6




                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .11




                                                                                                        .03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 −.15




                                                                                                                                                          .5




                                               −.005
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                      −.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Log Change (Food)




                                                                                          .025
                                                                                          Log Change (Food)
                                                                                                                                                          .4

                                                                                                                       Log Change (Restaurant)




              Log Change (Restaurant)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Log Change (Restaurant)




                                               −.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .09




                                                                                                                                                                                                     −.25




                                                                                                                                                          .3




                                                                                          .02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .08




                                               −.015
                                                                                                                                                                0   .2       .4    .6       .8   1
                                                       0   .2      .4    .6      .8   1                               Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                                                                                  0   .2        .4     .6        .8   1




     Notes:Panel A shows a non-parametric kernel fit of the log of amenity density and diversity indexes in 2000 for restaurants and food stores and the amenity quality index in 2000 for restaurants, plotted against
     the young-college population-weighted distance from the city center for all tracts in our estimation sample. Panel B shows a kernel of the 2000 to 2010 percent change in these indexes. The shaded region
     around kernel fit depicts the 95% confidence interval. Amenity establishment location is from the NETS data. See Appendix B for details on consumption amenity index construction.
                                                                                Figure 5: Model Fit by Age and Education Group


                                                                                                           College−Educated
                                                         25−34 Years Old                                              35−44 Years Old                                                45−64 Years Old




                                           20
                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                              20




                                                                                     10




                                     10
                                                                                                                                                              10




                                                                                     0




                              0
                                                                                                                                                              0




                                                                                     −10




                     −10
                                                                                                                                                              −10




                                                                                     −20




               Relative Population Growth (%)
              −20
                                                                                                                                                              −20
                                                                                                      0        .2        .4        .6        .8         1
                                                0   .2      .4    .6       .8   1                     Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                   0   .2      .4     .6      .8   1



                                                                                                           Less than College




51
                                                         25−34 Years Old                                              35−44 Years Old                                                45−64 Years Old




                                            5
                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                              5




                                                                                     0




                                      0
                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                              −5




                                                                                     −20 −15 −10 −5




               Relative Population Growth (%)
              −20 −15 −10 −5
                                                                                                                                                              −20 −15 −10




                                                                                                      0        .2        .4        .6        .8         1
                                                0   .2      .4    .6       .8   1                     Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                   0   .2      .4     .6      .8   1



                                                                                                             Actual                               Predicted




     Notes: These figures plot the average predicted change in the share of the population in each age-education group at different distances from the city center. These predictions are based on coefficient
     estimates from our base IV specification in panel B of Tables 2 and 3, excluding distance to city center and the within-CBSA share as described in Section 4.3 of the paper.
Figure 6: Variables Contributing to Young College-Educated Growth at Various Distance from
the City Center


                            Contribution of Variables in Change                                             Contribution of Variables in Initial Level
                    .3




                                                                                                      .3
                    .2




                                                                                                      .2
     Contribution




                                                                                       Contribution
                    .1




                                                                                                      .1
                    0




                                                                                                      0
                    −.1




                                                                                                      −.1
                    −.2




                                                                                                      −.2




                          0          .2          .4       .6         .8       1                             0             .2         .4        .6         .8        1
                           Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                  Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)


                                 Jobs (L)                      Jobs (M)                                         Jobs (H)                            House Prices

                                 Restaurants                   Food Stores                                      2000 Nearby Own Share               2000 Nearby Pop Density

                                 Distance to CBD               2000 Own Share                                   2000 Pop Density




Notes: This figure plots the contribution of each variable in our base IV specification for the young and college-educated (columns 1 and 2 of
panel 2 of Table 2) towards the change in the share of the young college-educated population at different distances from the city center, as
described in Section 4.3 of the paper. The y-axis intercepts are reported in online Appendix Table A.4.




                                                                                  52
Figure 7: Contribution of Restaurant Density to Young College-Educated Growth at Various
Distance from the City Center by CBSA Size
                                            (a) Level                                                                                          (b) Change
                .4




                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                    .05
                .3
       Contribution




                                                                                                           Contribution
                .2




                                                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                    −.05
                .1




                                                                                                                    −.1
                0




                      0        .2                .4              .6            .8                 1                        0        .2                .4              .6            .8                 1
                               Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                                  Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)
                          Top 10          Top 11−50          Top 51−100         Outside the Top 100                            Top 10          Top 11−50          Top 51−100         Outside the Top 100




Notes: This figure plots the contribution of the level and change in restaurant density in our base IV specification for the young and
college-educated (columns 1 and 2 of panel 2 of Table 2) towards the change in the share of the young college-educated population at different
distances from the city center in CBSAs of different sizes, as described in Section 4.3 of the paper.




                                                                                                      53
                                        Figure 8: Change in Commute Patterns
                                          Panel A: All Workers in All CBSAs




                               Panel B: High-Wage Workers in Largest 10 CBSAs




Notes: These tables show the percentage change from 2002 to 2011 in the number of workers living and working at different distances from
the city center. High-wage workers earn more than $3333/month in nominal dollars. The underlying data are from LODES 2002 and 2011.




                                                                   54
Figure 9: Expenditure and Trip Share on Non-Tradable Services by Age and Education Group
                                                                               Panel A: Restaurants

                                                    Expenditure Share (2014)                                                           Trip Share (2009)
                              .15




                                                                                                       .08
                              .12




                                                                                                       .06
                              .09
            Share




                                                                                             Share
                                                                                              .04
                              .06




                                                                                                       .02
                              .03
                              0




                                                                                                       0
                                     Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                          Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                                College             Non−College                                              College               Non−College


                                             Change in Expenditure Share (1998−2014)                                         Change in Trip Share (2001−2009)
                              .03




                                                                                                       .005
                              .024
            Change in Share




                                                                                               Change in Share
                              .018




                                                                                                          0
                              .012




                                                                                             −.005
                              .006




                                                                                                       −.01
                              0




                                     Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                          Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                               College              Non−College                                             College                 Non−College


                                                                  Panel B: Nightlife Establishments

                                                    Expenditure Share (2014)                                                           Trip Share (2009)
                              .015




                                                                                                       .02
                              .012




                                                                                                       .015
                              .009
            Share




                                                                                             Share
                                                                                              .01
                              .006




                                                                                                       .005
                              .003
                              0




                                                                                                       0




                                     Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                          Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                                College             Non−College                                              College               Non−College


                                             Change in Expenditure Share (1998−2014)                                         Change in Trip Share (2001−2009)
                              .006




                                                                                                       .004  .002
            Change in Share




                                                                                                 Change in Share
                              .004




                                                                                                      0
                              .002




                                                                                             −.002     −.004
                              0




                                     Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                          Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                               College              Non−College                                             College                 Non−College




Notes: The left-hand chart in each panel shows mean CEX expenditure shares for each age-education group and the right-hand chart shows
mean NHTS trip shares. In the CEX, restaurants expendidture is “food away from home" (UCC Codes 190111-190926), and nightlife is
“alcohol away from home" (UCC Codes 200511-200536). In the NHTS, restaurant trips are to get a meal (not grocery). Nightlife trips are all
trips categorized as “Go out/hang out". The bands around the end of each bar depict 95% confidence intervals.
Figure 10: Share of Young College-Educated Individuals by Family Type and Income Bracket
                                                               Panel A: Population Share in 1990 vs. 2012-2016

                                 By Family Type                                                                                                                By Income Bracket

                                                                                                                                                                0.058
                                                                                                  0.441                                0−15K
                                                                                                                                                                        0.085
    Unmarried (no child)
                                                                                                              0.539                                                                           0.179
                                                                                                                                      15−30K
                                                                                                                                                                                                  0.197
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.343
                                                               0.238                                                                  30−50K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    0.310
      Married (no child)
                                                       0.194                                                                                                                                                    0.246
                                                                                                                                      50−75K
                                                                                                                                                                                                       0.214
                                                                                                                                                                        0.089
                                                                       0.271                                                         75−100K
                                                                                                                                                                        0.091
               Child <5
                                                           0.225                                                                                         0.036
                                                                                                                                    100−125K
                                                                                                                                                          0.040
                                                                                                                                                     0.019
                                  0.049                                                                                             125−150K
                                                                                                                                                      0.021
               Child >5
                                 0.042                                                                                                                0.023
                                                                                                                                       150K+
                                                                                                                                                         0.038


                           0                       .2                       .4                                         .6                        0                       .1                    .2                            .3                           .4
                                                        Total Population Share                                                                                                        Total Population Share

                                                               1990                         2016                                                                                           1990                       2016




                                                          Panel B: Share in Urban vs. Suburban Area in 1990

                                 By Family Type                                                                                                                By Income Bracket

                                                                                                                                                                         0.091
                                                                                                                            0.630      0−15K
                                                                                                                                                               0.053
    Unmarried (no child)
                                                                                          0.410                                                                                               0.181
                                                                                                                                      15−30K
                                                                                                                                                                                              0.179
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0.291
                                                       0.201                                                                          30−50K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0.351
      Married (no child)
                                                               0.244                                                                                                                                  0.210
                                                                                                                                      50−75K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.252
                                                                                                                                                                           0.101
                                          0.142                                                                                      75−100K
                                                                                                                                                                        0.087
               Child <5
                                                                       0.292                                                                               0.048
                                                                                                                                    100−125K
                                                                                                                                                        0.034
                                                                                                                                                       0.026
                               0.027                                                                                                125−150K
                                                                                                                                                     0.017
               Child >5
                                  0.053                                                                                                                  0.039
                                                                                                                                       150K+
                                                                                                                                                     0.021


                           0                      .2                      .4                                      .6                             0                       .1                    .2                            .3                           .4
                                                        Total Population Share                                                                                                        Total Population Share

                                                         Urban                            Suburban                                                                                    Urban                      Suburban




                               Panel C: Restaurant and Nightlife Trip and Expenditure Shares in 2001

                                 By Family Type                                                                                                                By Income Bracket

                                                                                    0.097                                                                                                     0.070
    Unmarried (no child)                                                                                                            0−20K
                                                                                                                            0.160                                                                                                 0.114


                                                                                0.089                                                                                                                 0.080
      Married (no child)                                                                                                            20−40K
                                                                                                          0.135                                                                                                                     0.117


                                                                   0.071                                                                                                                                       0.094
                Child <5                                                                                                            40−60K
                                                                                0.088                                                                                                                                                       0.127


                                                                       0.073                                                                                                                                   0.092
                Child >5                                                                                                             60K+
                                                                                        0.099                                                                                                                                                          0.141



                           0                  .05                                  .1                         .15                            0                                  .05                              .1                                      .15
                                                                        Share                                                                                                                 Share

                                           Trip Share                                   Expenditure Share                                                                     Trip Share                      Expenditure Share




Notes: These plots depict the data used in the shift-share analysis described in Section 7 of the paper. Panel A depicts changes in the
composition of 25-34 year old college graduates between 1990 and 2012-2016 across family type and income brackets and Panel B shows
how these subpopulations were distributed between urban and suburban areas of U.S. cities in 1990. Both Panels A and B use data from the
IPUMS Public Use Microdata Sample and depict shares computed out of all 25-34 year-old college graduates in the 27 CBSAs where we can
define constant geography urban areas in 1990 and 2012-2016. The urban area of each CBSA is the set of tracts closest to city center that
constitute 10% of the total CBSA population in 2000. See Appendix refap:data for further description. Panel C depicts the trip and
expenditure shares each subpopulation allocated to restaurants and nightlife in 2001 using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX)
and the National Household Travel Survey (NHTS). In the CEX, restaurants expendidture is “food away from home" (UCC Codes
190111-190926), and nightlife is “alcohol away from home" (UCC Codes 200511-200536). In the NHTS, restaurant trips are to get a meal
(not grocery). Nightlife trips are all trips categorized as “Go out/hang out".
    Appendices

A     Data Appendix
The following appendix provides detailed information on all data sources.


A.1    Census Data and ACS Data
Census Tract Data and Definitions For our stylized facts on recent urban growth, we assem-
ble a database with the population of constant 2010 geography census tracts using a geographi-
cal crosswalk from the Longitudinal Tract Data Base (LTDB) and the 1980-2000 census and the
2008-2012 ACS data from the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS). In
each of the censuses from 1980 to 2000, some tracts are split or consolidated and their bound-
aries change to reflect population change over the last decade. The LTDB provides a crosswalk
to transform tract level variable from 1980, 1990, and 2000 censuses into 2010 tract geogra-
phy. This reweighting relies on population and area data at the census block level, which is
small enough to ensure a high degree of accuracy. We combine these reweighted data with the
2008-2012 ACS data, which already use 2010 tract boundaries.

CBSA Definitions Core Based Statistical Areas (CBSAs) refer collectively to metropolitan
and micropolitan statistical areas. CBSAs consist of a core area with substantial population,
together with adjacent communities that have a high degree of economic and social integration
with the core area. We assign 2010 census tracts to CBSAs based on 2013 CBSA definitions.
Our model estimation sample covers all 355 metropolitan area CBSAs.

IPUMS Data PUMA geography is also not constant from 1990 to 2014, so we use a cross-
walk between PUMAs (Public-Use Microdata Areas) and CBSAs in each year to link each
PUMA to a CBSA. To construct constant downtowns from PUMAs across years, we develop
the following methodology. We first intersect PUMA geographies in 1990 and 2014 with a
constant downtown geography defined out of tracts closest to the city center accounting for 10
percent of a CBSA’s population in 2000. PUMAs generally intersect with both the urban and
suburban area of a CBSA, so we assign an urban weight to each PUMA equal to the percentage
of that PUMA’s population falling in census blocks whose centroid falls within the urban area
(i.e., downtown) of that CBSA.
     In most CBSAs, PUMAs are too large to accurately represent downtowns. We therefore
enforce an inclusion criteria where we only keep CBSAs for which 60% of the urban population



                                             57
lives in PUMAs whose population is at least 60% urban. Under this restriction, we find a set of
27 CBSAs for which we can define urban areas in 1990 and 2014.


A.2     LODES Data
The LODES data comes from the Longitudinal Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data.
The LODES data has three parts: origin-destination (OD), workplace area characteristics (WAC),
and residence area characteristics (RAC). The WAC data provides counts of workers in each
census block by wage groups and 20 NAICS sectors that we use to compute our job density
indexes and wage group-specific Bartik instruments. We use the OD data to study commuting
patterns in section 2. The OD data provides counts of workers working and living in a census
block pair by age and income groups (but not for age-income interactions). For each census
block pair, counts are available for three age groups (29 or younger, 30 to 54, and 55 or older)
and three nominal wage groups ($1,250/month or less, $1,251/month to $3,333/month, and
greater than $3,333/month). We aggregate the OD data at the tract level and exclude federal
workers.
    The LODES data for general public use is processed to protect the workers’ confidentiality
(Graham et al., 2014).55 There are two aspects to confidentiality protection in the LODES
data.56 First, the residential location of workers is synthesized. That is, the residential census
block of a worker is “coarsened” and drawn from a distribution of blocks within the same census
tract, PUMA or Super-PUMA. Graham et al. (2014) note that only 10 percent of residences are
coarsened above the census tract level, so synthesis has no impact on 90 percent of our sample,
which is aggregated at the tract level. Moreover, only residential-workplace pairs with very
small shares – generally for long commutes - have residences coarsened at a geography larger
than a census tract. Our weighted regressions ensure that these small cells have little impact on
our estimation results. Second, the workplace location of residents is subject to noise infusion
and small cell imputation. These procedures again have the most impact on block-pairs with
very small worker counts, and both tract-level aggregation and weighted regressions ensure a
minimal impact of these procedures on our estimates.57
   55
      The complexity and opacity of these procedures may discourage academic use of the data. We share these
concerns, but argue that too much caution is unwarranted in many empirical contexts including ours.
   56
      Another source of measurement error comes from the LEHD source data, in which 40 percent of jobs are at
multi-establishment employers. The state of Minnesota reports establishment level data, so the LEHD uses Min-
nesota data to impute an establishment to workers at multi-establishment employers in other states. For instance,
workers are more likely imputed to establishments closer to their residence.
   57
      See Graham et al. (2014) for additional technical details on these procedures, comparison with the ACS
commute data, and further references on the LEHD and LODES data creation.




                                                       58
A.3         NETS Data
The 2012 National Establishment Time-Series (NETS) Database includes 52.4 million estab-
lishments with time-series information about their location, industries, performance, and head-
quarters from 1990-2012. The NETS dataset comes from annual snapshots of U.S. establish-
ments by Duns and Bradstreet (D&B). D&B collects information on each establishment through
multiple sources such as phone surveys, Yellow Pages, credit inquiries, business registrations,
public records, and media. Walls & Associates converts D&B’s yearly data into the NETS time-
series. The NETS data records the exact address for about 75 percent of establishments. In the
remaining cases, we observe the establishment’s zip code and assign it’s location to the zip code
centroid.
    Neumark et al. (2007) assess the reliability of the NETS data by comparing it to other estab-
lishment datasets (i.e., QCEW, CES, SOB, and BED data). Their conclusions support our use of
the NETS data to compute a long 10-year difference in establishment density. They report that
NETS has better coverage than other data sources of very small establishments (1-4 persons),
many of which serve consumption amenities. Table 5 reports the number of establishments
nationally in 2000 and 2010 in each of our four consumption amenity types, as well as the SIC
codes used to define these types.58

                                Table A.1: NETS Establishment Counts and SIC codes

         Category                                 Description                   00 Estab. Counts   10 Estab. Counts     SIC Codes
                                                     [1]                               [2]                [3]              [4]


         Non-Tradable Services
                   Restaurants             full service, fast food, etc.            437570             416807         581200 - 581209
                      Nightlife              bar, clubs, lounge, etc.               64948              75261          581300 - 581302

         Stores
                      Food Stores    grocery stores, markets, bakeries, etc.        281269             335802               54
                    Apparel Stores               apparel stores                     197909             239863               56



Notes: Columns 2 and 3 show the total number of establishments in the NETS data for each type of consumption amenity in 2000 and 2010
respectively.


    58
     The NPD Group, a marketing agency, reports 579,416 restaurants in the spring of 2010. Couture (2016)
reports 273,000 restaurants on Google Local in States accounting for 50 percent of the U.S. population, suggesting
close to 550,000 restaurants nationally. By comparison, the NETS reports 416,807 restaurants nationally in 2010.




                                                                           59
A.4    House Price Indexes
Our main house price index comes from Zillow.com.59 Our “two-bedroom home” index is
the Zillow House Value Index (ZHVI) for all two-bedroom homes (i.e., single family, condo-
minium, and cooperative), which is available monthly for 7,423 zip codes in 2000 and 8,941
zip codes in 2010. In robustness checks, we use the per square foot Zillow House Value Index
for All Homes, which is available monthly for 10,452 zip codes in 2000 and 11,118 zip codes
in 2010 and HUD’s Fair Market Rent Series (FMR) for one bedroom, two bedroom and three
bedroom homes, which is calculated annually for 3,038 counties in 2000 and 3,042 counties
in 2010. For each zip code in the Zillow data, we compute a yearly index by averaging over
all months of the year. We map zip codes to tracts with a crosswalk from HUD. We compute
the tract-level index as the weighted average of the home value index across all zip codes over-
lapping with the tract, using as weights the share of residential address in the tract falling into
each each zip code. For tracts falling partly into missing zip codes, we normalize the residential
share in zip codes with available data to one. The final data set contains home value indexes for
51,165 tracts in 2000 and 53,784 tracts in 2010.


A.5    UCR Crime Data
The crime data comes from the Uniform Crime Reporting Program (UCR) from 1990, 2000,
and 2010. As in Ellen et al. (2017), we use data on violent crimes, which include murder, rape,
robbery, and aggravated assault. UCR relies on each city’s police district to self-report their
crime statistics to the FBI. Therefore, we lack coverage for police districts that did not report.
There are multiple police districts within each CBSA. The number of police districts reporting
increased from 9,222 in 1990 to 11,044 in 2010, partially because new cities were incorporated.
To impute district-level data to census tracts, we use GIS software to map every 2010 census
tract into the corresponding district or districts that it overlaps with. We then assign the crime
total for each district to the tracts that overlap with it (population-weighted overlap) assuming
that population and crime are uniformly distributed within tracts and within districts. The final
data set contains crime data for 54,745 tracts in 1990 and 57,095 tracts in 2010 after discarding
tracts that do not overlap with any districts.


A.6    Consumption Expenditure Survey (CEX) Data
The Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) is conducted by the U.S. Department of Labor’s Bu-
reau of Labor Statistics. We use the public-use micro-data from the CEX Diary Survey for years
  59
    The index and methodology are available at http://www.zillow.com/research/data/, accessed
31 December, 2018.



                                                60
1996 to 2000 and 2012 to 2016. These surveys record all expenditures for each respondent,
including expenditures on small, frequently purchased items over two consecutive one-week
periods, as well as characteristics, income and weights for the consumer unit (household). Each
CEX expenditure receives a Universal Classification Code (UCC) that we match to our amenity
types as follows:

   1. Restaurants (UCC 190111 - 190926, “Food away from home” (excluding beer, wine and
      other alcohol))

   2. Nightlife (UCC 200511 - 200536, Beer, wine and other alcohol in “Food away from
      home”)

   3. Food Stores (UCC 10110 - 180720, “Food”)

   4. Apparel stores (UCC 360110 - 410901, “Apparel”)

To obtain population estimates of mean expenditure shares, we use weights at the consumer unit
level (total sample weight). Our sample size for the 24-35 year-old college-educated group (the
smallest considered in our analysis) is 8,045 individuals in 1998-2002 and 8,077 individuals in
2008-2012.


A.7    National Household Transportation Survey (NHTS) Data
The National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) conducted by the Federal Highway Adminis-
tration (and local partners) provides travel diary data on daily trips taken in a 24-hour period for
each individual in participating households. We use the 2001 and 2009 NHTS surveys. Each
trip has a WHYTO (trip purpose) code that we match to our amenity types as follow:

   1. Restaurants (WHYTO 80, 82, 83, “Meals”, “get/eat meal”, “coffee/ice cream/snacks”)

   2. Nightlife (WHYTO 54, “Go out/hang out: entertainment/theater/sports event/go to bar”)

   3. Food Stores (WHYTO 41, “Buy goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store”)

   4. Apparel stores (WHYTO 41, “Buy goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store”)

We use weights at the person level to compute population estimates of mean trip shares. Our
sample size for the 24-35 year-old college-educated group (the smallest considered in our anal-
ysis) is 6,228 individuals in 2001 and 7,309 individuals in 2009.
    For our analysis of the broader secular trends driving urban revival in section 7, we use
the income and household composition information provided in the NHTS. The NHTS reports
household income in brackets. We use the midpoint of each bracket, and $167,000 for the top

                                                61
bracket “$100,000+” , as an estimate for household income. The 2009 survey excludes children
under five, but we know the age-range of the youngest child. If any child in a household does
not fill the survey and we know that the youngest child in the household is younger than five,
then we assume that the child who did not fill the survey is younger than five.


B     Variable Definitions
This appendix details the computation of the dependent variable in our regression, as well as
the measures of job density, and consumption amenity density, quality, and diversity.


B.1    Dependent Variable
The dependent variable, ∆ ln s̃djc , is the 2000 to 2010 log change in the share of age-education
group d that lives in tract j of CBSA c relative to a base tract. It comes from tract-level popu-
lation counts by age and education from the decennial census of 2000 and from the American
Community Survey (ACS) 2008-2012 aggregates, as in our stylized facts. Let ndjct be the num-
ber of individuals of group d in tract j in CBSA c. The share of all type d residents who live in
tract j in CBSA c at time t is then:

                                                     ndjct
                                           sdjct = P P                 .
                                                      c    j   ndjct

B.2    Job Density Index
We use the LODES data to compute a distance-weighted average of the number of jobs in tracts
surrounding each residential tract in 2002 and in 2011. The job density index for a tract j 0 for
wage group g is:

                                   X                                         1/(dj 0 j + 1)
              job densitygj0 t =       w(dj 0 j )ngj0 jt where w(dj 0 j ) = P                  ,
                                   j                                          j 1/(dj 0 j + 1)


                                                                                                   0
where ngj0 jt is the number of workers who work in tract j but do not live in tract j ,and dj 0 j is
the linear distance in miles between the centroids of tract j and j 0 .


B.3    Amenity Variables
Consumption Amenity Density Indexes We measure the level and change in the availability
of different types of establishments around each tract’s centroid. The amenity density index for,
say, restaurants in tract j is high if there are many restaurants within a short travel time of tract


                                                     62
j’s centroid. The amenity density index for a given type is the inverse of a CES price index,
in which the price of visiting an establishment includes transport cost, as in Couture (2016).
We assume an elasticity of substitution of 8.8, estimated by Couture (2016) with restaurant
data. The higher the elasticity, the lower the weight on establishments far away from the tract
centroid, and the more localized the amenity index. The price of a visit to an establishment
is a constant derived from the CEX for that type, plus a transport cost by foot from the tract
centroid.60 So for each type a, the density index in tract j is:


                                                              1
(A.1)                               Aaj =                                 !1/1−σ ,
                                                PIj
                                                   i=1 (pa   + tij )1−σ


where pa is the average price of a visit to an establishment in amenity type a, tij is the travel
cost of a two-way trip to establishment i from the tract centroid j, Ij is the set of all NETS
establishments in type a within 50 miles of a tract, and σ is the elasticity of substitution equal
to 8.8. To compute travel costs, we start with the linear distance from tract j’s centroid to an
establishment i.61 To go from the linear distance to the actual travel distance, we use an average
ratio of actual to linear travel distance computed from each tract’s centroid to a random sample
of 100 NETS establishments on Google Maps. To go from travel distance to travel time, we use
Google Maps’ constant walking speed of 20 minutes per mile.

Consumption Diversity Index

The amenity diversity indexes of section 5 are inverse Herfindahl indexes, which capture the
diversity of the 70 restaurant SIC8 types and 66 food store SIC8 types:


                                                               1
(A.2)                                           Hji = P            2
                                                                     ,
                                                             i mij


where mij is the market share of SIC8 code i within 50 miles of tract j. When computing market
shares, each restaurant receives the same CES weight as in equations A.1.
    60
       Using CEX expenditures that most closely match our amenity types, we set a price of $10.2 for restaurants,
$12.4 for nightlife, $36.5 for food stores and $60.4 for apparel stores. Transport costs assume a value of time equal
to $12 dollars per hour (equal to 50 percent of the average U.S. wage as suggested in Small and Verhoef, 2007).
    61
       When there are no establishments within 50 miles of a tract centroid, a tract receives a top code for that
amenity type equal to the highest non-missing value in the tract sample. Usually less than 1 percent of tracts are
top-coded, except for nightlife which is 9 percent top-coded in 2010 and 4 percent top-coded in 2000.




                                                        63
Consumption Quality Index The methodology to compute the restaurant quality index is
described in detail in Couture et al. (2018) using data from smartphone visits from 2016-2018
also described in that paper. Couture et al. (2018) compute a quality measure for each of the
100 largest restaurant chains, based on the average propensity of people living in block groups
with median income larger than $100,000 to visit that chain relative to the average individual,
controlling for variation in choice sets. They then find the average quality measure within each
tract in 2000 and 2012, using chains in tract farther away if there are fewer than three chains
within tract.
    Here we replicate this methodology, but instead compute our quality measure based on
the visit propensity of people living in tracts with the top 10% largest share of young and
college-educated individuals in each CBSA in the latest ACS (2013-2017). The average share
of college-educated 25-to-34 year old college educated individuals in these tracts is 21%. We
calculate highly correlated indices when restricting to tracts with an even higher share of young
college graduates. Overall the restaurant chain ranking makes sense. The two highest ranking
chains are Shake Shack (which famously targets young professionals) and Pot Belly, and the
two lowest ranking are Huddle House and Cotton Patch Café. Among the 10 largest chains,
the two highest ranking chains are Starbucks and Subway, and the lowest ranking are KFC and
Dunkin Donuts.62


B.4     Transit Performance Index
Our transit performance index comes from a sample of 100 simulated transit trips originating
in each tract, obtained from Google Maps in 2014. Each trip is from the centroid of a tract to
a randomly chosen NETS establishment. If there is no transit available for a given trip, then
Google Maps returns the walking time of 20 minutes per mile.
    For each tract, we then run a linear regression of transit time on the distance from the
centroid to each establishment.63 We compute, for each tract, a fitted value from this regression
at a distance of 5 miles. This fitted value is our measure of transit performance, which captures
the average time of a 5 mile trip using transit, starting from each tract’s centroid.




   62
      Among the 50 largest chains, the five highest ranking chains are Quiznos, Jimmy John’s, Chipotle, Panera
Bread, and Jamba Juice (Starbucks is 6th)
   63
      This linear specification is consistent with a fixed cost of walking to and waiting for transit, and a constant
time cost of distance once in a train. While buses may experience congestion, acceleration, and, we experimented
with other more flexible polynomials and found highly correlated indices.


                                                        64
Online Appendix
This document contains supplementary material for the paper “Urban Revival in America,” by
Victor Couture and Jessie Handbury. Appendix C contains additional stylized facts document-
ing growth across CBSAs of different sizes from 1980 to 2010. Appendix D contains additional
results not shown in the paper. Appendix E contains detailed derivation for the estimating equa-
tion and the urbanization contribution plots in the paper. Appendix F discusses two alternative
hypotheses for urban revival: first that reduced access to homeownership following the housing
crisis explains the urbanization of young college graduates, and second that changes in mobile
technology and review platforms made urban areas more desirable for young college graduates.




                                               1
                                                        Figure A.1: Population Growth at Various Distances from the City Center by CBSA Size


                                                                                                           All Individuals, By Decade
                                                            1980−1990                                                   1990−2000                                              2000−2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      C




                                 10 15 20 25
                                                                                      10 15 20 25
                                                                                                                                                       10 15 20 25




                                 5
                                                                                      5
                                                                                                                                                       5




                                 0
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                       0
                                               0   .2      .4       .6   .8       1                 0       .2         .4       .6      .8         1                 0   .2   .4       .6   .8        1




                                                                                                    College−Educated Individuals, By Decade
                                                            1980−1990                                                   1990−2000                                              2000−2010




                                 80
                                                                                      80
                                                                                                                                                       80




                                 60
                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                       60




                                 40
                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                       40




                                 20
                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Additional Stylized Facts




                                 0
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                       0




  2
                                               0   .2      .4       .6   .8       1                 0       .2         .4       .6      .8         1                 0   .2   .4       .6   .8        1




         Population Growth (%)
                                                                              College−Educated Individuals from 2000−2010, by Age Group
                                                            Age 25−34                                                   Age 35−44                                              Age 45−64




                                 60
                                                                                      60
                                                                                                                                                       60




                                 40
                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                                       40




                                 20
                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                       20




                                 0
                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                       0




                                 −20
                                                                                      −20
                                                                                                                                                       −20




                                               0   .2      .4       .6   .8       1                 0       .2         .4       .6      .8         1                 0   .2   .4       .6   .8        1




                                                                                                        Top 50 CBSAs                         Other CBSAs


                                                                  Distance to City Center (cumulative share of CBSA pop. in base year)


Notes: Each figure shows a non-parametric kernel fit of percent change in tract population at different distances from the city center. Each kernel regression observation is weighted by initial tract population.
Distance from the city center is measured as the cumulative share of CBSA population in the base year. The top row of plots presents kernels for the percent change in total population between 1980 and 1990,
1990 and 2000, and 2000 to 2010. The second row is similar but for the college-educated population. The final row presents kernels for the 2000-2010 percent change in the college-educated population in
three age brackets. The two lines show the percent change for the top 50 CBSAs and all CBSAs outside the top 50, as ranked by CBSA population in the base year of each plot. Data are from the 1980–2000
decennial censuses and the 2008–2012 ACS.
                                Table A.2: Counts of CBSAs: Urban Population Growth Greater than Suburban Population Growth

                                                              All Individuals                            College-Educated Indviduals                     College-Educated Individuals
                                                                                                                                                                  2000-2010
               Urban          CBSA Pop.         1980-1990        1990-2000        2000-2010        1980-1990        1990-2000        2000-2010        Age 25-34 Age 35-44 Age 45-64
               Def.           Rank                 [1]              [2]              [3]              [4]              [5]              [6]              [7]         [8]          [9]
               5 pct.         1-10                   1                1                3                4                4                9                10               9                4
               5 pct.         11-50                  3                1                3                5                6                19               33               18               5
               5 pct.         51-100                 4                4                3                9                2                12               23               15               9
               5 pct.         101-355                67               46               36               84               49               66               104              97               93

               10 pct.        1-10                   2                0                2                4                3                7                9                9                3
               10 pct.        11-50                  1                2                0                4                3                11               29               14               2
               10 pct.        51-100                 5                3                3                9                3                9                21               10               6
               10 pct.        101-355                64               28               21               61               28               41               78               72               73

               15 pct.        1-10                   2                0                2                3                1                7                8                8                1
               15 pct.        11-50                  2                2                1                2                3                9                24               12               2
               15 pct.        51-100                 7                3                4                8                2                5                18               6                4
               15 pct.        101-355                60               30               23               65               21               33               79               63               50

               2 Miles        1-10                    1               2                5                3                6                10               10                9               5




3
               2 Miles        11-50                   1               2                7                4                10               26               36               23               10
               2 Miles        51-100                  5               3                3                9                2                9                20               10               6
               2 Miles        101-355                76               37               38               85               28               40               100              66               60

               3 Miles        1-10                    1               1                4                4                3                10               10               10               5
               3 Miles        11-50                   2               2                1                5                6                17               31               20               3
               3 Miles        51-100                  6               3                4                9                2                6                19               9                4
               3 Miles        101-355                85               48               45               94               30               40               100              56               55

               5 Miles        1-10                    2               0                2                 4               3                9                10               9                5
               5 Miles        11-50                   2               0                0                 1               3                10               30               16               1
               5 Miles        51-100                  4               3                5                 6               2                6                15               6                3
               5 Miles        101-355                96               66               58               102              41               43               94               59               51

               Central        1-10                   1                0                1                1                0                8                8                8                0
               Central        11-50                  3                2                1                3                4                8                19               10               4
               Central        51-100                 8                5                6                11               4                9                17               8                5
               Central        101-355                79               42               23               75               31               28               75               46               41
    Notes: Columns 1 to 3 give the number of CBSAs for which the total urban population grew faster than the total suburban population for the given decade. Columns 4 to 6 give the number of CBSAs for
    which the college-educated population grew faster in urban areas relative to suburban areas for the given decade. Finally, columns 7 to 9 give the number of CBSAs for which the college-educated population
    grew faster in urban areas relative to suburban areas from 2000 to 2010 by age group. These counts are given for various urban definitions and CBSA population rankings. The X pct. urban area is the set of
    all tracts closest to the city center accounting for X percent of a CBSA’s population, and the X miles urban area is the set of all tracts with centroids within X miles of the city center.
                                                  Table A.3: Population Growth in Urban and Suburban Areas by CBSA Size


                                                       All Individuals                                    College-Educated Individuals                       College-Educated Individuals, 2000-2010

                    CBSA              1980-1990          1990-2000           2000-2010             1980-1990         1990-2000         2000-2010              Age 25-34          Age 35-44          Age 45-64
     Urban          Pop.              Urb   Sub          Urb   Sub           Urb   Sub             Urb Sub           Urb Sub           Urb Sub               Urb Sub            Urb    Sub         Urb Sub
     Def.           Rank              [1]    [2]         [3]    [4]          [5]    [6]            [7]   [8]         [9]   [10]        [11] [12]             [13] [14]          [15] [16]          [17] [18]
     5 pct.         1-10             0.00      0.14      0.04      0.14      0.05     0.09         0.56     0.70     0.31     0.32     0.46     0.29         0.53     0.16       0.38     0.09     0.38     0.46
     5 pct.         11-50            0.01      0.26      0.00      0.14     -0.05     0.11         0.48     0.76     0.29     0.42     0.37     0.34         0.43     0.18       0.23     0.15     0.33     0.50
     5 pct.         51-100           -0.05     0.19     -0.01      0.17     -0.03     0.13         0.41     0.72     0.08     0.36     0.18     0.33         0.22     0.23      -0.02     0.10     0.24     0.46
     5 pct.         101-355          -0.02     0.18     -0.02      0.14     -0.03     0.13         0.51     0.87     0.11     0.37     0.11     0.31         0.09     0.23      -0.10     0.08     0.22     0.40

     10 pct.        1-10             0.00      0.15      0.03      0.15      0.02     0.10         0.53     0.71     0.29     0.33     0.39     0.29         0.45     0.14       0.31     0.08     0.35     0.47
     10 pct.        11-50            -0.03     0.21      0.01      0.18     -0.03     0.14         0.48     0.78     0.25     0.44     0.30     0.35         0.31     0.18       0.19     0.15     0.32     0.51
     10 pct.        51-100           -0.01     0.20      0.00      0.15     -0.01     0.14         0.41     0.74     0.11     0.37     0.18     0.34         0.17     0.23      -0.03     0.10     0.26     0.46
     10 pct.        101-355          0.05      0.27      0.01      0.15     -0.02     0.12         0.55     0.89     0.11     0.39     0.11     0.33         0.08     0.24      -0.09     0.09     0.20     0.41

     15 pct.        1-10             0.02      0.16      0.04      0.16      0.01     0.11         0.51     0.73     0.26     0.34     0.33     0.29         0.37     0.14       0.24     0.08     0.32     0.47
     15 pct.        11-50            0.06      0.29      0.02      0.16      0.00     0.12         0.56     0.92     0.13     0.41     0.12     0.34         0.26     0.19       0.14     0.16     0.31     0.52
     15 pct.        51-100           -0.02     0.23      0.02      0.19     -0.02     0.15         0.49     0.81     0.24     0.46     0.26     0.36         0.15     0.24      -0.04     0.11     0.27     0.48
     15 pct.        101-355          0.00      0.21      0.01      0.16      0.01     0.15         0.42     0.77     0.13     0.39     0.17     0.35         0.09     0.25      -0.08     0.10     0.20     0.43




4
     2 Miles        1-10             0.01      0.13      0.05      0.14      0.12     0.09         0.57     0.69     0.31     0.32     0.51     0.29         0.61     0.17       0.37     0.10     0.41     0.46
     2 Miles        11-50            -0.05     0.18      0.00      0.17      0.01     0.13         0.50     0.75     0.33     0.42     0.41     0.34         0.44     0.19       0.32     0.15     0.36     0.50
     2 Miles        51-100           -0.01     0.19      0.00      0.14     -0.01     0.14         0.45     0.72     0.08     0.37     0.17     0.33         0.18     0.23      -0.03     0.10     0.26     0.46
     2 Miles        101-355          0.08      0.29      0.03      0.16      0.01     0.12         0.61     0.91     0.13     0.42     0.12     0.34         0.11     0.25      -0.09     0.11     0.20     0.43

     3 Miles        1-10             0.00      0.14      0.03      0.14      0.07     0.09         0.59     0.70     0.31     0.32     0.49     0.29         0.58     0.15       0.40     0.09     0.39     0.46
     3 Miles        11-50            -0.04     0.19     -0.01      0.17     -0.02     0.14         0.49     0.77     0.28     0.43     0.32     0.34         0.34     0.18       0.23     0.15     0.32     0.50
     3 Miles        51-100           0.01      0.21      0.01      0.16      0.00     0.15         0.43     0.76     0.11     0.39     0.16     0.35         0.16     0.24      -0.04     0.11     0.26     0.47
     3 Miles        101-355          0.10      0.31      0.05      0.17      0.03     0.13         0.64     0.97     0.18     0.45     0.15     0.37         0.14     0.26      -0.08     0.13     0.22     0.46

     5 Miles        1-10             0.00      0.14      0.02      0.15      0.04     0.09         0.59     0.70     0.29     0.33     0.44     0.29         0.52     0.14       0.35     0.09     0.37     0.46
     5 Miles        11-50            -0.03     0.21      0.00      0.18     -0.03     0.14         0.48     0.79     0.25     0.44     0.29     0.35         0.15     0.27      -0.05     0.15     0.24     0.49
     5 Miles        51-100           0.01      0.23      0.02      0.17      0.01     0.16         0.44     0.80     0.13     0.41     0.17     0.36         0.30     0.18       0.19     0.15     0.31     0.51
     5 Miles        101-355          0.11      0.34      0.07      0.17      0.05     0.14         0.67     1.01     0.21     0.48     0.17     0.40         0.14     0.25      -0.04     0.12     0.27     0.49

     Central        1-10              0.05     0.17      0.07      0.16     0.02      0.12         0.51     0.77     0.22     0.36     0.28     0.31         0.29     0.15       0.14     0.09     0.30     0.50
     Central        11-50             0.06     0.23      0.08      0.19     0.02      0.17         0.59     0.83     0.30     0.47     0.25     0.38         0.20     0.20       0.11     0.17     0.35     0.54
     Central        51-100            0.06     0.21      0.07      0.16     0.04      0.16         0.50     0.80     0.19     0.41     0.15     0.38         0.12     0.27      -0.07     0.14     0.27     0.51
     Central        101-355           0.09     0.31      0.06      0.16     0.03      0.13         0.59     0.98     0.18     0.44     0.13     0.37         0.11     0.27      -0.10     0.14     0.21     0.46
    Notes: Columns 1 to 6 give the percentage change in the total population for a given CBSA group in urban areas and suburban areas by decade. Columns 7-12 give the percentage change in the
    college-educated population for a given CBSA group in urban areas and suburban areas by decade. Columns 13 to 18 give the percentage change in the college-educated population from 2000 to 2010 for a
    given CBSA group in urban areas and suburban areas by age group. The X pct. urban area is the set of all tracts closest to the city center accounting for X percent of a CBSA’s population, and the X miles
    urban area is the set of all tracts with centroids within X miles of the city center.
Figure A.2: Restaurant and Food Store Density Indexes at Various Distance from the City
Center in 1990, 2000, and 2010


                                                     Restaurant                                                                             Food Store




                                                                                                          −3.25
                   −2.25




                                                                                                          −3.3
                   −2.3
     Log Density Index (level)




                                                                                            Log Density Index (level)
                                                                                                             −3.35
                    −2.35




                                                                                             −3.4
     −2.4




                                                                                                          −3.45
                   −2.45
                   −2.5




                                                                                                          −3.5




                                  0        .2        .4            .6   .8          1                                    0        .2        .4            .6   .8          1
                                 Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)                                    Dist. to City Center (Cum. Share of 2000 CBSA Pop.)
                                             1990           2000             2010                                                   1990           2000             2010




Notes: These plots show a non-parametric kernel fit of the log of amenity density indexes for restaurants and food stores in 1992, 2000, and
2010, plotted against the young-college population-weighted distance from the city center for all tracts in our estimation sample. See
Appendix B for details on consumption amenity index construction.




                                                                                        5
D        Additional Results

                     Figure A.3: Coefficient Estimates Dropping One CBSA at a Time
                      Panel A: OLS Coefficients on 2000 Level of Restaurant Density
                                      .09




                                                                                                                                 New York
                                      .08




                                                                                                                                                         San Diego
                                                                     Columbus
                                      .07
                           .03 .04 .05 .06
                            Coefficient estimate




                                                                                                                   Los Angeles
                                                       Boston




                                                                                Detroit
                                      .02
                                      .01
                                      0




                                                   0            20                        40            60                                  80                         100
                                                                                               Dropped CBSA



                        Panel B: IV Coefficients on 2000 Level of Restaurant Density
                                      .4
                                      .35




                                                                                                                                                                             Washington
                                                                                                                                            Pittsburgh
                                      .3




                                                                                Detroit
                           Coefficient estimate
                            .15     .2     .25




                                                                                                                                                                San Jose
                                                                                                       Las Vegas
                                      .1




                                                       Boston
                                      .05
                                      0




                                                   0            20                        40            60                                  80                         100
                                                                                               Dropped CBSA



Notes: These plots show the coefficients on the 2000 restaurant density index estimated when replicating our base OLS and IV specifications
for the young and college-educated (Columns 1 and 2 of Panel A and B of Table 2) dropping one CBSA at a time. Each point reflects the point
estimate of the coefficient plotted against an index for the CBSA that is dropped from the sample (the ranking of the CBSA when ordered
alphabetically). The bars reflect the 95% confidence bands around the point estimate.




                                                                                                 6
Table A.4: Y-Axis Intercepts Characterizing the Contribution of Different Varaibles towards the Urbanization of the Young and College-
Educated

                                           Base (Nested)                                                                     Non-Nested CBSA FE
                             IV                                     OLS                                           IV                                     OLS
                  Variable            Intercept              Variable             Intercept            Variable             Intercept             Variable            Intercept
 Rank               [1]                  [2]                   [3]                   [4]                 [5]                   [6]                  [7]                  [8]
 1      Restaurant Density             1.30         Nearby Share of Same Type       0.52      High Wage Job Density           9.56      Nearby Share of Same Type      1.57
 2      Nearby Pop. Density            0.48         ∆ Nearby Share of Same Type     0.40      Restaurant Density             3.82       Restaurant Density              0.90
 3      Nearby Share of Same Type      0.35         Nearby Pop. Density             0.34      Nearby Share of Same Type      1.98       ∆ Nearby Share of Same Type     0.88
 4      ∆ Nearby Share of Same Type     0.25        Restaurant Density             0.33       ∆ Low Wage Job Density          1.58      Nearby Pop. Density            0.44
 5      Low Wage Job Density           0.16         Med. Wage Job Density           0.22      ∆ Nearby Share of Same Type     1.44      Food Store Density             0.42
 6      ∆ High Wage Job Density         0.13        Food Store Density             0.06       ∆ High Wage Job Density         1.01      Med. Wage Job Density          0.10
 7      ∆ Med. Wage Job Density         0.11        ∆ Housing Costs                 0.03      ∆ Med. Wage Job Density         0.34      ∆ Housing Costs                 0.04
 8      High Wage Job Density           0.06        ∆ High Wage Job Density         0.02      ∆ Nearby Pop. Density           0.09      ∆ Med. Wage Job Density         0.03
 9      ∆ Food Store Density            0.02        ∆ Low Wage Job Density          0.01      ∆ Food Store Density           -0.08      ∆ Low Wage Job Density          0.02
 10     ∆ Low Wage Job Density          0.02        ∆ Med. Wage Job Density         0.00      Housing Costs                  -0.11      ∆ High Wage Job Density         0.00
 11     ∆ Housing Costs                -0.04        ∆ Food Store Density           -0.01      ∆ Housing Costs                -0.21      ∆ Food Store Density           -0.03
 12     Housing Costs                  -0.09        ∆ Restaurant Density           -0.02      Food Store Density             -0.68      High Wage Job Density          -0.03
 13     ∆ Nearby Pop. Density          -0.12        Low Wage Job Density           -0.05      Low Wage Job Density           -1.05      ∆ Restaurant Density           -0.07
 14     ∆ Restaurant Density           -0.17        Housing Costs                  -0.08      Nearby Pop. Density            -1.19      Housing Costs                  -0.12
 15     Med. Wage Job Density          -0.19        ∆ Nearby Pop. Density          -0.12      ∆ Restaurant Density           -1.59      ∆ Nearby Pop. Density          -0.19
 16     Share of Same Type             -0.53        High Wage Job Density          -0.15      Share of Same Type             -1.81      Low Wage Job Density           -0.27
 17     Population Density             -0.80        Share of Same Type             -0.58      Med. Wage Job Density          -1.95      Share of Same Type             -1.52
 18     Food Store Density             -0.94        Population Density             -0.78      Population Density             -3.67      Population Density             -3.00


Notes: Columns 1 and 2 of this table report the y-axis intercept of the contribution curve of each variable depicted in Figure 6 for the base (Nested) IV specification
and described in Section 4.3 of the paper. The remaining columns report the corresponding intercepts of the contribution curves for each variable as estimated in the
base (Nested) OLS specification, as well as the non-nested CBSA fixed effect specifications in IV and OLS (outlined in Section 5 of the paper). Removed from
consideration are the nested-logit within-CBSA share control (where relevant) and the distance to city center control.
                               Table A.5: Robustness of Nested-Logit Residential Location Choice Regression Results: House Prices

                                                                                                                             Replacing Zillow 2-bedroom Index with:
                                             Base            Housing Age Control      HUD Rent Control       Zillow Per Square Foot    Gyourko-Ferriera         FHFA for Changes       Housing on the LHS
                   Coefficient on:     ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000      ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000       ∆Xjc    Xjc,2000        ∆Xjc       Xjc,2000      ∆Xjc    Xjc,2000         ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000       ∆Xjc     Xjc,2000
         Structural Interpretation:    d
                                      βX,2010     ∆βXd        d
                                                             βX,2010     ∆βXd         d
                                                                                     βX,2010    ∆βXd           d
                                                                                                             βX,2010       ∆βX d       d
                                                                                                                                      βX,2010    ∆βX d          d
                                                                                                                                                               βX,2010    ∆βX d         d
                                                                                                                                                                                       βX,2010     ∆βX d

    Variable (Xjc )                      [1]       [2]          [3]       [4]           [5]      [6]             [7]        [8]          [9]      [10]           [11]      [12]          [13]       [14]
    House Price Index                 -0.038*** -0.028***    -0.020***   -0.021***   -0.023*** -0.012***     -0.032*** -0.035***      0.002        -0.038***   -0.033*** -0.037***
                                      (0.005)   (0.002)      (0.005)     (0.002)     (0.005)   (0.002)       (0.005)   (0.003)        (0.006)      (0.004)     (0.007)   (0.004)
    Age of Housing Stock                                     -0.045***   -0.035***
                                                             (0.003)     (0.004)
    Rent                                                                             0.006       -0.023***
                                                                                     (0.004)     (0.004)
    Low Wage Job Density        -0.063***        0.040***    -0.034***   0.028***    -0.085***   0.024***    -0.055***   0.037***     -0.062***    -0.023***   -0.066***   0.042***    0.206***    0.119***
                                (0.012)          (0.007)     (0.012)     (0.007)     (0.012)     (0.006)     (0.011)     (0.006)      (0.012)      (0.008)     (0.019)     (0.010)     (0.018)     (0.009)
    Med. Wage Job Density       -0.167***        -0.045***   -0.149***   -0.020**    -0.108***   -0.011      -0.167***   -0.043***    -0.069***    0.056***    -0.156***   -0.027*     -0.194***   0.090***
                                (0.017)          (0.011)     (0.017)     (0.010)     (0.015)     (0.009)     (0.017)     (0.010)      (0.017)      (0.011)     (0.024)     (0.014)     (0.022)     (0.012)
    High Wage Job Density       0.265***         0.015***    0.214***    -0.008      0.239***    0.004       0.273***    0.024***     0.187***     0.000       0.290***    0.026***    -0.089***   -0.382***
                                (0.014)          (0.006)     (0.013)     (0.005)     (0.013)     (0.007)     (0.014)     (0.006)      (0.015)      (0.008)     (0.026)     (0.010)     (0.016)     (0.007)
    Restaurant Density          0.155***         0.184***    0.113***    0.125***    0.044*      0.075***    0.108***    0.131***     0.148***     0.161***    0.188***    0.217***    0.224***    0.274***
                                (0.025)          (0.023)     (0.027)     (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.022)     (0.022)     (0.021)      (0.030)      (0.024)     (0.035)     (0.034)     (0.037)     (0.035)
    Food Store Density          -0.038***        -0.104***   -0.029**    -0.072***   -0.007      -0.021      -0.025**    -0.067***    -0.041***    -0.101***   -0.053***   -0.128***   -0.123***   -0.207***
                                (0.013)          (0.019)     (0.013)     (0.018)     (0.012)     (0.018)     (0.011)     (0.017)      (0.012)      (0.018)     (0.016)     (0.027)     (0.017)     (0.027)




8
    (Nearby) Population Density 0.065***         0.059***    0.111***    0.061***    0.093***    0.047***    0.056***    0.064***     0.113***     0.065***    0.064***    0.052***    0.107***    0.098***
                                (0.009)          (0.011)     (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.011)     (0.009)     (0.010)      (0.012)      (0.011)     (0.015)     (0.016)     (0.013)     (0.015)
    (Nearby) Share of Same Type 0.056***         0.108***    0.061***    0.096***    0.065***    0.116***    0.062***    0.120***     0.051***     0.117***    0.067***    0.130***    0.093***    0.126***
                                (0.010)          (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.012)     (0.010)     (0.014)     (0.009)     (0.012)      (0.012)      (0.016)     (0.016)     (0.022)     (0.014)     (0.018)
    Population Density                           -0.093***               -0.061***               -0.088***               -0.083***                 -0.066***               -0.065***               -0.109***
                                                 (0.008)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)                   (0.008)                 (0.012)                 (0.011)
    Share of Same Type                           -0.103***               -0.096***               -0.093***               -0.096***                 -0.105***               -0.139***               -0.124***
                                                 (0.008)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)                 (0.007)                   (0.009)                 (0.014)                 (0.011)
    Distance to City Center                      -0.009***               -0.007***               0.000                   -0.005*                   -0.003                  -0.017***               -0.049***
                                                 (0.003)                 (0.002)                 (0.003)                 (0.002)                   (0.003)                 (0.004)                 (0.003)
    Within-CBSA Share                 0.704***               0.713***                0.721***                0.706***                                          0.651***                0.555***
                                      (0.017)                (0.016)                 (0.016)                 (0.016)                                           (0.027)                 (0.025)

    Observations                            22,911                 18,844                  21,692                   27,044                      13,304                15,053                 27,761


    Notes: * – 10%; ** – 5%; ***–1%. This table lists the coefficient estimates and associated standard errors for different versions of our main residential tract choice
    regression (Equation 3) estimated for 25-34 year old college graduates. Columns 1 and 2 replicate columns 1 and 2 of our base IV specification from Panel B of Table
    2. The remaining columns present variants of this specification adjusting how housing costs are measured. Columns 3 and 4 and columns 5 and 6 include controls for
    the average age of housing and rental rates. Columns 7 through 12 replace the Zillow 2-bedroom house price index with alternative indexes and columns 13 and 14
    adjust our left-hand side variable for housing costs using a Cobb-Douglas assumption, as described in Section 5 of the paper. In all specifications, observations are at
    the tract j and demographic group d level and weighted by the share of group d that resides in tract j in 2000. All change variables are instrumented as described in
    Section 4.2.1 of the paper.
   Figure A.4: Expenditure and Trip Share on Tradable Retail by Age and Education Group
                                                                                                        Panel A: Food Stores

                                                                             Expenditure Share (2014)                                                      Trip Share (2009)
                              .24




                                                                                                                              .15
                              .2




                                                                                                                              .12
                              .16




                                                                                                                             .09
            Share




                                                                                                                         Share
                              .12




                                                                                                                      .06
                              .08




                                                                                                                              .03
                              .04
                              0




                                                                                                                              0
                                                              Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                     Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                                                         College             Non−College                                         College               Non−College


                                                                      Change in Expenditure Share (1998−2014)                                    Change in Trip Share (2001−2009)
                              .02




                                                                                                                              .02
                              .01
            Change in Share




                                                                                                                                  .01
                                                                                                                      Change in Share
                              0




                                                                                                                        0
                              −.01




                                                                                                                              −.01
                              −.02




                                                              Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old                     Young   MidAge       Old     Young     MidAge   Old
                                                                        College              Non−College                                        College                 Non−College


                                                                                                   Panel B: Apparel Stores

                                                                             Expenditure Share (2014)
                              .06
                              .045
            Share
                              .03
                              .015
                              0




                                                              Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old
                                                                         College             Non−College


                                                                      Change in Expenditure Share (1998−2014)
                              0
                              −.015 −.012 −.009 −.006 −.003
            Change in Share




                                                              Young     MidAge     Old     Young   MidAge       Old
                                                                        College              Non−College




Notes:The left-hand chart in each panel shows mean CEX expenditure shares for each age-education group and the right-hand chart shows
mean NHTS trip shares. In the CEX, food store expendidture is at grocery stores or food stores (UCC codes 10110-180720), and apparel store
expenditure is for apparel and accessories (UCC codes 360110-410901). In NHTS, trips to food stores are all trips to buy goods which
includes grocery stores, but also clothing and hardware stores. The bands around the end of each bar depict 95% confidence intervals.
   Figure A.5: Population Share of Young College-Educated Individuals by Household Type



                                                                                                             0.441
                                                                                                                0.459
        Unmarried (no child)
                                                                                                                         0.513
                                                                                                                             0.539

                                                                          0.238
                                                                          0.234
           Married (no child)
                                                                     0.202
                                                                    0.194

                                                                                0.271
                                                                              0.260
                      Child <5
                                                                           0.242
                                                                         0.225

                                           0.049
                                           0.047
                      Child >5
                                          0.043
                                          0.042


                                 0                                .2                       .4                                        .6
                                                                       Total Population Share

                                                                           1990                         2000
                                                                           2010                         2014


Notes: This plot depicts the composition of 25-34 year old college graduates in 1990, 2000, 2010 (2008-2012 ACS), and 2014 (2012-2016
ACS) across family type. The data comes from the IPUMS Public Use Microdata Sample and shows shares computed out of all 25-34 year-old
college graduates in the 27 CBSAs where we can define urban areas in 1990 and 2012-2016. We restrict to these set of CBSAs to match the
data used in the shift-share analysis described in Section 7. The urban area of each CBSA is defined by a fixed geography corresponding to the
set of tracts closest to city center that constitute 10% of the total CBSA population in 2000. See Appendix A for further description.
E       Additional Derivations

E.1     Derivation of Estimating Equation in Section 4.2
The utility maximization problem of each individual i of type d is to choose its residential
                                                                                 i
location tract j in CBSA c in year t to maximize its indirect utility function Vjct :


                   i          d(i)       d(i)        d(i)                d(i)   d(i)
(A.3)        max Vjct = βwt ln wjct − βAt ln pAjct − βHt ln pHjct + βat ln ajct
               j
                                d(i)      d(i)
                                           i
                            +µjc + ξjct + ψct (σ d(i) ) + (1 − σ d(i) )νjct
                                                                        i
                                                                            .

    This equation is described in the main text and, as outlined in Berry (1994), it yields a linear
equation for the share s̃djct of individuals in group d who choose tract j in CBSA c relative to a
base tract j̄. We can write the share of type d individuals living in residential location j in year
t as the product of the within-CBSA share of individuals living in location j in year t and the
CBSA share of individuals in year t:

                                                 sdjct = sdj|ct sdct ,

where                                                                 
                                                      d           d
                                              exp  V jct /(1  − σ   )
                                     sdj|ct =             d
                                                                        ,
                                                        Dct
                                                          d
                                                      d 1−σ
                                          d        Dct
                                         sct = P              d,
                                                           d 1−σ
                                                 c∈C    D ct

and
                                            X
                                  d                      d
                                                            /(1 − σ d ) ,
                                                                       
                                 Dct =             exp Vjct
                                            j∈Jc

where Jc denotes the set of residential locations in CBSA c, C denotes the universe of CBSAs,
       d       d      d      d             d               d
and Vjct  = βwt  ln wjct − βAt ln pAjct − βHt ln pHjct + βat ln ajct + µdjc + ξjct
                                                                               d
                                                                                   denotes the mean
utility for an individual of type d from residential location j in year t. Following Berry (1994),
this collapses to:

                                                   d
                                                                 
                                            exp Vjct  /(1 − σ d )
(A.4)                            sdjct   =      dP             d.
                                             d σ            d 1−σ
                                           Dct       c∈C  D ct


   Fixing some tract j̄ in CBSA c̄ as the base residential location, we have that the log expected
share of type-d people who reside in location j in CBSA c in year t relative to the log expected




                                                            11
share that reside in location j̄ in CBSA c̄ in year t is equal to:

                                                     d      d
                                                   Vjct − Vj̄c̄t
                       ln sdjct   − ln sdj̄c̄t =                              d
                                                                    − σ d ln Dct       d
                                                                                           
(A.5)                                                                            − ln Dc̄t   .
                                         1 − σd
               d
                    P             d          d
                                                      d         d        d
Substituting Dct =     j∈Jc exp Vjct /(1 − σ ) and ln sjct = ln sct + ln sj|ct into (A.5) and
rearranging terms, we have that:
                                                                                     
                     ln sdjct − ln sdjct   d      d        d
                                                               ln sdj|ct − ln sdj̄|c̄t .
                                                      
                                     ¯ = Vjct − Vj̄c̄t + σ


From this, we obtain equation 2 from the main text:



(A.6)     ln s̃djct = βwt
                       d              d
                          ln w̃jct + βAt             d
                                         ln Ãjct − βHt ln p̃Hjct + µdjc + ξ˜jct
                                                                             d
                                                                                 + ξ˜wjct
                                                                                     d
                                                                                          + σ d ln s̃dj|c ,

where X̃j = Xj − Xj̄ and we normalize µj̄c to equal zero. To simplify the presentation, we use
                                                                                   d
the vector Ãjct to denote the sum of the public and consumption amenity terms, βAt  ln (1/pAjct )+
  d
βat ln ajct . wjct denotes a vector of time-varying accessibility to jobs in three different wage
                                         d                                            d
brackets, which we use to proxy for wjct   , the group’s wage net of commute costs. ξw,jct reflects
the residual variation in the wages earned by group d individuals residing in location j.


E.2     Derivation of Contribution Plots in Figure 6
We first outline how these fitted moments are calculated. We start with the fitted value from
equation 3 for the expected change in the share of the total national population in a given
demographic group d that resides in tract j relative to the share of that demographic group that
resides in our base tract l:
                                                  X
                                    ∆\ ln s̃djc =     δbkd Xk ,
                                                                k


where k δbkd Xk = β\   d                                      \d                dd
        P                                   dd
                       w,2010 ln ∆w̃jc + ∆βw ln w̃jc,2000 + βA,2010 ∆ ln Ãjc + ∆βA ln Ãjc,2000 +

β\d                    \  d
 pH ,2010 ∆ ln p̃Hjc + ∆βpH ln p̃Hjc,2000 , and we exclude the distance to city center control and
within-CBSA share. We un-difference this fitted value from the change in the observed share
of demographic group d in the base tract l and from the observed share of demographic group
d residing in tract j in 2000 to get a fitted value for the log share of demographic group d that
resides in tract j in 2010:

                              ln\
                                sdjc,2010 = ∆\           ]
                                             ln s̃djc + ∆ln sdlc + ln sdjc,2000 .




                                                           12
We take the exponent of this fitted 2010 log share and multiply it by the population of demo-
graphic group d in 2010 to get the fitted value for the population of demographic group d in
tract j in 2010:                                          
                             \ d                 \  d            d
                          pop  jc,2010 = exp   ln s jc,2010 ∗ pop2010 .

We divide this fitted population for demographic group d by the observed total population of
tract j in 2010 to arrive at the share of tract j’s population in demographic group d in 2010. We
then difference this 2010 fitted level from the observed value of this share in 2000 to get a fitted
prediction of the change in population share that is represented in the contribution plots:

                                                            \
                                                           pop d
                                                               jc,2010   popdjc,2000
                                   ∆s\
                                     d|jc,2010 =                       −             .
                                                           popall
                                                               jc,2010   popall
                                                                             jc,2000


Putting this together and rearranging terms we have that:
                                                                                                                              
                                    ! "                                                                                 !−1   
                         popdjc,2000 
                                                         #                                       !
                                       Y
                                                                                  popd2010          popall
                                                                                                           jc,2010
                                                                                                                               
(A.7)    ∆sd|jc,2010
           \         =                          d
                                          exp δk Xjc,k     exp ∆ ln s̃djc                                                    −1 .
                                               b                                                                               
                            all                                                       popd2000          popall
                                      
                         popjc,2000  k                                                                    jc,2000
                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                              
                                        |     {z         }|                                {z                              }
                                         Estimated Scaling Factors    Observed Changes in Population Shares and Levels




    Equation A.7 shows that the contribution of any single regression factor, Xk , to the spatial
distribution of demographic group d across tracts j (and, therefore, to the change in each de-
mographic group’s population share in each tract) depends on a scaling factor exp δbkd Xjc,k ,
where δbd is the estimated non-standardized regression coefficient on tract characteristic X .
         k                                                                                                                           jc,k

The change in demographic group d’s population share of tract j from 2000 to 2010 is deter-
mined by the product of these estimated scaling factors multiplied by the product of various ob-
served demographic changes, including the change in demographic group d’s population share
of the base tract l from 2000 to 2010, the change in the aggregate population of demographic
group d from 2000 to 2010, and the inverse of the change in tract j’s population from 2000 to
2010.


F       Additional Hypotheses

F.1     Homeownership and Credit Constraints
One prominent hypothesis to explain the recent urbanization of certain population groups is re-
duced access to homeownership following the housing crisis and recession of 2007-2009. Given
that rental units (generally multifamily) are more urbanized than owner-occupied units (gener-
ally single-family homes), a decline in accessibility to homeownership that disproportionately

                                                                 13
affects young college graduates could push them into urban areas.
    In the aftermath of the housing crisis, credit score requirements for access to mortgage credit
became more stringent. For instance, the average FICO credit score of mortgages acquired by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac rose from 725 in 2007 to more than 760 by 2010 (Parrott and
Zandi 2013).64 Presumably, this reduction in credit availability has been disproportionately
harmful to younger individuals about to enter the housing market, and may have driven them
away from homeownership and toward rental options. Consistent with this story, Rappaport
(2015) documents the rapid increase in multifamily construction starting in 2010, and the in-
creased propensity of young adults to live in multifamily units as opposed to single-family
homes following the housing crisis.
    The main flaw in this hypothesis is the timing of the housing crisis: the 2000s include more
years of historically easy mortgage credit than of restricted credit. Using IPUMS data and a
methodology similar to that in Section 7.3, we decompose the growth of the young and college-
educated by tenure type (owners and renters) from 2000 to 2010. Renters are indeed more
prevalent in urban areas. However, homeowners have grown faster nationally than renters.65
Therefore, the premise of the housing market hypothesis that young college graduates have
been forced into renting from 2000 to 2010 is not supported by the data. In fact, further analysis
reveals that homeownership rates among young college graduates increased in both urban and
suburban areas over that period.
    To provide additional support for this conclusion, we replicate our stylized facts using the
earliest available ACS data, from 2005-2009 (not shown). We find patterns of urban revival very
similar to those observed in later years. Given that the housing crisis only covers half of the
2005-2009 time period, this result again challenges to notion that reduced access to mortgage
credit drives urban revival.


F.2     Changing Mobile Technology and Review Platforms
Recent innovations in mobile technology like mapping applications and establishment-rating
aggregators may complement urban amenities and disproportionately benefit digitally savvy
young college graduates. This hypothesis is hard to test directly. Here we add a measure of
the share of NETS establishments that are independent to our regressions. Our idea is that
independent establishments plausibly benefit more than chains from maps and review portals.66
   64
       In 2010, Fannie and Freddie acquired 61 percent of total new home mortgage originations (Jaffee and Quigley,
2011).
    65
       The number of young and college-educated homeowners has grown by 19 percent from 2000 to 2010, versus
8 percent for renters.
    66
       We define independent establishments in the NETS data as having fewer than five other establishments with
the same name. The NPD Group, a marketing agency, reports 53.8 percent of independent restaurants in the spring
of 2010. We find 49.6 percent with our methodology.


                                                       14
    Our independent establishment index is a weighted average of the share of independent
establishments near a tract, using the same CES weight as the consumption amenity density
index in the main text.67 After adding this index to our base IV regression, we find a positive
preference for independent restaurants that is marginally significant, but a negative change in
that preference, contrary to the hypothesis above. Both effects are very small, and do not suggest
that independent restaurants are an important determinant of the location choice of the young
and college-educated. This is a coarse test of the technology hypothesis. A better test would
exploit spatial variation in the timing of the introduction of key applications or platforms (e.g.,
Yelp), but such variation is hard to isolate. That said, we again note that our stylized facts
replicate using data from 2000 to 2007 (2005-2009), and that the first iPhone is introduced only
in 2007, and by the start of 2007 Yelp is still only available in 12 cities.




                                                             PIj
   67                                                         i=1    Dummyi × (p + tij )(1−σ)
        The index in area j is computed as: Independentj =           PIj                       , where Dummyi is
                                                                                       (1−σ)
                                                                        i=1 (p + tij )
equal to 0 for all establishments part of chains with at least five establishments with the same name, and 1 for all
other “independent” establishments.


                                                        15
