NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOUSE PRICE BELIEFS AND MORTGAGE LEVERAGE CHOICE
Michael Bailey
Eduardo Dávila
Theresa Kuchler
Johannes Stroebel
Working Paper 24091
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24091

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

We like to thank Jonathan Berk, Philippe Bracke, Peter DeMarzo, Nicola Gennaioli, Emmanuel
Farhi, Sean Hundtofte, Amit Seru, Alp Simsek, Venky Venkateswaran, and Iván Werning, as
well as seminar and conference participants at Bank of Ireland, Berkeley Haas, Chicago Booth,
CREi, Drexel University, Empirical Macro Workshop in Charleston, Federal Reserve Bank of
Philadelphia, LMU Munich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, NYC Real Estate
Conference, NBER Summer Institute, Stanford Institute for Theoretical Economics, University
College London, University of Maryland, USC Rena Sivitanidou Lusk Research Symposium, UT
Austin, Washington University in St. Louis for helpful comments. Elizabeth Casano, Drew
Johnston, Hongbum Lee, and Luke Min provided excellent research assistance. This project was
supported through a grant of the Center for Global Economy and Business at NYU Stern. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24091.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

House Price Beliefs And Mortgage Leverage Choice
Michael Bailey, Eduardo Dávila, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel
NBER Working Paper No. 24091
November 2017
JEL No. D1,D14,E03,G0,G02,G11,G12,G21,R21,R30
ABSTRACT
We study the relationship between homebuyers' beliefs about future house price changes and
their mortgage leverage choices. From a theoretical perspective, whether more pessimistic
homebuyers choose more or less leverage is ambiguous and depends on their willingness to
reduce the size of their housing investment. When households primarily maximize the levered
return of their property investment, more pessimistic homebuyers reduce their leverage to
purchase smaller houses. On the other hand, when considerations such as family size pin down
the desired property size, pessimistic homebuyers reduce their financial exposure to the housing
market by making smaller downpayments to buy similarly-sized homes. To determine which
scenario better describes the data, we empirically investigate the cross-sectional relationship
between beliefs and leverage choices in the U.S. housing market. Our data combine mortgage
financing information and a housing market expectations survey with anonymized social network
data from Facebook. The survey shows that an individual's belief distribution about future house
price changes is affected by the recent house price experiences of her geographically distant
friends, allowing us to use these experiences as quasi-exogenous shifters of individuals' house
price beliefs. We find that more pessimistic homebuyers make smaller downpayments and choose
higher leverage, in particular in states where default costs are relatively low, as well as during
periods when house prices are expected to fall on average. Overall, our results provide evidence
for an important role of heterogeneous beliefs in explaining individuals' financial decisionmaking.
Michael Bailey
Facebook
Economist
mcbailey@fb.com
Eduardo Dávila
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
edavila@stern.nyu.edu

Theresa Kuchler
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
tkuchler@stern.nyu.edu
Johannes Stroebel
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
johannes.stroebel@nyu.edu

Aggregate leverage ratios in the economy vary substantially over time and play a key role in driving economic
fluctuations (see Krishnamurthy and Muir, 2016; Mian, Sufi and Verner, 2016). Understanding the determinants of
investors’ leverage choices is therefore a question of central economic importance. Leverage choices in the housing
market are of particular interest to policy makers (see DeFusco, Johnson and Mondragon, 2017): mortgages are
the primary liability on households’ balance sheets, and increased household leverage plays a key role in many
accounts of the recent Financial Crisis (e.g., Mian and Sufi, 2009). In this paper, we explore the role of homebuyers’
beliefs about house price growth as one potential determinant of their mortgage leverage choices.
We first develop a parsimonious model that characterizes the channels through which homebuyers’ beliefs
about future house price growth can affect their mortgage leverage choices. We show that the direction of the
combined effect of beliefs on leverage choices is ambiguous, and depends on the willingness of relatively pessimistic
homebuyers to reduce the size of their housing market investment by either renting or buying a smaller house in a
cheaper neighborhood. We then empirically investigate the relationship between homebuyers’ beliefs about future
house price growth and their leverage choices, and find that more pessimistic homebuyers take on more leverage.
Our model adapts the portfolio choice framework of Geanakoplos (2010) and Simsek (2013) to the housing
market. We consider individuals who optimally choose non-housing consumption in addition to home size and
mortgage leverage given a schedule of loan-to-value ratios and interest rates offered by lenders. Introducing
consumption as an additional choice margin allows households to separately determine the size of their home and
their leverage. House price beliefs affect leverage choices through two forces. The first force works through the
perceived expected return on housing investments (“expected return force”). More optimistic agents want to buy
larger houses, since they expect each dollar invested in housing to earn a higher return. In order to afford the larger
home, they need to further lever up their fixed resources. The second force works through the protection against
house price declines offered by the ability to default on mortgages (“downpayment protection force”).1 Holding
house size fixed, more pessimistic agents, who perceive a higher probability of defaulting on their mortgage, choose
lower downpayments and higher leverage to limit the potential loss of their own funds in case of default.2
Our model captures an additional important feature of housing markets. Since owner-occupied housing is
both an investment and a consumption good, the optimal home is not just determined by homebuyers’ investment
motives, but also by consumption-driven motives such as family size and neighborhood preferences. This introduces
a “collateral adjustment friction” that reduces homebuyers’ willingness to adjust their property size in response to
changes in house price beliefs.3 For example, a large collateral adjustment friction could be the result of pessimists
not being willing to purchase in a less-safe neighborhood, or not wanting to buy a much smaller house. Our main
theoretical result is to show that the strength of this friction is central to determining the relationship between
homebuyers’ house price beliefs and their mortgage leverage choices.
We highlight the key mechanisms in our model by considering two polar scenarios for which we can obtain
explicit analytical results. We first consider a housing-as-investment scenario in which there is no collateral
1 We show that this force is active independent of whether mortgage default is primarily strategic, with homeowners defaulting
as soon as their home is sufficiently “underwater,” or whether mortgage default only occurs when households also receive a negative
income shock that makes it impossible for them to continue their monthly mortgage payments.
2 As will become evident below, an equivalent exposition of the second force describes pessimists as perceiving a lower marginal
cost of borrowing, since they expect to repay their loan in fewer states of the world. This makes higher leverage more appealing.
3 We use the term friction to capture any force that reduces the willingness of individuals to adjust their exposure to the housing
collateral for pure investment motives. In our setting, this force comes from the preferences of homebuyers, who view their house not
just as an investment, but also as a place to live, which puts additional constraints on house size. Our discussion of the collateral
adjustment friction focuses on the intensive margin of housing investment. In housing markets, renting rather than buying can give
individuals the option to separate their decision of what house to live in from the decision of the size of their housing market investment.
However, in many cases, the set of properties available for rent is very different from the set of properties available for sale; indeed, large
single-family residences are almost exclusively owner-occupied. Therefore, reducing one’s housing market exposure through renting
will usually also involve a potentially costly adjustment to the type of housing that can be consumed. This force will have the same
effect as the collateral adjustment friction we consider for the intensive margin adjustment.

2

adjustment friction and property size and leverage are determined by both the expected return force and the
downpayment protection force. Under the appropriate definition of optimism, this scenario recovers the predictions
from the portfolio choice problem in Simsek (2013): more pessimistic homebuyers reduce their leverage to purchase
smaller houses because the expected return force dominates the downpayment protection force.
We then consider a housing-as-consumption scenario, in which the size of the housing investment is completely
pinned down by factors such as family size, and households allocate their resources between consumption and
making a downpayment to purchase the house. In this scenario, which corresponds to an infinite collateral
adjustment friction, the expected return force is inactive, but the downpayment protection force continues to
operate. As a result, more pessimistic agents make smaller downpayments to protect their assets against losses
in case of house price declines. In particular, a pessimistic homebuyer might think: “I need at least a 3-bedroom
house given my family size, but I think house prices are likely to fall, so I do not want to invest much of my own
money.” Such a borrower would then naturally choose higher leverage. As a reader explained to the Washington
Post (2011): “An acquaintance once told me he doesn’t believe in putting much money down on a mortgage loan
because that way he can ‘just walk away’ if things ever get bad. And walk away he did. His property is now in
foreclosure.” In the paper, we provide extensive evidence for the prevalence of such thinking among homebuyers.
When we move away from these polar cases, whether more pessimistic agents take on more or less leverage
depends on the magnitude of the collateral adjustment friction that captures the extent to which optimal home
size is determined by investment or consumption motives. The empirical contribution of this paper is to investigate
which of these forces dominates in practice. This analysis faces a number of challenges. Testing the implications of
models with belief heterogeneity is difficult because individuals’ beliefs are high-dimensional and hard-to-observe
objects. In addition, even if we could cleanly elicit homebuyers’ house price beliefs, we rarely observe forces that
induce heterogeneity in these beliefs without also inducing variation in their economic resources or other variables
that might independently affect their leverage choices.
Our empirical approach builds on Bailey et al. (2017a), who document that the recent house price experiences
in an individual’s geographically distant social network affect her beliefs about the attractiveness of local housing
market investments. Indeed, we verify that the recent house price experiences of geographically distant friends
can be used as shifters of individuals’ beliefs about the distribution of expected future house price changes. We
also show that friends’ house price experiences are unlikely to affect leverage choices through channels other than
beliefs. This allows us to explore the empirical relationship between beliefs and leverage by analyzing the crosssectional relationship between the leverage choices of individuals borrowing from the same lender to purchase
homes at the same time and in the same neighborhood, and the house price experiences of these homebuyers’
geographically distant friends.
In our data, we observe an anonymized snapshot of U.S. individuals’ friendship networks on Facebook, the
largest online social network, with over 231 million users in the U.S. and Canada. Our first empirical step combines
these data with responses to a housing market expectation survey that was conducted by Facebook in April 2017.
The survey, which targeted Facebook users in Los Angeles through their News Feeds, elicited a distribution
of respondents’ expectations for future house price changes in their own zip codes. Individuals whose friends
experienced more recent house price increases expect higher average future house price growth. Quantitatively, a
one-percentage-point higher house price appreciation among an individual’s friends over the previous 24 months
is associated with individuals expecting a 33 basis points higher house price growth over the subsequent year. We
also find that individuals whose friends experienced more heterogeneous recent house price changes report a more
dispersed distribution of expected future house price growth. This suggests that the house price experiences within
an individual’s social network do not just affect her beliefs on average, but that other moments of the distribution

3

of friends’ experiences affect the corresponding moments of the belief distribution.
To study the role of house price beliefs in shaping mortgage leverage choice, we match anonymized social
network data on Facebook users from 2,900 U.S. zip codes to public record housing deeds data, which contain
information on both transaction prices and mortgage choices. We observe information on homebuyers’ leverage
choices for about 1.35 million housing transactions between 2008 and 2014.
We first test the predictions of our model under the assumption that beliefs over future house price changes are
normally distributed.4 We find that individuals whose friends have experienced lower recent house price growth,
and who are thus more pessimistic about future house price growth, take on more leverage. Quantitatively, a onepercentage-point decrease in the average house price experiences among an individual’s friends over the prior two
years is associated with an increase in the loan-to-value ratio of about 9 basis points. Combined with the estimates
from the survey, this suggests that a one-percentage-point decrease in the expected house price appreciation over
the next twelve months leads individuals to increase their loan-to-value ratio by 26 basis points. These findings are
aligned with the predictions of the housing-as-consumption scenario, and suggest a sizable collateral adjustment
friction in the choice of financing owner-occupied housing. Consistent with predictions from this scenario, we also
find that a higher cross-sectional variance of friends’ house price experiences is associated with choosing higher
leverage: holding mean beliefs fixed, individuals who have a more dispersed belief distribution perceive a higher
probability of default, and thus reduce their downpayment.
We test a number of additional predictions from the model about the relationship between beliefs and leverage
choice in the housing-as-consumption scenario. First, the model suggests that the effects of beliefs on leverage
choices should be particularly large when the cost of default is relatively small, so that household would consider
defaulting in response to declining house prices a less costly proposition. Consistent with this, we find that
more pessimistic individuals in non-recourse states, where lenders cannot recover losses on a mortgage by going
after borrowers’ non-housing assets, are more likely to reduce their downpayments than pessimistic individuals in
recourse states, where the ability of lenders to go after non-housing assets translates into a higher cost of default.
Second, in the housing-as-consumption scenario, changes in beliefs have larger effects on leverage choices
for individuals that are relatively pessimistic to begin with. This is because, in this scenario, the key driver of
differences in leverage choice is disagreement about the probability of default. Following large house price increases,
even relatively pessimistic individuals assign small probabilities to default states of the world. The quantitative
effects of cross-sectional differences in beliefs on optimal leverage are therefore relatively small. Consistent with
this, we find the magnitude of the relationship between house price beliefs and leverage choice to be the strongest
among individuals who are relatively more pessimistic and during periods of declining house prices.
Third, the relative strength of the downpayment protection force compared to the expected return force
should be increasing in the collateral adjustment friction faced by homebuyers. Consistent with this, we find
that pessimists reduce their downpayment more when buying homes in areas with a high homeownership rate,
where they have fewer opportunities to reduce their exposure to the housing market by renting instead of buying.
Throughout the analysis, we argue that the house price experiences of a homebuyer’s geographically distant
friends affect her mortgage leverage choice only through influencing her beliefs about future house price changes.
We rule out other channels that could have explained the observed relationship. For example, we show that the
results are not driven by wealth effects whereby a higher house price appreciation in areas where an individual has
friends increases her resources for making downpayments. Our results are also not explained by correlated shocks
to individuals and their friends, or by individuals learning about the cost of default from their friends.
4 By studying the case of normally distributed beliefs, we can derive unambiguous predictions for changes in the level and dispersion
of beliefs (the mean and standard deviation of beliefs about house price growth). Our non-parametric results highlight the importance
of using the appropriate definitions of optimism to generate unambiguous predictions about the effect of beliefs on leverage.

4

We provide ancillary for the mechanisms described above. First, we show that, in a correlational sense, the
negative relationship between optimism and leverage can also be detected in the New York Fed Survey of Consumer
Expectations. Second, we conduct an additional survey on SurveyMonkey in which we presented 1,600 individuals
with hypothetical house price scenarios, and asked them to recommend a mortgage option to a friend who has
already decided on a particular house to buy. Survey respondents were more likely to recommend making smaller
downpayments under scenarios with a higher probability of large house price declines, even though this entailed
paying higher interest rates. When asked to explain their reasoning, many individuals described a thought process
consistent with the downpayment protection force (e.g., “If he defaults and housing prices decrease so that he
cannot sell to recoup his investment, he loses less deposit if he puts less down”). We also document that a
similar logic is often described on financial advice websites and blogs that discuss what downpayments individuals
should make. We then show that many individuals do not consider mortgage default particularly costly, another
requirement for a strong downpayment protection force. Lastly, we present evidence for a substantial collateral
adjustment friction. In particular, we explore Zillow’s Consumer Housing Trends Report 2017, which highlights how
consumption aspects such as location and home size are usually the most important determinants of individuals’
property choice, and that potential investment returns are much less important.
Overall, our evidence points to an important role for house price beliefs in determining individuals’ mortgage
leverage choices. In the presence of sizable collateral adjustment frictions, more pessimistic individuals do not
buy substantially smaller houses, but instead reduce their exposure to the housing market by making a smaller
downpayment, particularly when the costs of mortgage default are relatively small.
Our paper contributes to the theoretical literature on collateralized credit with heterogeneous beliefs developed
by Geanakoplos (1997, 2003, 2010) and Fostel and Geanakoplos (2008, 2012, 2015, 2016).5 Within that literature,
which has focused on environments in which investors exclusively make levered purchases of risky assets, our
model is most closely related to the baseline environment studied by Simsek (2013). We show that the same
theoretical framework can deliver new predictions when (i) an additional margin of adjustment — a consumptionsavings decision — is introduced, and (ii) homebuyers’ housing choices are not exclusively driven by the pecuniary
investment return on housing. We operationalize the theory by developing implementable tests of how borrowers’
beliefs affect their leverage choices. Our results provide support for theories in which investors’ beliefs are an
important determinant of individual and aggregate behavior, and are complementary to the findings of Koudijs
and Voth (2016), who document the positive relation between lenders’ optimism and high leverage.
Our theoretical observation that the relationship between borrowers’ beliefs and leverage choices depends on the
magnitude of the collateral adjustment friction is likely to be important across a number of other settings. In the
housing market, the consumption aspect of housing reduces households’ desire to adjust the size of their housing
market investment based on their beliefs about future house price growth. In a similar way, firms borrowing
against their machinery might not be able to sell any collateral that remains important in the current production
process, even if the firms expect the collateral to lose value in the future. Even for pure investment assets, such as
stock holdings, an investor’s ability to dispose of those assets quickly might be affected by market liquidity, which
could also introduce a collateral adjustment friction. In all of these settings, our model predicts that pessimistic
agents would engage in significant (non-recourse) collateralized borrowing against any asset that they are unable
to sell. To our knowledge, we are the first to identify the ability or willingness to adjust collateral positions as the
key feature that determines the relation between borrowers’ beliefs and leverage choices, although the primitive
forces driving our model are important in many environments.6
5 Other applications of collateral equilibrium include Araújo, Schommer and Woodford (2015), Cao (2017), Gottardi and Kubler
(2015), Geanakoplos and Zame (2014), Geerolf (2015) and He and Xiong (2012).
6 For example, the mechanism behind the downpayment protection force is also present in models of sovereign default, as those

5

On the empirical side, we provide evidence for the importance of beliefs in determining housing and leverage
decisions. We also show that leverage choice in the housing market is best described by a housing-as-consumption
paradigm with a sizable collateral adjustment friction. This potentially sets it apart from other markets, such as
the stock market, where investment motives are the primary driving force determining the size of the investment.
Our empirical findings also contribute to the growing literature that studies belief formation. Some recent work
includes Malmendier and Nagel (2011, 2015), Greenwood and Shleifer (2014), and Kuchler and Zafar (2015). Much
of this literature has focused on explaining how individuals’ own experiences affect their expectations. We expand
on the findings in Bailey et al. (2017a) to show that various moments of the experiences of individuals’ friends
also affect the corresponding moments of those individuals’ belief distributions.
Our results speak to the active debate about the extent to which the joint movement in house prices and
mortgage leverage during the 2002-2006 housing boom period was the result of homebuyer optimism or other
forces in the economy, such as credit supply shocks (Adelino, Schoar and Severino, 2016; Burnside, Eichenbaum
and Rebelo, 2016; Case, Shiller and Thompson, 2012; Cheng, Raina and Xiong, 2014; Di Maggio and Kermani, 2016;
Foote, Loewenstein and Willen, 2016; Glaeser, Gottlieb and Gyourko, 2012; Landvoigt, Piazzesi and Schneider,
2015; Mian and Sufi, 2009; Nathanson and Zwick, 2014; Piazzesi and Schneider, 2009). Our findings suggest that,
by itself, increased household optimism does not induce higher leverage, and that other forces, such as shifts in the
credit supply function, also played an important role during the recent housing cycle.7 This does not mean that
homebuyer optimism was not important in explaining the boom-bust cycle in house prices. However, it does mean
that a singular focus on homebuyer beliefs would have counterfactually predicted a decline in mortgage leverage
during this period.8 More broadly, our findings provide support for a literature that explores the role of beliefs as
drivers of credit and business cycles (see Gennaioli, Shleifer and Vishny, 2012; Xiong, 2012; Angeletos and Lian,
2016; Gennaioli, Ma and Shleifer, 2016, for recent contributions).

1

A Model of Leverage Choice with Heterogeneous Beliefs

In this section, we develop a parsimonious model of leverage choice that allows us to characterize the various
channels through which homebuyers’ beliefs can affect their mortgage leverage choices.

1.1

Environment

We consider an economy with two dates, t = {0, 1}, populated by two types of agents: borrowers, indexed by i,
and lenders, indexed by L.9 There is a numeraire consumption good and a housing good.
described in Aguiar and Amador (2013) and Uribe and Schmitt-Grohé (2017). For instance, a sovereign with pessimistic expectations
about the performance of the economy anticipates the possibility of defaulting, which generates an incentive to borrow more. As
described in Section 2.2.1, this effect is modulated by the costs of default, which are endogenous in the sovereign context, as emphasized
by Bulow and Rogoff (1989) and Gennaioli, Martin and Rossi (2014), among others.
7 We show that, in both housing-as-consumption and housing-as-investment scenarios, lenders’ optimism can generate an increase
in leverage. Intuitively, access to cheaper credit makes borrowers more willing to borrow. This result establishes that shifts in the
distribution of borrowers’ and lenders’ beliefs have an asymmetric impact on equilibrium leverage.
8 This is consistent with the evidence in quantitative models of the housing market such as Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2015),
who show that more optimistic homebuyers can precipitate price increases, but that without a simultaneous relaxation in credit
constraints, leverage will likely decrease. Such quantitative models incorporate general equilibrium effects of beliefs on house prices
that our cross-sectional empirical strategy cannot speak to. For example, if more optimistic beliefs drive up house prices, this can
provide an additional positive force on equilibrium leverage if the same downpayment to purchase the same house now involves taking
on larger leverage. Quantitatively, the results in Kaplan, Mitman and Violante (2015) suggest that general equilibrium forces are not
strong enough to overturn the negative correlation between homebuyer beliefs and leverage we uncovered in the cross section.
9 For simplicity, we present our results in a principal-agent formulation in which borrowers and lenders have predetermined roles.
A common theme in existing work is that optimists endogenously become asset buyers and borrowers while pessimists become asset
sellers and lenders. This type of sorting is natural if belief disagreement is the single source of heterogeneity. However, in housing
markets, additional dimensions of heterogeneity (e.g., life-cycle motives, wealth, risk preferences, access to credit markets, etc.) also
determine which agents become buyers and borrowers in equilibrium.

6

Borrowers.

Borrowers’ preferences over initial consumption and future wealth are given by
ui (c0i ) + βEi [w1i ] ,

where c0i denotes borrowers’ date-0 consumption and Ei [w1i ] corresponds to borrowers’ date-1 expected wealth
given their beliefs. We assume that the borrowers’ discount factor satisfies β < 1 and that ui (·) is an increasing
and concave function that satisfies u0i (·) > 0, u00i (·) < 0, and limc→0 u0i (c) = ∞. Our formulation preserves the
linearity of borrowers’ preferences with respect to future wealth, which allows us to derive sharp results while
allowing for a meaningful date-0 consumption decision.10
Borrowers are endowed with n0i > 0 and n1i > 0 dollars at dates 0 and 1, respectively. At date 0, borrowers use
their own resources or borrowed funds to either consume c0i or to purchase a house of size h0i at a price p0 . They
can borrow through a non-contingent non-recourse loan (mortgage) that is collateralized exclusively by the value
of the house they acquire. Formally, in exchange for receiving p0 h0i Λi (δi ) dollars at date 0, borrowers promise
to repay b0i dollars at date 1. The function Λi (δi ), which takes as an argument the normalized loan repayment
δi =

b0i
p0 h0i ,

denotes borrowers’ loan-to-value (LTV) ratio and is determined by lenders as described below. Hence,

borrowers’ date-0 budget constraint corresponds to
c0i + p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) = n0i .

(1)

At date 1, borrowers have the option to default. In case of default, borrowers experience a private loss κi h0i ,
which scales proportionally with the house size.11 The default cost parameter κi ≥ 0 captures both pecuniary
and non-pecuniary losses associated with default and can be also interpreted as a simple form of allowing for
heterogeneity across borrowers regarding future continuation values.
We denote house prices at dates 0 and 1 by p0 and p1 , respectively, and define the growth rate of house prices
by g =

p1
p0 .

Borrowers hold heterogeneous beliefs about the growth rate of house prices. Borrower i’s beliefs about

the growth rate of house prices are described by a cdf Fi (·):
g=

p1
, where g ∼i Fi (·) ,
p0

 
where g has support in g, g , with g ≥ 0 and g ≤ ∞.12 Borrowers solve the following optimization problem:
max

c0i ,b0i ,h0i


 N D 
ui (c0i ) + βEi max w1i
, w1i ,

N
D
subject to Equation (1), where w1i
and w1i
denote borrowers’ wealth in non-default and default states, given by
N
w1i
= n1i + p1 h0i − b0i
D
w1i
= n1i − κi h0i .

Finally, we incorporate the possibility of a “collateral adjustment friction” by assuming that borrowers have a
10 We preserve the risk-neutrality assumption common in existing work on leverage cycles. In Appendix A.3, we study the implications
of introducing curvature in borrowers’ date-1 utility. Our theoretical results can be interpreted as a first-order approximation to the
more general case.
11 Formally, assuming that the default cost is proportional to the house size preserves the homogeneity of the borrowers’ problem.
This assumption can be relaxed without affecting our insights, though we believe that it is reasonable to assume that individual default
costs are larger for homeowners with larger properties.
12 An alternative interpretation of our framework involves thinking of individual beliefs as risk-neutral adjusted beliefs. Under this
view, differences in Fi (·) across borrowers can partly capture differences in attitudes towards risk.

7

minimum desired house size. Formally, borrowers’ housing choice h0i must satisfy
h0i ≥ hi ,

(2)

where hi ≥ 0 is such that the borrowers’ feasible set is non-empty. This specification tractably captures that
borrowers’ preferences for owner-occupied housing are also affected by the consumption aspect of housing.13
When the home size constraint binds, homebuyers’ housing investment decision is completely pinned down by
consumption aspects of housing, such as the homebuyer’s family size, the house quality or location, or the local
amenities.14 Considering this case allows us to study the relationship between beliefs and leverage with an infinite
collateral adjustment friction. When the home size constraint does not bind, we can analyze the same relationship
in the absence of collateral adjustment frictions. These two polar cases, which we study below, provide extreme
characterizations that highlight how the relationship between beliefs and leverage choices varies as we adjust the
magnitude of the collateral adjustment friction.
Lenders.

Lenders are risk neutral and perfectly competitive. They require a predetermined rate of return

1 + r, potentially different from β −1 , and, for simplicity, have the ability to offer borrower-specific loan-to-value
schedules.15 In bankruptcy, lenders recover only a fraction η ∈ [0, 1] of the value of the collateral. The remaining
fraction 1 − η corresponds to bankruptcy costs. Lenders’ perceptions over house price growth, which may be
different from those of borrowers, are given by a distribution with cdf FL (·).
Equilibrium. An equilibrium is defined as consumption, borrowing, and housing choices c0i , b0i , h0i , and default
decisions by borrowers, such that borrowers maximize utility given the loan-to-value schedule offered by lenders
to break even. Since our goal is to derive testable cross-sectional predictions for changes in borrowers’ beliefs,
we do not impose market clearing in the housing market. Fixing total housing supply and closing the housing
market would not affect our cross-sectional predictions for leverage choices. We work under the presumption
that homebuyers always find it optimal to borrow in equilibrium, and relegate a detailed discussion of regularity
conditions to Appendix A.

1.2

Equilibrium characterization

We characterize the equilibrium of the model backwards. We first study borrowers’ default decisions, then
characterize the loan-to-value schedules offered by lenders, and, finally, study the ex-ante decisions made by
borrowers.
13 This constraint is a common feature of quantitative models of the housing market (e.g., Gervais, 2002; Cocco, 2004; Floetotto,
Kirker and Stroebel, 2016). We adopt a hard constraint on h0i for tractability.
 Imposing
 the constraint in Equation (2) is equivalent
to assuming that borrowers’ utility is augmented by an additive term α · 1 h0i ≥ hi , where α is a sufficiently large positive scalar
and 1 [·] denotes the indicator function. We have explored alternative specifications for housing preferences, including preferences that
feature linear and quadratic welfare losses around an optimum desired house size h?i , that is, augmenting borrowers’ utility by terms

2

−ψ0 h0i − h?i or −ψ1 h0i − h?i . When the positive scalars ψ0 and ψ1 are sufficiently large, borrowers find it optimal to choose
h0i = h?i in the linear case or h0i ≈ h?i in the quadratic case for a large set of model primitives, including borrowers’ beliefs. The
predictions under those assumptions are the same as the predictions when the housing constraint binds.
14 While we model housing as an homogeneous good to maintain tractability, the collateral adjustment friction also proxies for
households’ willingness to adjust their housing choice in other dimensions. For example, it does not just capture households’ willingness
to buy a smaller house in the same neighborhood, but also their willingness to move to a cheaper neighborhood in other to reduce the
fraction of their portfolio allocated to housing.
15 Our results remain valid under weaker assumptions on the determination of credit supply. For instance, our results are unchanged
if lenders are restricted to offering a single loan-to-value schedule to all borrowers. A correct interpretation of our empirical findings
requires that potentially unobserved characteristics used by lenders’ to offer loan-to-value schedules to borrowers must be orthogonal
to the recent house price experiences of a borrower’s geographically distant friends.

8

Default decision.

At date 1, borrowers default according to the following threshold rule,

g ≤ δi − χi , Default
if
g > δ − χ
No Default
i
i

where χi =

κi
p0

and δi =

b0i
,
p0 h0i

and where g denotes the actual realization of house price growth. Note that χi ≥ 0 is simply a rescaled version
of the default cost, so that χi = 0 when κi = 0. Intuitively, borrowers decide to default only when date-1 house
prices are sufficiently low. For any realization of house price changes, the probability of default by borrower i
increases with the borrower’s promised repayment δi and decreases with the magnitude of default costs κi .
Remark. (Strategic default) There is a substantial literature that investigates the extent to which mortgage defaults
represent strategic, ruthless defaults by households walking away from homes with negative equity (“underwater
homes”), even though they have the resources to continue making mortgage payments (see Elul et al., 2010;
Bhutta, Dokko and Shan, 2017; Gerardi et al., 2017). This literature concludes that default usually happens at
levels of negative equity that are larger than what would be predicted by a frictionless default model. Our model
incorporates these findings through the size of the parameter κi , which captures other, non-financial default costs
(e.g., social stigma). As we discuss below, our theoretical and empirical findings do not depend on whether default
is purely strategic or the result of also receiving negative income shocks. Indeed, our results only require that
default is more likely when house prices decline; in other words, the results are robust as long as negative equity
is a necessary condition for default, even if it is not sufficient.16
LTV schedules. Given borrowers’ default decisions, competitive lenders offer loan-to-value (LTV) schedules to
a type i borrower to break even. Equation (3) characterizes the loan-to-value schedule offered by lenders to a
borrower of type i for any normalized promised repayment δi =
η
Λi (δi ) =

R δi −χi

gdFL (g) + δi

g

b0i
p0 h0i :

Rg
δi −χi

dFL (g)
.

1+r

(3)

The first term in the numerator corresponds to the payment received by lenders in default states net of default costs,
normalized by the date-0 value of the house. The second term in the numerator corresponds to the normalized
repayment in non-default states. Both terms are discounted at the lenders’ risk-free rate, 1 + r.
Although we formally let borrowers choose δi for tractability, this is identical to allow borrowers to choose
loan-to-value ratios instead. Indeed, we establish in the Appendix that at any interior optimum for leverage there
exists a positive relation between both variables, that is, Λ0i (δi ) > 0. We also show that Λ0i (δi ) < 1. Alternatively,
we could have formulated homebuyers’ choice in terms of the margin/haircut/downpayment, which is equal to
1 − Λi (δi ), or the leverage ratio, which is equal to
Borrowers’ leverage choice.

1
17
1−Λi (δi ) .

To determine borrowers’ leverage choice, we reformulate their problem as a

function of δi . Formally, borrowers choose c0i , h0i , and δi to maximize
"

Z

δi −χi

max ui (c0i ) + βp0 h0i −χi

c0i ,h0i ,δi

Z

g

#
(g − δi ) dFi (g) ,

dFi (g) +

(4)

δi −χi

g

16 This requirement is fulfilled even in the “double trigger” theory, under which negative equity and income shocks are both required
before households will default on their mortgage. Importantly, under this theory, when households receive a negative income shock and
cannot continue making their mortgage payments, if house prices are high, households can just sell the home, repay the outstanding
mortgage, and keep the difference. Only when they are underwater will the negative income shock precipitate mortgage default.
17 There exists a one-to-one relation among these variables. For instance, if a borrower pays $100k dollars for a house, borrowing
75
$75k and paying $25k in cash, the borrower’s loan-to-value ratio is 100
= 75%, his downpayment is 25%, and his leverage ratio is 4.

9

subject to a date-0 budget constraint and the housing constraint (collateral adjustment friction)
c0i + p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) = n0i

(λ0i )

hi ≤ h0i

(ν0i ) .

Borrower i takes into account that Λi (δi ) is given by Equation (3), and λ0i and ν0i respectively denote (nonnegative) Lagrange multipliers. Note that the term in brackets in the objective function (4) corresponds to the net
return per dollar invested in housing. Borrowers’ optimality conditions for consumption, housing, and leverage,
are given by the following equations:18
c0i :

u0i (c0i ) − λ0i
|{z}
| {z }

Mg. Benefit

=0

(5)

Mg. Cost

"
h0i :

Z

− λ0i p0 (1 − Λi (δi )) + βp0 −χi
|
{z
}
Mg. Cost
|

δi −χi

Z

#

g

(g − δi ) dFi (g) +ν0i = 0

dFi (g) +
{z

Mg. Benefit (Expected return channel)

δi :

λ0i p0 h0i Λ0i (δi ) − βp0 h0i
{z
}
|
|
Mg. Benefit

Z

(6)

δi −χi

g

}

g

δi −χi

{z

dFi (g) = 0,
}

(7)

Mg. Cost
(Downpayment protection
channel)

The optimality condition for consumption simply equates the marginal benefit of consumption, given by u0i (c0i ),
with the marginal cost of tightening the date-0 budget constraint, given by λ0i .
The optimality condition for housing equates the marginal benefit of buying a larger house with the marginal
cost of doing so. The marginal benefit of a housing investment is the net present value of the expected return
received at date 1. This is the first channel through which borrower beliefs affect leverage choice, referred to above
as the “expected return” force. The marginal cost of the investment corresponds to the reduction in available
resources at date 0, valued by borrowers according to λ0i . When the housing constraint binds, borrowers’ housing
corresponds to h0i = hi and Equation (6) simply defines ν0i , the shadow value of relaxing the housing constraint.
The optimality condition for borrowing equates the marginal benefit of increasing the promised repayment,
which corresponds to having more resources at date 0, valued by borrowers as λ0i , with the marginal cost of doing
so. The marginal cost corresponds to the net present value of the increased promised repayment in non-default
states at date 1. This is the second channel through which borrower beliefs matter for leverage, referred to above
as the “downpayment protection” force. Intuitively, a pessimistic borrower that needs a house of a certain size but
thinks that house prices might decrease is more inclined to choose a lower downpayment (higher repayment and
higher LTV ratio), since the perceived probability of repaying the mortgage is low. Equivalently, an optimistic
borrower with a similar house size target who thinks that house prices are likely to increase, expects to repay
her mortgage in more states of the world. This increase in the perceived marginal cost of borrowing leads more
optimistic borrowers to invest more of their own funds by making a larger downpayment.
An alternative way of understanding borrowers’ behavior is by considering the three possible uses for a dollar
of own funds at date 0. When borrowers can adjust housing freely (no collateral adjustment friction), the following
18 The derivation of Equation (7) uses the envelope theorem. Even though borrowers take into account that adjusting their leverage
choice affects their probability of default ex-post — formally, varying δi modifies the limits of integration in Equation (4) — no
additional terms appear in Equation (7) to account for this effect, since borrowers make default decisions optimally. Intuitively,
because borrowers are indifferent between defaulting and repaying at the default threshold, a small change in the default threshold
has no first-order effects on borrowers’ welfare. The same logic applies to the derivation of Equation (6).

10

relation must hold at the optimum:

u0i (c0i )
| {z }

Marginal Benefit
of Consumption

=

β
|

Rg

dFi (g)
δi −χi
Λ0i (δi )
{z

}

Return on Larger
Downpayment

=

h
i
R δ −χ
Rg
β −χi g i i dFi (g) + δi −χi (g − δi ) dFi (g)
1 − Λi (δi )
{z

|

Return on Leveraged House Purchase

.

(8)

}

Intuitively, at an optimum in which the housing constraint is slack, a borrower is indifferent between (i) consuming
a dollar, (ii) using a dollar to increasing today’s downpayment, and (iii) leveraging the dollar to make a larger
housing investment. The second and third terms in Equation (8) have an intuitive interpretation. A dollar of extra
∂δi
1
downpayment at date 0 allows borrowers to reduce their future per-dollar of housing repayment by ∂Λ
= Λ0 (δ
) >1
i
i i
Rg
dollars. The per-dollar net present value of such a reduction corresponds to β δi −χi dFi (g) , since borrowers only

repay in states of the world in which they do not default. Said differently, pessimistic borrowers who think they are
quite likely to default in the future perceive a very small benefit of reducing the promised payment tomorrow, and
will therefore make small downpayments and take on larger leverage. Alternatively, a dollar invested in housing
at date 0 can be levered 1−Λ1i (δi ) times, while the per-dollar net present value of a housing investment corresponds
h
i
Rg
R δ −χ
to β −χi g i i dFi (g) + δi −χi (g − δi ) dFi (g) .

1.3

Two alternative scenarios

When borrowers have preferences for housing that are not purely driven by investment considerations and they
can freely adjust their behavior along consumption, borrowing, and housing margins, it is not generally possible
to provide clear analytic characterizations of the effect of changes in beliefs on leverage choices. However, by
sequentially studying (i) a scenario with no collateral adjustment friction in which borrowers freely adjust their
housing size, and (ii) a scenario in which borrowers’ housing size is fixed due to non-investment-related forces such
as family (infinite collateral adjustment friction), we can provide comparative statics on the effects of beliefs shifts.
We refer to the case in which borrowers freely adjust their housing choice as the housing-as-investment
scenario. We adopt this terminology to capture that borrowers’ housing decisions are mostly driven by investment
considerations. In this case, borrowers make housing decisions purely based on its return as a levered investment
and there is no collateral adjustment friction. We refer to the second case in which the housing decision is
fixed as the housing-as-consumption scenario. We adopt this terminology to capture that idea that consumption
considerations such as family Baileysize or locational preferences are mostly driving borrowers’ housing decision. In
practice, we expect borrowers’ behavior to be a combination of the effects we identify under these polar scenarios.
The purpose of our empirical exercise is to determine which scenario more closely captures the dominant forces
driving leverage in the U.S. housing market.
Housing-as-Investment Scenario.

In Appendix A, we show that the problem faced by borrowers in the

housing-as-investment scenario can be solved sequentially. First, borrowers choose δi to maximize the levered
return on a housing investment. Formally, they solve
−χi
ρi = max
δi

R δi −χi
g

dFi (g) +

Rg
δi −χi

1 − Λi (δi )

(g − δi ) dFi (g)
.

(9)

The solution to this problem yields borrowers’ optimal LTV ratio, which is fully characterized by a single equation
Λ0i (δi )
1
=
,
Fi (δi −χi )
1 − Λi (δi )
−χi 1−Fi (δi −χi ) + Ei [ g| g ≥ δi − χi ] − δi
11

(10)

where the truncated expectation of house price growth corresponds to
Rg
δ −χi

Ei [ g| g ≥ δi − χi ] = R ig

δi −χi

gdFi (g)

.

(11)

dFi (g)

Equation (10) can be derived directly from Equation (8) by combining borrowers’ optimal borrowing and housing
choices.19 The numerator of Equation (11) captures the “expected return” channel described above, while its
denominator captures the “downpayment protection” channel. Changes in the distribution of borrowers’ beliefs
affect leverage choices exclusively through the impact on the probability of default Fi (δi − χi ) and the truncated
expectation Ei [ g| g ≥ δi − χi ]. Below, to derive unambiguous predictions, we will characterize conditions under
which changes in beliefs shift the first two terms of the denominator of Equation (10) for any δ̃ (point-wise).20
Equation (10) determines borrowers’ optimal leverage choice independently of the choices of consumption and
housing. This implies that the existence of a consumption-savings margin does not modify the predictions regarding
the relationship between borrowers’ optimism and leverage. Once δi is determined, borrowers choose initial
consumption by equalizing the marginal benefit of investing in housing with the marginal utility of consumption:
u0i (c0i ) = ρi ,
where ρi , defined in (9), is the maximized levered return on a housing investment. Finally, given δi and c0i ,
borrowers choose h0i to satisfy
p0 h0i =

n0i − c0i
.
1 − Λi (δi )

Housing-as-Consumption Scenario. In this scenario, borrowers choose δi to solve a consumption smoothing
problem.21 Formally, the optimal LTV ratio is fully characterized by the following equation
u0i (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi ))) Λ0i (δi ) = β (1 − Fi (δi − χi )) .

(12)

Equation (12) can be derived directly from Equation (8) by combining borrowers’ optimal consumption
and borrowing choices. In this case, only the downpayment protection force is present, through the term
Rg
dFi (g) = 1 − Fi (δi − χi ) . Therefore, changes in the distribution of borrowers’ beliefs only affect leverage
δi −χi
choices through changes in the probability of repayment, 1 − Fi (δi − χi ). In this scenario, as described below,
unambiguous predictions can be found by comparing point-wise shifts in Fi (·). Once δi is determined, borrowers
choose initial consumption to satisfy their budget constraint
c0i = n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) ,

(13)

where h0i takes the value hi .
19 Note that Equation (10) can be mapped to Equation (12) in Simsek (2013). The upshot of introducing a consumption margin in
our formulation is that it highlights that borrowers’ optimism only increases leverage indirectly – through Equation (6), not Equation
(7) – through the fact that more optimistic borrowers need to lever up a given amount of resources to buy larger properties.
20 Throughout the paper, we compare belief distributions along dimensions that allow us to guarantee that truncated expectations and
default probabilities, when defined as functions of the default threshold, shift “point-wise.” We could establish additional predictions
from “local” changes in truncated expectations (starting from a given equilibrium). We do not pursue that route, because our empirical
strategy only uses shifts in the distribution Fi (·) and does not use information on actual default thresholds.
21 In a more general setup, borrowers will also be indifferent at the margin between consuming and investing in other assets. See
Cocco (2004) and Chetty, Sándor and Szeidl (2017) for recent work on how housing affects optimal asset allocation problems.

12

2

Beliefs and Leverage Choice: Equilibrium Outcomes

We next study how changes in the distribution of borrowers’ beliefs affect equilibrium outcomes in the model
described above. In the body of the paper, we impose a parametric assumption on the distribution of beliefs and
develop comparative statics for changes in the key moments of the belief distribution. In Appendix B, we derive
and implement a non-parametric test of how beliefs affect leverage.

2.1

Parametric Predictions

Throughout this section, we assume that borrowers’ beliefs about the expected growth rate of house prices follow
a normal distribution with mean µi and standard deviation σi , that is,

g ∼i N µi , σi2 .
We adopt the normal distribution for our parametric predictions based on the empirical evidence about the
distribution of house price movements that we observe in our data. Appendix Figure A3 shows the distribution of
annual house price changes since 1993 across U.S. counties, constructed using data from Zillow. The distribution is
unimodal and approximately symmetric, which suggests that the normal distribution is a sensible parametric choice
(see also Panel (c) of Figure 4). When needed, we truncate the normal distribution at g = 0 in all calculations.
As we show below, one desirable feature of the normal distribution is that shifts in the two moments, mean and
variance, have unambiguous predictions for Ei [ g| g ≥ δi − χi ] and Fi (δi − χi ), and therefore on the relationship
between beliefs and leverage in both the housing-as-investment and housing-as-consumption scenarios.
Proposition 1. (Mean and variance shifts with normally distributed beliefs.)
a) [Housing-as-investment predictions.] In the housing-as-investment scenario, holding all else constant,
including the belief dispersion σi , borrowers with a higher average belief µi choose a higher LTV ratio and a larger
house for any default cost. In the housing-as-investment scenario, holding all else constant, including the average
belief µi , borrowers with a higher belief dispersion σi choose a higher LTV ratio and a larger house for moderate
default costs. Formally, these predictions for equilibrium LTV ratios can be expressed as:




Fi (δ̃−χi )
∂ −χi 1−F δ̃−χ + Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi
i(
i)
> 0, ∀δ̃
∂µi




Fi (δ̃−χi )
∂ −χi 1−F δ̃−χ + Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi
i(
i)
> 0, ∀δ̃
∂σi

⇒

∂δi
> 0,
∂µi

⇒

∂δi
> 0, when χi is sufficiently low.
∂σi

b) [Housing-as-consumption predictions.] In the housing-as-consumption scenario, holding all else constant,
including the belief dispersion σi , borrowers with a higher average belief µi choose a lower LTV ratio and lower
consumption for any default cost. In the housing-as-consumption scenario, holding all else constant, including the
average belief µi , borrowers with a higher belief dispersion σi choose a higher LTV ratio and higher consumption, as
long as the default probability is less than 50% – the empirically appropriate case – for any default cost. Formally,

13

these predictions for equilibrium LTV ratios can be expressed as:

∂Fi δ̃ − χi
< 0, ∀δ̃
∂µi

∂Fi δ̃ − χi
> 0, ∀δ̃
∂σi

⇒

∂δi
< 0,
∂µi

⇒

∂δi
> 0,
∂σi

if δ̃ < µi + χi .

Our model shows that the relationship between beliefs and leverage depends crucially on the margins of adjustment
that are active for a given borrower. Indeed, as highlighted by Equation (10), when borrowers perceive their housing
choice to be an investment decision (the housing-as-investment scenario without a collateral adjustment friction),


Fi (δ̃−χi )
leverage increases when −χi 1−F δ̃−χ + Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi is higher for any leverage choice δ̃. Figure 1 illustrates
i(
i)


how Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi , which corresponds to the expected value of the house price change conditional on the value

being to the right of the default threshold – given by the black line – and Fi δ̃ − χi , which corresponds to the
default probability, vary point-wise with changes in µ and σ. Panel (a) shows that an increase in the average


belief increases the perceived net return on borrowers’ housing investment by increasing Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi and

reducing Fi δ̃ − χi point-wise, which pushes them to choose higher leverage and invest more in housing. Panel
(b) shows that an increase in σi raises the expected net return of a housing investment, which makes housing a
more attractive investment for borrowers. This is because an increase in the probability of extremely good states
of the world is valued by borrowers more than the increase in the probability of extremely bad states of the world,
since they expect to default on those states.



Figure 1: Illustration of how shifts in µi and σi affect Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi and 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi
(b) Variance shift

(a) Mean shift
2

2

1.8

1.8

1.6

1.6

1.4

1.4

1.2

1.2

1

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0

0
0

0.5

1

1.5

2

Note: Figure 1 illustrates how shifts in µi and σi modify Ei

2.5



0

g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi



0.5

and 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi

1



1.5

2

2.5

for a given threshold δ̃ − χi . The parameters

used in Panel (a) are µ = 1.3, µ = 1.7, and σ = 0.2. The parameters used in Panel (b) are µ = 1.3, σ = 0.2, and σ = 0.4. In both panels, we
set δ̃ − χi = 0.78.

On the other hand, Equation (12) highlights that when a borrower finds it optimal not to adjust her housing
choice, perhaps because it is determined primarily by family size (housing-as-consumption scenario with an infinite
collateral adjustment friction), leverage is decreasing in the perceived probability that the mortgage will be repaid,

1 − Fi δ̃ − χi , for a given default threshold δ̃ − χi . In Figure 1, this is given by the probability-mass to the right
of the default threshold. Panel (a) shows that a reduction in the average belief is perceived by borrowers as
a reduction in the return to their downpayment, since now the resources put down as downpayment are more
14

likely to be lost in case of default. In that case, more pessimistic borrowers optimally decide to make smaller
downpayments and borrow more. In this scenario, when the probability of default is less than 50%, a higher σi
increases the probability of default (i.e., it reduces the probability mass to the right of the threshold), reducing the
probability of repayment and reducing also the return on borrowers’ downpayment. Higher variance of expected
house price changes will thus induce borrowers to increase their leverage.
It is worth highlighting that borrowers’ ability to default is crucial for our results. Had we assumed that
borrowers are always forced to repay (κi → ∞), the downpayment protection force would be inactive, and changes
in borrowers’ beliefs would have no impact on leverage choice in the housing-as-consumption scenario. As discussed
above, our theoretical and empirical results do not depend on whether default is purely strategic (i.e., sizable
negative equity is a sufficient condition for default), or whether households only default if negative income shocks
make it impossible for them to continue making their mortgage payments. This is because even in response to
income shocks, households will only default when they have negative equity, and the mortgage is worth more
than their house – if they had positive equity, they could just sell the house, repay the mortgage, and keep the
difference. This means that in either scenario, mortgage default is more likely when house prices decline (negative
equity is either sufficient, when default is strategic, or necessary, when default is in response to negative income
shocks), which is what we require for our results.

2.2

Additional Testable Predictions

The results in Proposition 1 establish that changes in beliefs can have differential implications for borrowers’
leverage choices depending on the active margins of adjustment. In this section, we derive additional testable
predictions from our theoretical framework. Specifically, we study how the relationship between beliefs and leverage
choices characterized in Proposition 1 varies with the magnitude of the default cost. We also analyze how this
relationship varies with the average optimism of homebuyers. As highlighted in the introduction, we find the
empirical evidence to be more consistent with the housing-as-consumption scenario. In the interest of brevity, we
therefore derive these additional predictions for the housing-as-consumption scenario in the body of the paper,
and relegate the formal analysis of the empirically less-relevant housing-as-investment scenario to the Appendix.22
2.2.1

Interaction with Cost of Default

We first derive testable predictions for how the ability with which lenders can seize borrowers’ collateral in case
of default affects the strength of the relation between belief shifts and leverage choices
Proposition 2. (Interaction with cost of default.) In the housing-as-consumption scenario, a given increase in
the average belief, µi , generates a smaller decrease in leverage when borrowers’ default cost κi is higher, as long as
the default probability is less than 50% – the empirically appropriate case – for any default cost. A given increase
in belief dispersion, σi , generates a smaller increase in leverage when borrowers’ default cost κi is higher, as long
as the default probability is less than 16% – the empirically appropriate case – for any default cost. Hence, high
default costs dampen the effects of belief changes on leverage. Formally, the predictions for equilibrium LTV ratios
22 Note that when characterizing Propositions 2 and 3 below, we exclusively focus on the direct effects of changes in the default cost
and average beliefs. As we describe in the Appendix, second-order comparative statics exercises are determined by both direct effects
and curvature effects. Our focus is on the former set of effects.

15

can be expressed as:

∂ 2 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi
< 0, ∀δ̃
∂µi ∂κi

∂ 2 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi
> 0, ∀δ̃
∂σi ∂κi

⇒

∂ 2 δi
< 0,
∂µi ∂κi

if δ̃ < µi + χi .

⇒

∂ 2 δi
< 0,
∂σi ∂κi

if δ̃ − χi − µi < σi .

Proposition 2 shows that a high default cost dampens the strength of the downpayment protection force. Intuitively,
when default costs are large, the probability of default is low, so a given change in µi and σi shifts only a small
mass of the belief distribution from the default to no-default region or vice versa. Alternatively, when default costs
are low, borrowers perceive that default is relatively more likely, so a given change in µi and σi shifts a larger mass
of the belief distribution from the default to no-default region or vice versa. In the empirical implementation, we
will use differences across states in lenders’ recourse to borrowers’ non-housing assets to provide variation in κi .
2.2.2

Interaction with Average Beliefs

We next use our framework to derive testable predictions regarding the relative importance of changes in beliefs
on leverage choices across individuals or time periods with relatively higher or lower mean beliefs.
Proposition 3. (Interaction with average beliefs.) In the housing-as-consumption scenario, a given increase in
the average belief, µi , generates a smaller decrease in leverage when borrowers’ average belief, µi , is higher to begin
with, as long as the default probability is less than 50% – the empirically appropriate case – for any default cost.
A given increase in belief dispersion, σi , generates a smaller increase in leverage when borrowers’ average belief,
µi , is higher to begin with, as long as the default probability is less than 16% – the empirically appropriate case –
for any default cost. Hence, high average beliefs dampen the effects of belief changes on leverage. Formally, these
predictions for equilibrium LTV ratios can be expressed as:
∂ 2 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi
∂µ2i



∂ 2 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi
∂σi ∂µi



< 0, ∀δ̃

⇒

∂ 2 δi
> 0,
∂µ2i

> 0, ∀δ̃

⇒

∂ 2 δi
< 0,
∂σi ∂µi

if δ̃ < µi + χi .
if δ̃ − χi − µi < σi .

Proposition 3 shows that in the housing-as-consumption scenario, the effect of changes in µi and σi are smaller
in magnitude when µi is higher to begin with. Panel (a) of Figure 2 shows that the probability of repayment,

1 − Fi δ̃ − χi , is concave in µi . Intuitively, a given increase in optimism changes the probability of repayment
by less when the average expectation is already high and default is unlikely. Panel (b) of Figure 2 shows that the
dashed line, which corresponds to the repayment probability as a function of the variance of beliefs when expected
house price growth is high, is flatter than the solid line, which corresponds to the repayment probability when
expected high price growth is low. Intuitively, when µi is low to begin with, a larger mass of the belief distribution

is around the default threshold, increasing the sensitivity of 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi to changes in the variance.
We will provide both cross-sectional and time-series evidence for Proposition 3. Cross-sectionally, we will show
a stronger negative relation between beliefs and leverage for the most pessimistic individuals. In the time series,
we document a stronger negative relation between beliefs and leverage during periods of declining house prices.

16

Figure 2: Interaction with average beliefs: Housing-as-consumption predictions
(a) Boom-bust predictions for mean

(b) Boom-bust predictions for variance

1

1

0.95
0.95
0.9

0.9
0.85

0.8
0.85

0.75
0.8
0.7

0.65
0.8

0.85

0.9

0.95

1

1.05

1.1

1.15

1.2

1.25

1.3

0.75
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

0.55

0.6

Note: The parameters used in Panel (a) are δ̃ = 0.7 and σ = 2. The parameters used in Panel (b) are δ̃ = 0.7, µ = 1.3, and µ = 1.17. In both
figures, we set χi = 0.

2.3

Role of Lenders’ Beliefs

Although our empirical findings build on cross-sectional variation on homebuyers’ beliefs, it is valuable to separately
characterize the effect of changes in lenders’ beliefs on the equilibrium leverage choices of borrowers. This allows
us to draw implications of our cross-sectional results for aggregate variables, as we discuss in the conclusion. We
show that an increase in lenders’ optimism can increase equilibrium leverage in both the housing-as-consumption
and the housing-as-investment scenarios. We assume that lenders have normally distributed beliefs with mean µL .
Proposition 4. (Role of lenders’ beliefs.) In the housing-as-investment scenario and the housing-as-consumption
scenario, higher optimism by lenders, in the form of a higher average belief µL , holding all else constant, including
borrowers’ beliefs, is necessary to generate an increase in leverage.
In Appendix A, we formally show that a change in the average belief of lenders µL is associated with pointwise shifts in Λi (·) and Λ0i (·). Intuitively, when lenders become more optimistic, borrowers have access to cheaper
funding. In the housing-as-investment scenario, we show that access to cheaper credit increases the maximum
levered return that a borrower can achieve, generating a substitution effect towards higher leverage in equilibrium.
In the housing-as-consumption scenario, in addition to the substitution effect, there is an income effect that works
in the opposite direction: lower interest rates make borrowers feel richer, which generates a force towards higher
consumption and lower leverage. The findings of Propositions 1 and 4 thus show that shifts in the beliefs of
borrowers and lenders, when considered in isolation, can have opposite predictions for equilibrium leverage.

3

Beliefs and Leverage Choice: Empirical Investigation

The previous sections showed that the effect of homebuyer beliefs on leverage choice is ambiguous. If households are
able to substantially adjust the size of their property in response to changes in expected house price growth, then
more pessimistic buyers will buy smaller houses with lower overall leverage. On the other hand, some homebuyers’
property choices might be primarily determined by factors related to the consumption aspect of the house, such as
family size. Such a collateral adjustment friction limits the ability of pessimistic homebuyers to reduce their home
size, and the only way to minimize their financial exposure to the housing market is to reduce their downpayment.
17

In practice, individuals’ behavior will be in between the extreme cases studied in Section 2.1. Indeed, whether
collateral adjustment frictions are sufficiently large such that more optimistic individuals will choose lower leverage
is an empirical question that is central to understanding the role of homebuyer beliefs in driving mortgage leverage.
In this section, we analyze the effects on equilibrium leverage of changes in homebuyer beliefs, holding lender
beliefs fixed. Our tests use the recent house price experiences of geographically distant friends as shifters of
individuals’ beliefs about the distribution of future house price changes. Specifically, we compare the leverage
choices of otherwise similar individuals purchasing houses at the same point in time and in the same neighborhood,
where one individual’s friends have experienced more positive, or more widely dispersed recent house price growth.
This empirical approach builds on recent evidence in Bailey et al. (2017a), who show that the recent house price
changes experienced within an individual’s social network affect that individual’s beliefs about the attractiveness
of local housing market investments. We expand on these findings, and analyze responses to a new survey that
elicits individuals’ distribution of beliefs about future house price changes. We document that the mean and
standard deviation of the house price experiences across an individual’s friends shift the corresponding moments
of the distribution of individuals’ house price beliefs. Bailey et al. (2017a) also show that there is no systematic
relationship between the house price experiences of an individual’s geographically distant friends and other
characteristics of that individual that might also affect her housing market investment behavior. This means
that the house price experiences of an individual’s geographically distant friends are likely to only affect leverage
choice through their effects on beliefs. Indeed, in our empirical analysis we will rule out a number of other initially
plausible channels.

3.1

Data Description and Summary Statistics

Our empirical analysis is based on the combination of two key data sets. First, to measure different individuals’
social networks, we use anonymized social network data from Facebook. Facebook was created in 2004 as a collegewide online social networking service for students to maintain a profile and communicate with their friends. It has
since grown to become the world’s largest online social networking service, with over 1.9 billion monthly active
users globally and 234 million monthly active users in the U.S. and Canada (Facebook, 2017). Our baseline data
include a de-identified snapshot of all U.S.-based active Facebook users from July 1, 2015. For these users, we
observe the county of residence as well as the set of other Facebook users they are connected to. Using the language
adopted by the Facebook community, we call these connections “friends.” Indeed, in the U.S., Facebook serves
primarily as a platform for real-world friends and acquaintances to interact online, and people usually only add
connections to individuals on Facebook whom they know in the real world (Hampton et al., 2011; Jones et al.,
2013; Bailey et al., 2017b).
To construct a measure of the house price experiences in different individuals’ social networks, we combine the
data on the county of residence of different individuals’ friends with county-level house price indices from Zillow.
As we describe below, this allows us to analyze the full distribution of recent house price experiences across any
group of Facebook users. For example, we can calculate the standard deviation of house price experiences across
every individuals’ out-of-commuting zone friends.
In order to measure homebuyers’ leverage choice, we merge individuals on Facebook with three snapshots
from Acxiom InfoBase for July 2010, July 2012, and July 2014.23 These data are collected by Acxiom, a leading
marketing services and analytics company, and contain a wide range of individual-level demographic information
23 This merge involves a scrambled merge-key based on common characteristics. 53% of merges relied on email address. Other
characteristics were full date of birth (51%) or year-month of date of birth (28%), last name (45%) and first name (84%), location at
the level of zip code (44%), county (37%), Core Based Statistical Area (8%), and telephone number (2%). Most matches are based on
multiple characteristics.

18

compiled from a large number of sources (e.g., public records, surveys, and warranty registrations). We observe
information on age, marital status, education, occupation, income, household size, and homeownership status. For
current homeowners, the data also include information on housing transactions after 1993 that led to the ongoing
homeownership spell, compiled from public records deeds recordings. These data include the transaction date, the
transaction price, and details on any mortgage used to finance the home purchase.24
Since we can only analyze origination mortgages that have not been refinanced by the time we observe the
transaction in an Acxiom snapshot, we focus our analysis on home purchases between 2008 and 2014. There are
at most two years between these transaction and the closest Acxiom snapshot, allowing us to observe virtually
all of the initial mortgages. We want to study the mortgage choices for home purchases across a dispersed set of
geographies, in order to provide us with cross-sectional heterogeneity in the cost of default created by differences
in the legal environment across states. To achieve this, we first define a set of eligible geographies as those with
good Acxiom coverage and complete reporting of house prices and mortgage amounts; this excludes, for example,
property transactions from non-disclosure states such as Texas, where housing transaction prices are not reported
in the public record. We select all transactions in our data since January 2008 from a random sample of 2,900 zip
codes from these eligible geographies. This provides us with about 1.35 million housing transactions for which we
can match the buyer to Facebook.25 These transactions come from 33 different states, with the most prominently
represented states being California (24.6%), Florida (12.4%), and Arizona (9.5%), with Ohio, Washington, Nevada
and North Carolina each contributing approximately 5% of all transactions. Figure 3 shows how these transactions
are distributed over time.

2014

2013

2012

2011

2010

2009

2008

0

Number of Transactions (Thousands)
100
200

300

Figure 3: Number of Transactions

Note: Figure shows the number of transactions by purchase year in our matched transaction-Facebook sample.

Table 1 shows summary statistics for our sample.26 The average combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratio across
24 While the original deeds data contain the precise information on mortgage amount and purchase price, the Acxiom data include
these in ranges of $50,000. We take the mid-point of the range as the transaction price and mortgage amount. While the resulting
measurement error in LTV ratios does not affect our ability to obtain unbiased estimates in regressions where LTV ratio is the
dependent variable, it complicates the interpretation of the R2 from these regressions.
25 This only includes transactions with a buyer that has more than 10 geographically distant (i.e., out-of-commuting zone) friends.
Having such friends is a requirement to construct the belief shifters for these individuals.
26 For some of the transactions, the property is purchased by more than one individual, and we can match both individuals to their
Facebook accounts. In these cases, we use the characteristics and friends’ house price experiences of the head of household, as reported
in the Acxiom data. Pooling the sets of friends of both buyers yields very similar results.

19

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean

Standard
Deviation

P10

P50

P90

Purchase Characteristics
Transaction price (k$)
Combined Loan-to-Value (CLTV) Ratio

302.3
88.5%

237.8
16.9%

125
69.2%

225
94.7%

550
100.0%

Network Statistics
Number of Friends
Number of Out-of-Commuting Zone Friends
Number of Out-of-State Friends
Number of Counties with Friends

353.9
194.3
155.7
74.7

408.3
272.6
241.3
65.5

63
27
19
19

241
114
83
59

733
427
351
144

Neighborhood Statistics
Homeownership Rate
Recourse

74.3%
0.54

11.7%
0

58.7%
0

76.7%
1

87.2%
1

-6.4%
-5.3%
8.0%
9.0%

13.3%
10.3%
3.3%
3.1%

-22.6%
-16.3%
4.2%
5.1%

-7.7%
-7.4%
7.5%
8.8%

12.1%
10.2%
12.5%
13.2%

3.1%
5.7%
3.7%
2.0%

6.5%
3.3%
2.3%
0.9%

-4.4%
2.8%
1.1%
0.9%

1.7%
5.0%
3.2%
1.9%

11.3%
9.3%
7.1%
3.2%

Property Characteristics
Home Size (sqft)
Lot Size (sqft)
Property Age (years)
SFR
Has Pool

2,032
12,033
29.0
0.82
0.19

12,766
12,549
24.0
0
0

1,056
2,500
3.0
0
0

1,730
7,500
23.0
1
0

3,077
25,000
62.0
1
1

Buyer Characteristics
Age at Transaction (years)
Has Max High School Degree in 2010
Has Max College Degree in 2010
Has Max Graduate Degree in 2010
Income in 2010 ($)
Married in 2010
Household Size in 2010

37.7
0.64
0.26
0.10
82,116
0.41
2.55

12.7
0.48
0.44
0.30
49,413
0.49
1.51

24
0
0
0
25,000
0
1

35
1
0
0
62,500
0
2

56
1
1
0
175,000
1
5

Δ Friends' House Prices (24m)
Mean - All Friends
Mean - Out-of-Commuting Zone Friends
St.Dev. - All Friends
St.Dev. - Out-of-Commuting Zone Friends
Other Friend Experiences

Δ Friends' County Income (24m) - Mean
Δ Friends' County Income (24m) - St.Dev.
Friends' Foreclosure Rate (24m, Share of Units) - Mean
Friends' Foreclosure Rate (24m, Share of Units) - St.Dev

Note: Table shows summary statistics on our matched transaction-Facebook sample. It provides information on the sample mean
and standard deviation, as well as the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the distribution.

all mortgages used to finance the transactions in our sample is 88.5%, but there is substantial heterogeneity in
this number. The average purchase price is $302,300, while the median purchase price is $225,000. At the point of
purchase, the average buyer was 38 years old, but this ranges from 24 years old at the 10th percentile to 56 years
old at the 90th percentile of the distribution.
For the average homebuyer, we observe 354 friends, with a 10-90 percentile range of 63 to 733. The average
homebuyer has 194 friends that live outside their own commuting zone, and 156 friends that live outside their own
state. The top row of Figure 4 shows the full distribution of the number of friends and out-of-commuting zone
friends across homebuyers in our sample. Most individuals are exposed to a sizable number of different housing
markets through their friends: the average person has friends in over 74 different counties, with individuals at the
90th percentile having friends in 144 different counties.
There is significant heterogeneity across individuals purchasing homes in the same neighborhood in the
geographic distribution of their friends. As an example, Figure 5 shows a heatmap of the distribution of the
friendship networks of two individuals buying a house at the same time and in the same Los Angeles zip code.
Both individuals have a substantial share of their friends who live locally. In addition, the individual in the left

20

Figure 4: Summary Statistics
(b) Number of Friends (Out of Commuting Zone)

0

0

5.0e-04

.002

.001

Density

Density
.0015

.004

.002

.0025

.006

(a) Number of Friends

0

500

1000
Number of Friends

1500

2000

0

1000

(d) StDF riendHPi,t

0

0

.05

.05

.1

Density
.1

Density
.15

.15

.2

.2

.25

(c) F riendHP Expi,t

200
400
600
800
Number of Friends (Out of Commuting Zone)

-20

-10
0
10
HP Change Past 24 Months (%) - Mean

20

-10

-5
0
5
HP Change Past 24 Months (%) - Standard Deviation

10

Note: Figure shows summary statistics on our matched transaction-Facebook sample. Panel (a) shows the distribution of the number
of friends, Panel (b) shows the distribution of the number of out-of-commuting zone friends. Panel (c) shows the distribution of
residuals of a regression of F riendHP Expi,t on month-of-purchase fixed effects. Panel (d) shows the distribution of residuals from a
regression of StDF riendHPi,t on month-of-purchase fixed effects.

panel has many friends in the area around Minneapolis, while the individual in the right panel has many friends
in Pennsylvania and Florida.
Such differences in the geographic distribution of friendship networks, combined with time-varying differences in
regional house price movements, induce heterogeneity in the average house price movements in the social networks
of different homebuyers purchasing similar properties at the same point in time. We define the average house price
movements across homebuyer i’s friends in the 24 month prior to purchasing a property at point t as:27
F riendHP Expi,t =

X

ShareF riendsi,c × ∆HPc,t−24m,t ,

c

where ShareF riendsi,c measures the fraction of homebuyer i’s friends that live in county c, and ∆HPc,t−24m,t
measures the house price changes in county c in the 24 months prior to time t using the Zillow house price indices.
Panel (c) of Figure 4 shows the distribution of the residual when regressing F riendHP Expi,t on zip code by
27 In all of the following analyses, we consider the house price experiences of the buyers’ friends over the 24 months prior to the
purchase. All results are robust to instead considering the experiences over the previous 12, 36, and 48 months.

21

Figure 5: Geographic Distribution of Friendship Links

Note: Figure shows heatmap of the friend distribution across two homebuyers in our matched transaction-Facebook sample. The
individual in the left panel has a significant number of friends in Minnesota; the individual in the right panel has a significant number
of friends in Pennsylvania and Florida.

purchase month fixed effects. The standard deviation of this residual is 3.7%, showing significant variation in
friends’ house price changes across individuals buying houses in the same place and at the same point in time.
In addition, most homebuyers have friends with relatively heterogeneous house price experiences: the same
individuals can have some friends in regions where house prices did relatively well, and other friends in regions
where house prices did relatively badly. We define the standard deviation of the house price experiences across
homebuyer i’s friends in the 24 months prior to time t as:
s
StDF riendHPi,t =

X

(ShareF riendsi,c × ∆HPc,t−24m,t − F riendHP Expi,t )

2

c

The average value of StDF riendHPi,t across the transactions in our sample is 8.0%, with a 10-90 percentile range
of 4.2% to 12.5%. Panel (d) of Figure 4 shows the distribution of the residual when regressing StDF riendHPi,t
on zip code by purchase month fixed effects. The standard deviation of this residual is 2.6%.

3.2

Expectation Survey: Evidence for Belief Shifters

The first step of our empirical analysis is to verify that the moments of the distribution of house price experiences
across an individual’s friends affect that individual’s distribution of beliefs about future house price changes in
their own zip code. To do this, we analyze responses to a short survey conducted by Facebook in April 2017.
The survey targeted Facebook users living in Los Angeles through a post on their News Feed. Figure 6 shows
the survey interface. We observe 504 survey responses. The respondents’ average age was 38 years, with a 10-90
percentile range of 23 to 58 years. 62% of respondents are male.
The first survey question elicits how often individuals talk to their friends about whether buying a house is a
good investment. Regular conversations with friends about housing investments are important in order for there
to be a channel through which the house price experiences of friends can influence an individual’s own house price
beliefs. Panel (a) of Figure 7 shows the distribution of responses to this question. About 43% of respondents gave
the modal answer, “sometimes.” The other possible responses were “never” (16% of responses), “rarely” (21% of
responses) and “often” (20% of responses).
To measure an individual’s beliefs about future house price changes, we use responses to the second question,
which asked individuals to assign probabilities to various scenarios of house price growth in their zip codes over
the following 12 months. The survey enforced the assigned probabilities to add up to 100%. We use the responses

22

Figure 6: Survey Interface

Note: Figure shows the interface on a user’s News Feed of the expectation survey conducted by Facebook on April 2017.

to determine the mean and standard deviation of the distribution of individuals’ house price beliefs.28 Panels (b)
and (c) of Figure 7 show the distribution of these moments across the survey respondents. There is substantial
disagreement about expected house price growth among individuals living in the same local housing markets: while
the median person expects house prices to increase by 5.3% over the next year, the 10-90 percentile range for this
estimate is 0.8% to 10.0%, and the standard deviation is 3.8%.
As a first test for whether individuals provide sensible and consistent responses to the expectation survey, Panel
(d) of Figure 7 shows the distribution of the means of the belief distributions for individuals separately by their
responses to Question 3, which asks if the respondents expect the average home price in their zip code to increase,
stay the same, or decrease over the next 12 months. As a response to that question, 79.8% of individuals said they
expected house prices in their zip code to increase over the next 12 months, 14.6% said they would expect them
to stay about the same, and 5.6% expected them to decline. As a reference point, in the 12 months running up
to the survey, Los Angeles house prices increased by 7.4%. Individuals that thought it was most likely that house
prices in their zip code would increase over the next twelve months have a median belief about house price growth
of 6.0%; the median expected house price growth of respondents who said house prices would stay about the same
(decline) was 2.0% (-2.4%). While there are a small number of individuals who indicate they expect house price
28 To do this, we take the mid-point of each bucket, as well as the probabilities that individual agents assign to that bucket. For
the open-ended buckets “Increase by more than 12%” and “Decrease by more than 8%”, we use point-estimates of 14% and -10%,
respectively, but our results are robust to using different values assigned to these buckets. The roughly 15% of respondents who only
assign probabilities to one bucket are assigned a standard deviation of beliefs of 0%.

23

Figure 7: Summary Statistics - Survey Responses
(a) Response to Question 1

(b) Mean of House Price Expectations (Q2)

0

.1

.05

Density

Share of Responses
.2
.3

.1

.4

.15

How often do you talk to your friends about
whether buying a house is a good investment?

0

-10
Often

Sometimes

Rarely

Never

-5

large

10

15

(d) Mean of House Price Expectations by Response to Q3

0

.05

.05

.1

Density
.1
.15

Density
.15

.2

.2

.25

.25

(c) Standard Deviation of House Price Expectations (Q2)

0
5
Mean of House Price Expectation (%)

-5

0

-10
0

2
4
6
8
Standard Deviation of House Price Expectation (%)

10

0
5
Mean of House Price Expectation (%)

Decrease

About the Same

10

15
Increase

Note: Figure shows summary statistics on the responses to the housing expectation survey. Panel (a) shows the responses to Question
1. Panels (b) and (c) show the distribution of the mean and standard deviation of the belief distribution derived from individuals’
answers to Question 2. Panel (d) shows the distribution of the mean of the belief separately by individuals’ answer to Question 3.

to fall, yet assign probabilities that imply increasing house prices, the combined evidence documents a substantial
degree of consistency across individuals’ answers within the same survey.
We next analyze how moments of the distribution of house price changes across individual i’s social network in
the 24 months prior to answering the survey affect the corresponding moments of the distribution of beliefs about
future house price changes. There is significant variation across respondents in both the mean and the standard
deviation of the experiences of their friends: indeed, F riendHP Expi,April2017 has a mean of 15.1% and a standard
deviation of 1.7% across survey respondents. When only measured among out-of-commuting zone friends, it has
a mean of 16.3% and a standard deviation of 2.6%. Similarly, StDF riendHPi,April2017 has a mean of 5.0% and a
standard deviation of 1.7% across all friends of the survey respondents; among all out-of-commuting zone friends,
the mean and standard deviation of StDF riendHPi,April2017 are 6.9% and 1.7%, respectively.
Table 2 shows results from regressions of moments of the belief distribution on moments of the experience
distribution among respondents’ friends. All specifications control for zip code fixed effects to ensure that we
are comparing individuals’ assessments of the same local housing markets; it also includes flexible controls for
the age, gender, and the number of friends of the respondent. In columns 1 to 3, the dependent variable is the

24

Table 2: Regression Results - House Price Expectations
Dep. Var.: Mean of the Belief Distribution
(1)

(2)

(3)

Dep. Var.: Standard Deviation of the Belief Distribution
(4)

(5)

(6)

Δ House Prices - Past 24 Months
Out-of-CZ Friends - Mean

0.186**
(0.082)
0.121**
(0.058)

Out-of-CZ Friends - St. D

0.326**
(0.144)

All Friends - Mean

0.322**
(0.148)

-0.024
(0.055)

0.027
(0.145)

All Friends - St. D

0.182**
(0.089)

0.184**
(0.090)

Zip Code Fixed Effects

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Demographic Controls

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Specification Note

OLS

IV

IV

OLS

IV

IV

N

426

426

426

426

426

426

Note: Table analyzes the determinants of individuals’ expectations about house price changes in their own zip codes over the next
12 months. In columns 1 to 3, the dependent variable is the mean of individuals’ belief distributions, based on their responses to
Question 2 of the expectation survey (see Figure 6); in columns 4 to 6, the dependent variable is the standard deviation of these belief
distributions. All specifications include fixed effects for the zip code of the survey respondents; we also control for age, gender, and the
number of friends. Columns 1 and 4 present OLS specifications, while columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 present instrumental variables regressions,
where the moments of the house price experiences across an individual’s friends are instrumented for by the corresponding moments
of the distribution of experiences across their out-of-commuting zone friends. Standard errors are in parentheses. Significance Levels:
* (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).

mean of the belief distribution. Since all friends in Los Angeles experience the same recent house price changes,
across-individual variation in friends’ house price experiences is driven by differences in the experiences of their
out-of-commuting zone friends as well as differences in the share of friends that live locally. As we discuss below,
we want to isolate variation in friends’ experiences coming from the experiences of their out-of-commuting zone
friends, since this allows us to address a number of potential alternative interpretations of our findings. Column
1 of Table 2 shows that a one-percentage-point (0.38 standard deviation) increase in the house price appreciation
across an individuals out-of-commuting zone friends, F riendHP ExpOut−CZ
i,April2017 , is associated with a 0.19 percentage
point (0.05 standard deviation) increase in the expected house price increase over the next twelve months.29
In column 2, the main explanatory variable is the average house price experience of all friends,
F riendHP Expi,April2017 , instrumented for by the average house price experiences of the individuals’ out-ofOut−CZ
commuting zone friends, F riendHP Expi,April2017
. This specification mirrors our baseline regressions in Sections

3.3 and 3.4 below, and will allow us to compare estimates across specifications with different outcome variables.
A one-percentage-point increase in the house price experiences of all friends is associated with a 0.33 percentage
29 The effect of F riendHP ExpOut−CZ
on the R-squared is relatively modest: conditional on the control variables, the house price
i,April2017
experiences of an individual’s out-of-commuting zone friends explain an additional 1.1% - 1.6% of the observed variation in the mean
of house price beliefs. Specifically, the OLS regression without controlling for out-of-commuting zone friends’ average house price
experiences, but including all the other control variables, has an R-squared of 0.362; the within-zip code R-squared is 0.074. When
we include the out-of-commuting zone friends’ house price experiences as an additional control variable, the R-squared increases to
0.373, and the within-zip code R-squared increases to 0.090. However, given the large sample sizes in the leverage choice regressions in
Sections 3.3 and 3.4, the belief shifter has sufficient power to identify statistically significant effects of beliefs on leverage. The number
of observations in Table 2 is lower than the total number of responses we observe. This is because 78 responses are from individuals
who are the only respondents from their own zip code. Their responses are thus fully explained by the zip code fixed effects.

25

point increase in individuals’ mean belief about house price growth over the coming twelve months.30 In column
3, we also include the (instrumented) standard deviation of house price experiences across individuals’ friends,
StDF riendHPi,April2017 , as an additional control variable; it has no statistically significant effect on individuals’
average house price expectations.
The dependent variable in columns 4 to 6 of Table 2 is the standard deviation of the distribution of individuals’
beliefs about future house price changes. Column 4 shows that a one-percentage-point (0.38 standard deviation)
Out−CZ
increase in StDF riendHPi,April2017
is associated with a 0.12 percentage point (0.08 standard deviation) increase

in the standard deviation of the belief distribution. In column 5, the main explanatory variable of interest is
the standard deviation of house price experiences across all friends, StDF riendHPi,April2017 , instrumented for
Out−CZ
by its counterpart among out-of-commuting zone friends, StDF riendHPi,April2017
. The estimated effect of a

one-percentage-point increase in StDF riendHPi,April2017 on the standard deviation of the belief distribution is
0.18 percentage points. In column 6, we also include F riendHP Expi,April2017 as a control variable, but it has no
statistically significant effect on the standard deviation of the belief distribution.
Overall, these findings confirm that the mean and variance of the house price experiences across an individual’s
friends can shift the corresponding moments of the distribution of these individuals’ house price beliefs. In the
following section we will use this insight to analyze the effect of house price beliefs on leverage choice.

3.3

Main Results

In this section, we test how moments of the distribution of house price experiences across a homebuyer’s friends
affect that homebuyer’s leverage choice in the sample of transactions described in Section 3.1. Based on the
evidence in Section 3.2 and in Bailey et al. (2017a), we argue that these house price experiences provide shifters
of individuals’ distributions of beliefs about future house price changes that are orthogonal to other factors that
might influence leverage choice.
In our baseline regression specification R1, the unit of observation is a housing transaction. We run regressions
of the combined loan-to-value (CLTV) ratio for transaction i at time t in county c and financed by mortgage lender
l on moments of the distribution of the house price experiences of the friends of the homebuyer. This combined
loan-to-value ratio includes all mortgages originated to finance the home purchase.31 We also control for a rich set
of homebuyer characteristics,32 and include county by purchase month by lender fixed effects, ψt,c,l .33 This allows
us to compare the leverage choices across individuals who borrow from the same lender in the same county and
at the same point in time, and who therefore faced the same schedule of loan-to-value ratios and interest rates to
choose from.
CLT Vi,t,c,l = α + β1 M eanF riendHPi,t + β2 StDF riendHPi,t + β3 Xi,t + ψt,c,l + i,t,z ,

(R1)

In order to use estimates of β1 and β2 to differentiate between the housing-as-consumption scenario and the
30 One can provide a structural interpretation of this estimate as a Kalman gain in the context of standard linear-gaussian bayesian
updating.
31 For example, many homebuyers that choose to borrow more than 80% of the value of the house split their borrowing into a first
mortgage with an LTV of 80%, for which they do not have to pay private mortgage insurance (PMI), and a higher-interest piggy-back
loan for the remaining amount.
32 With the exception of age, which can be observed at the point of the transaction, other homebuyer characteristics are observed
as of the points of the Acxiom snapshots. We assign the value from the most proximate snapshot. We flexibly control for homebuyer
income, age, household size, family status, occupation, and education level. We also control for the number of friends, the number of
out-of-commuting zone friends, and the number of counties in which an individual has friends.
33 Even though Hurst et al. (2016) have shown that most lenders do not vary their mortgage pricing geographically, this choice of
fixed effects is conservative, and ensures that we are comparing the leverage choices of individuals facing the same trade-offs between
making a smaller downpayment and paying higher interest rates. In the rare cases where the first and second mortgages are by different
lenders, we use the identity of the lender of the first mortgage to determine the lender fixed effect.

26

housing-as-investment scenario, we need to ensure that our key explanatory variables, M eanF riendHP and
StDF riendHP , only affect leverage choice through their effect on homebuyers’ beliefs about the distribution
of future house price changes. A first concern is that individuals who have more local friends, and for whom higher
local house prices would thus lead to a higher M eanF riendHP , might also be more affected by this local house
price growth through channels other than the effect on their house price expectations. For example, if individuals
with more local friends were more likely to own local property, then they would be more likely to benefit from higher
capital gains, allowing them to make a larger downpayment on any subsequent property purchase. To rule out
confounding effects through such alternative channels, we estimate regression R1 using an instrumental variables
(IV) strategy, where we instrument for the mean and standard deviation of all friends’ house price experiences
with the mean and standard deviation of the house price experiences of out-of-commuting zone friends.34
Table 3 shows the results of regression R1. The baseline estimate in column 1, which does not control for
homebuyer demographics, suggests that individuals whose friends experienced a one-percentage-point higher house
price appreciation over the past 24 months increase their downpayment (and reduce their CLTV ratio) by between
8 and 9 basis points. A one within-zip-code-month standard deviation increase in friends’ house price experience
is thus associated with a 31 basis points larger downpayment. Combining this with the estimates from the survey
analyzed in Section 3.2 suggests that individuals that expect a one-percentage-point lower house price growth
over the coming twelve months would choose a

0.084
0.326

= 26 basis points lower downpayment. This finding suggests

that individuals behave more like in the housing-as-consumption scenario rather than in the housing-as-investment
scenario.35 Column 1 also shows that individuals whose friends had more dispersed house price experiences, and
who thus expected more variance in future house price changes, chose higher leverage. A one-percentage-point
increase in the across-friends standard deviation of house price experiences over the past 24 months is associated
with a 35 basis points increase in the combined loan-to-value ratio. This result is also consistent with the predictions
from the housing-as-consumption scenario: individuals that expect future house price growth to be more dispersed
perceive large house price drops to be more likely. This increases the benefits of not putting all their savings into
the house, and therefore increases their optimal leverage choice.
In column 2 of Table 3, we also control flexibly for a large number of borrower characteristics. The estimated
effects of the house price experiences of a person’s friends is remarkably stable with respect to the addition of these
observable controls. This provides additional evidence consistent with Bailey et al. (2017a) that the house price
experiences of a person’s friends in a given year are uncorrelated with that person’s observable characteristics,
and reduces concerns that the results are driven by selection on unobservable buyer characteristics (see Altonji,
Elder and Taber, 2005). In column 3, we interact the buyer demographics with year fixed effects. This allows, for
example, the effect of having a different education or a different profession on leverage choice to vary by year. This
specification provides a first test of whether our findings could be explained by correlated shocks to homebuyers
and their friends. For example, one might have worried that less-educated Los Angeles residents have more friends
in regions with a relatively less-educated population. In that case, a positive shock to the income prospects of
less-educated individuals in a given year might both raise house prices where less-educated buyers have friends, and
would increase the ability of these less-educated buyers to make larger downpayments. Our results are essentially
34 The instrument has an F-Statistic above 1,500 across all specifications, largely driven by the fact that the set of out-of-commuting
zone friends, which is used to construct the instruments, is a subset of the set of all friends, which is used to construct the instrumented
variables, M eanF riendHPi,t and StDF riendHPi,t .
35 This does not mean that more pessimistic individuals did not also reduce their housing market investments, as in the extreme
case with infinite collateral adjustment friction studied above. Indeed, Bailey et al. (2017a) document that individuals whose friends
experienced lower recent house price growth did buy smaller houses: a one-percentage-point smaller friends’ house price experience
was associated with purchasing a 0.3 percentage points smaller property. Instead, the estimate in column 1 of Table 3 suggests that as
individuals got more pessimistic, their desire to reduce their financial exposure to potential house price declines increased faster than
the reduction in that exposure that was possible to achieve by buying a smaller house. As a result, they ended up buying (slightly)
smaller houses with larger overall leverage.

27

Table 3: Main Results
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mean

-0.084***
(0.005)

-0.087***
(0.005)

-0.107***
(0.006)

-0.136***
(0.008)

-0.060***
(0.012)

-0.144***
(0.008)

-0.027*
(0.012)

St. D.

0.349***
(0.013)

0.318***
(0.013)

0.319***
(0.014)

0.546***
(0.021)

0.276***
(0.015)

0.439***
(0.019)

-0.027
(0.023)

Δ Friends' House Prices (24m)

Mean X Recourse

0.063***
(0.011)

St. D. X Recourse

-0.451***
(0.031)

Mean X Mean

0.0005*
(0.0002)

St. D. X Mean

-0.004***
(0.00)

Mean X Recovery

0.046***
(0.012)

St. D. X Recovery

-0.268***
(0.027)

Mean X HO-Rate

-0.103***
(0.014)

St. D. X HO-Rate

0.463***
(0.025)

Month x County x Lender FE

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Demographic Controls

N

Y

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

1,350,606

1,350,606

1,350,600

1,350,600

1,350,600

1,350,600

1,350,600

N
R-Squared

0.242

0.267

0.269

0.269

0.269

0.269

0.270

Mean Dep. Var.

88.38

88.38

88.38

88.38

88.38

88.38

88.38

Note: Table shows results from regression R1. The unit of observation is a housing transaction, the dependent variable is the
combined loan-to-value ratio of the mortgages financing the home purchase. All specifications are instrumental variables regressions
where we instrument for the moments of the distribution of house price experiences across an individual’s friends with the corresponding
moments of the distribution of house price experiences across her out-of-commuting zone friends. All specifications control for county
× transaction month × lender fixed effects. Columns 2-7 also control for homebuyer characteristics (dummy variables for income
groups, household size, marriage status, occupation, education levels, age, the number of friends, the number of out-of-commuting
zone friends, and the number of unique counties with friends. In Columns 3 to 7 we interact all borrower controls with year fixed
effects. Column 4 interacts the measures of friends’ house price experiences with a dummy variable of whether the transaction was in a
recourse state. Column 5 interacts the measures of friends’ house price experiences with the mean of friends’ house price experiences.
Column 6 interacts the measures of friends’ house price experiences with a dummy variable capturing zip code - months where the
average house price experiences of all buyers’ friends were above the sample median, loosely corresponding to a recovery period in the
housing market. Column 7 interacts the measures of friends’ house price experiences with the homeownership rate in the zip code of
the transaction. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × transaction-month level. Significance Levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05),
*** (p<0.01).

28

unchanged from our baseline specification, suggesting that correlated shocks are not a key driver of our results.
We provide additional robustness checks in Section 3.4.
Column 4 of Table 3 tests the predictions from Section 2.2.1, which show that the downpayment protection
force at the heart of the housing-as-consumption scenario is particularly strong when the cost of mortgage default
is low. We proxy for the cost of default by whether or not the transaction occurred in a recourse state. In recourse
states, lenders can collect on debt not covered by the sale of a foreclosed property by going after other assets of the
defaulting borrowers. This substantially increases the cost of default for borrowers in recourse states.36 Table 1
shows that about half of our transactions come from recourse states. Consistent with the predictions from Section
2.2.1 for the housing-as-consumption scenario, we find that the effect of friends’ average house price experiences
on individuals’ leverage choice is about twice as large for transactions in non-recourse states. Similarly, the effect
of a higher standard deviation of friends’ house price experiences on mortgage leverage choice is over five times
as large in non-recourse states as it is in recourse states. This provides strong evidence that the downpayment
protection force, which is central to the housing-as-consumption scenario, is indeed stronger in legal environments
that feature relatively low costs of default.
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 3 test the predictions from Section 2.2.2, which highlight that in the housing-asconsumption scenario, the effects of changes in house price beliefs on optimal leverage choice should be smaller if
the baseline house price belief is more optimistic. When comparing the beliefs of relatively optimistic borrowers,
either in the time-series, or the cross-section, all borrowers expect to repay their mortgage most of the time, and
there is little disagreement about the probability of default that is central to leverage choices in the housingas-consumption scenario. Column 5 interacts our measures of friends’ house price experiences with the mean of
friends’ house price experiences. The estimates show that changes in both the mean and the variance of friends’
house price experiences have smaller effects for individuals’ already starting from an already higher mean house
price expectation. This concavity in the effect of mean house price experiences is a central prediction of the
housing-as-consumption scenario.
In column 6, we interact the mean and the standard deviation of friends’ house price experiences with a dummy
variable that captures whether or not the average house price experiences of all buyers in the purchase zip codemonth were above the sample median value. These transactions usually occur during the later years of our sample,
when the housing market had started to enter a recovery period, and when homebuyers were generally expecting
future house price increases (see Case, Shiller and Thompson, 2012, and Kuchler and Zafar, 2015, for evidence on
such extrapolative house price expectations). Consistent with the predictions from the housing-as-consumption
framework, the effects of both the mean and standard deviation of friends’ house price experiences on the leverage
choice are significantly larger in absolute terms during the housing bust period than they are during the recovery
period.37 This is consistent with the downpayment protection force being particularly strong during periods when
there is a comparatively large disagreement between optimists and pessimists about the probability of default.
In column 7, we interact the mean and variance of the house price experiences of a homebuyers’ friends with
the homeownership rate in the zip code of the transaction. The homeownership rate is one proxy for the extent of
36 Ghent and Kudlyak (2011) analyze mortgage default behavior across U.S. states, and find strong evidence that the recourse/nonrecourse environment does indeed have significant effects on the default behavior of borrowers, as would be predicted if it induced
significant differences in the costs of default. Specifically, the authors find that at the average value of negative equity, the monthly
probability of default is 1.3 times higher in non-recourse states than it is in recourse states. All else equal, this means that it takes
8.6% more negative equity to make the probability of default in a recourse state the same as the probability of default in a non-recourse
state. See also the discussion in Kuchler and Stroebel (2009).
37 A potential concern when interpreting these differential effects across time comes from the fact that we only observe the friendship
network at one point in time, July 2015. This networks becomes a noisier measure of individuals’ contemporaneous network the
further back we go, which could induce increased attenuation bias for measuring friends’ house price experiences for buyers in earlier
transactions. However, given that the housing bust period preceded the housing recovery period, such an attenuation bias would
reduce the measured effect during the housing bust period, and therefore work against producing the effect that we uncover.

29

the collateral adjustment frictions faced by pessimists who want to reduce their exposure to the housing market.
In markets with a low homeownership rate, individuals wanting to live in a certain zip code (for example, because
of proximity to work or good schools) are more likely to find a suitable rental property than individuals wanting
to live in zip codes with extremely high homeownership rates. The estimates show that the effects of house price
beliefs on leverage choices are of the same direction across the entire support of the distribution of homeownership
rates. However, in regions with high homeownership rates, the effects of increased perceptions of the possibility
of default on leverage choice are larger, because, in those regions, reducing the downpayment is a comparatively
easier way for households to reduce their exposure to the housing market.
Taken together, the behavior of the homebuyers in our sample corresponds to the predictions from the housingas-consumption scenario, with a sizable collateral adjustment friction preventing relatively pessimistic homebuyers
from purchasing a substantially smaller home to live in.38 These pessimistic homebuyers therefore make smaller
downpayments in order to reduce their housing market exposures, in particular in states where the cost of default
is comparatively smaller, and in particular during time periods when there are concerns about substantial price
drops in the housing market.

3.4

Robustness Checks and Ruling Out Alternative Explanations

Our interpretation of the results in Section 3.3 is that the relationship between friends’ house price experiences and
leverage was driven by the effects of friends’ experiences on an individual’s belief about future house price growth.
In this section, we rule out a number of alternative interpretations of the correlation between friends’ house price
experiences and individuals’ mortgage leverage choice. As we address these alternative interpretations, we note
that most of these stories could have potentially explained the effect of friends’ average house price experiences
on leverage. However, the effect of the dispersion of friends’ house price experiences on leverage choices are much
harder to rationalize with alternative mechanisms, as are the differential effects across recourse/non-recourse states,
across periods with relatively high/low average beliefs, and across regions with different homeownership rates.
A first concern we address is that the instruments in our baseline regression, the moments of the house price
experiences of out-of-commuting zone friends, might still be correlated with the individuals’ own house price
experiences, and therefore potentially with their own capital gains, in particular for individuals who have more
friends in close-by commuting zones that have house price movements similar to those in their own commuting
zone. In column 1 of Table 4, we therefore use moments of the house price experiences of out-of-state friends as
instruments. Reassuringly, the magnitudes of the effects in this specification are, if anything, slightly larger than
in our baseline specifications.
In column 2 of Table 4, we restrict the sample to purchases by individuals who have more than 50 out-ofcommuting zone friends; in column 3, we restrict the sample to transactions by individuals with friends in at
least 35 counties. These specifications address concerns that the effects of the dispersion of friends’ experiences
on leverage could be driven by individuals without sufficiently many geographically distant friends to construct
powerful shifters of the belief distribution. Reassuringly, the magnitude of the estimates are very similar to those
in the baseline specification.
A further possible concern is that unobserved shocks to an individual’s ability to make a downpayment in
a given year might be correlated with her friends’ house price experiences in that year. Such an alternative
interpretation requires a shock to an individual’s wealth or income that contemporaneously moves house prices
38 One caveat regarding the generalizability of these findings is that our sample is restricted to purchases by owner-occupiers, since
we cannot match buyers making investment purchases to their respective Facebook accounts. While we do not have the data to analyze
the leverage choices of these investment buyers, our theoretical framework suggests that those individuals should face a much smaller
collateral adjustment friction. They might therefore respond to increasing optimism by buying more houses with higher leverage.

30

Table 4: Robustness Checks I
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mean

-0.112***
(0.007)

-0.094***
(0.006)

-0.093***
(0.007)

-0.080***
(0.007)

-0.090***
(0.025)

-0.084***
(0.006)

-0.114***
(0.008)

St. D.

0.456***
(0.019)

0.283***
(0.016)

0.278***
(0.017)

0.319***
(0.014)

0.256***
(0.065)

0.273***
(0.014)

0.370***
(0.023)

Δ Friends' House Prices (24m)

Δ Friends' County Income (24m)
Mean

-8.015***
(0.962)

St. D.

-13.33***
(0.910)

Friends' Foreclosure Rate (24m)
Mean

40.83***
(1.773)

St. D.

-32.37***
(3.479)

Month x County x Lender FE
Demographic Controls
Specification Notes
N
R-Squared
Mean Dep. Var.

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Out-of-State
Friends' Exp.
As Instrument

> 50 Out-OfCommuting
Zone Friends

> 35 Unique
Counties

1,350,348
0.268
88.38

996,864
0.271
88.65

937,075
0.280
88.86

Geographically
Non-Clustered
Profession
1,253,013
0.269
88.39

1,308,731
0.277
88.37

Only Friends in
Recourse States
1,347,592
0.270
88.38

1,349,396
0.269
88.38

Note: Table shows results from regression R1, and provides robustness checks to the baseline results presented in Table 3. The unit
of observation is a home transaction, the dependent variable is the combined loan-to-value ratio in the transaction. All specifications
include controls and fixed effects as in column 2 of Table 3. In columns 1, we instrument for moments of the house price experiences
of the buyers total friends with the corresponding moments of the distribution of house price experiences of the buyers’ out-of-state
friends. In column 2, we restrict the sample to purchases by individuals with at least 50 out-of-commuting zone friends, in column 3
to purchases by individuals with friends in at least 35 unique counties. Column 4 also controls for the average income changes in the
counties where an individual has friends. In column 5, we focus on purchases by individuals working in geographically non-clustered
professions (e.g., teachers and lawyers). Column 6 also controls for the average foreclosure share in the counties where an individual
has friends. Column 7 only uses the house price experiences of out-of-commuting zone friends in recourse states to instrument for the
house price experiences of all friends. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × transaction-month level. Significance Levels: *
(p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).

in geographically distant regions where she has friends. As discussed above, our baseline regressions already
minimize the scope for such potentially confounding effects, by including year-specific controls for a large number
of observable characteristics of homebuyers. We next address the one additional potential confounder that we were
able to identify. In particular, many people have friends that work in the same sector of the economy. If economic
activity in that sector features significant geographic clustering (e.g., tech in Silicon Valley), positive shocks to
that sector in a given year might both enable an individual to make a larger downpayment and drive up aggregate
house prices in those sector-exposed regions where the individual has friends.
To rule out this explanation of our findings, column 4 includes the average income change in the county where
the person has friends as a control, in addition to the average house price change. We measure income annually at
the county level using data from the Tax Statistics of Income (SOI). In addition, in column 5 we restrict the sample
of transactions to those in which the homebuyer works in geographically non-clustered professions (e.g., lawyers
and teachers). Any positive shocks to such professions, which might increase those individuals’ ability to make a
larger downpayment, should not affect house prices in regions where they have friends. This is because there are
no parts of the country where there are so many teachers or lawyers that positive shocks to those professions can
shift aggregate house prices. In both specifications the estimates are similar to our baseline estimates, confirming
that common shocks to individuals and their friends that shift house prices in areas where their friends live cannot
explain our findings.
Lastly, a potential alternative interpretation of our findings is that when house prices decline in counties where
31

an individual has friends, and there are subsequently more foreclosures in those counties, individuals might update
both their own house price beliefs as well as their expectations about the cost of default or the benefits of the
foreclosure process, both of which might also directly affect their leverage choice. To address such concerns, column
6 also includes measures of the share of all properties in friends’ counties that experienced a foreclosure over the
previous 24 months, based on data provided by Zillow. While a higher foreclosure rate in friends’ locations is
associated with larger leverage and a smaller downpayment, the inclusion of this additional control variable does
not significantly affect the estimated effect of friends’ house price experiences on mortgage leverage choice.39 In
column 7, we only use the house price experiences of friends in recourse states to instrument for the house price
experiences of all friends. If most of the effect came through individuals learning about the cost of default when
house prices fall where their friends live, then the estimated effect should be smaller when only using variation in
house prices in recourse states where house price changes translate less into foreclosures. However, the estimated
coefficients are, in fact, almost identical in size.
Table 5: Robustness Checks II
Same Employer

Same College

Family

All Friends

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Mean

-0.126***
(0.014)

-0.191***
(0.030)

-0.121***
(0.012)

-0.133***
(0.018)

-0.089***
(0.017)

-0.086**
(0.033)

-0.362***
(0.027)

St. D.

0.366***
(0.035)

0.629***
(0.119)

0.254***
(0.029)

0.333***
(0.074)

0.222***
(0.039)

0.118
(0.091)

0.776***
(0.051)

Δ Friends' House Prices (24m)

Month x County x Lender FE
Demographic Controls
Specification Notes

N
R-Squared
Mean Dep. Var.

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

Y, x Year

All Friends

Same
Employer

All Friends

Same College

All Friends

Family

Purchase in Home
State, Out-of-State
Friends for Instrument

257,450
0.323
89.719

257,450
0.324
89.702

368,612
0.297
88.221

368,612
0.298
88.200

167,587
0.343
91.112

167,587
0.340
91.096

485,031
0.300
88.957

Note: Table shows results from regression R1, and provides robustness checks to the baseline results presented in Table 3. The unit
of observation is a home transaction, the dependent variable is the combined loan-to-value ratio in the transaction. All specifications
include controls and fixed effects as in column 2 of Table 3. In columns 1 and 2, we focus on purchases by people for whom we can
identify at least ten work friends, in columns 3 and 4 on purchases by people for whom we can identify at least ten college friends, and
in columns 5 and 6 on purchases by people for whom we can identify at least ten family members. In columns 1, 3, and 5, we repeat
our baseline specification on the restricted sample for comparability. In columns 2, 4, and 6, we use the house price experiences of an
individual’s geographically distant work friends, college friends, and family members, respectively, to instrument the corresponding
moments of the house price experiences among all friends. In column 7, we only include transactions of individuals who report a
hometown, and who purchase a property in their home state. We use these buyers’ out-of-state friends’ house price experiences to
instrument for the house price experiences of all friends. Standard errors are clustered at the zip code × transaction-month level.
Significance Levels: * (p<0.10), ** (p<0.05), *** (p<0.01).

An additional challenge to our interpretation is the potential for wealth effects: if an individual has family in
those areas where she has friends, and if those family members own real estate, then house price increases in those
areas might increase her expected bequest. This wealth channel could then provide an alternative explanation
for why individuals make larger downpayments when their geographically distant friends have experienced higher
house price increases. We rule out such an explanation in a number of ways. First, columns 1 to 6 of Table 5
39 While the house price experiences and foreclosure rate across friends’ counties are naturally correlated, they are far from collinear.
Specifically, the extent to which declining house prices translate into more foreclosures depends both on the legal environment across
states as well as on the initial level of equity that individuals have in their homes, which, in turn, depends on the entire house price
history in the county. In addition, there is a substantial time-lag between the initial house price decline and default/foreclosure activity.

32

separately explore the house price experiences across an individual’s social network of work friends, family friends,
and college friends. Since not all individuals report their family member, their employer, or their college on
Facebook, these regressions have fewer observations than our baseline estimates. In columns 1, 3, and 5, we run
our baseline regression (corresponding to column 2 of Table 3), but only on the set of individuals for whom we can
identify at least ten work friends, family friends, and college friends. In columns 2, 4, and 6, we then run the same
regression, but only use the house price experiences among out-of-commuting zone work friends, family friends,
and college friends, respectively, to instrument for all friends’ house price experiences.40 While one might expect
to inherit a house from a family member, this is much less likely for a work friend or college friend. Yet, our results
are very similar when exploiting variation in house price experiences across these three networks, suggesting that
wealth effects are not a key driver of our findings. Finally, in column 7 we restrict our sample to individuals who
report their hometown on Facebook, and who purchase a property in their home state. We use the house price
experiences of their out-of-state friends as an instrument. For those individuals, the exposure of their expected
bequest to out-of-state house price movements is more limited, since most of the properties they might inherit
are likely to be located in their home state, yet we find, if anything, a larger correlation between the house price
experiences of their geographically distant friends and their leverage choice.

4

House Price Beliefs and Leverage Choice: Ancillary Evidence

The previous section documented that more optimistic individuals make larger downpayments, consistent with the
directional predictions from the housing-as-consumption scenario. In this section, we show that this relationship
between house price beliefs and mortgage leverage choice is consistent with various additional survey data. We
also provide evidence for the importance of the key mechanism underlying the housing-as-consumption scenario.
First, we consider data from the New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations to corroborate that, in
these data, respondents’ anticipated leverage choice is also decreasing in their expectations about future house
price growth, and increasing in their expected default probabilities. Second, we use SurveyMonkey to conduct a
Downpayment Motivation Survey (DMS) that allows us to explore individuals’ leverage choices under various
scenarios for future house price growth.

In the survey, individuals select smaller downpayments when the

probability of large house price declines increases. We also explore the thought-process behind individuals’ leverage
choices. In particular, the DMS elicits a “free text” response asking individuals to describe why they adjusted their
downpayment choice across different house price beliefs. Many individuals report to reduce their downpayments
in response to a larger probability of house price declines for reasons that are aligned with the key mechanism
in the housing-as-consumption scenario, namely that lower downpayments minimize the financial exposure to
adverse house price movements. We also show that financial advice websites and blogs regularly highlight the
tradeoffs behind the housing-as-consumption scenario when discussing how large a downpayment to make. Lastly,
we explore survey evidence on households’ perceived cost of mortgage default, to highlight that these perceived
default costs are often small enough to not make defaulting on a mortgage prohibitively expensive, consistent with
an important assumption behind the housing-as-consumption scenario.
40 Bailey et al. (2017a) documented that the average house price experiences across these three separate out-of-commuting zone
networks are relatively uncorrelated. This suggests that homebuyers’ family friends do not, in general, live in the same parts of the
country as their work or college friends.

33

Figure 8: Expectation of Applying for Additional Loan
Probability Apply For Additional Loan (12 Months)

By Expected House Price Growth (12 months)

By Expected Probability of Foreclosure (12 months)

0

0

Probability of Appling for Additional Loan (%)
6
2
4
8

Probability of Appling for Additional Loan (%)
10
2
4
8
6

Probability Apply For Additional Loan (12 Months)

<0%

0%-5%

5%-10%

>10%

0%

1%-10%

>10%

Note: Figure shows summary statistics based on data from the FRBNY Survey of Consumer Expectations. The left panel shows the
average probability that survey respondents assign to applying for an additional loan on their property over the next 12 months, in
percent, separately by groups of expected house price growth over the next 12 months. The right panel shows the average probability
of applying for an additional loan separately by the probability that individuals assign to having their house foreclosed over the next
12 months.

4.1

NY Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations.

We first analyze survey data from the 2014 Real Estate and Housing Module of the New York Fed Survey of
Consumer Expectations (SCE).41 Within these data, we consider the determinants of individuals’ (anticipated)
leverage choice. Our key outcome variable is the answer to the following question asked of current homeowners:
“What is the percent chance that over the next 12 months you will apply for an additional loan on your primary
residence?” In Figure 8, we explore how the answer to this question differs with respondents’ expectations. In the
left panel, we sort respondents by their beliefs about house price growth in their neighborhood over the coming
12 months, which was also elicited in the survey. In the right panel, we sort respondents by their answer to the
following question: “What is the percent chance that over the next 12 months you will enter foreclosure or lose
your home through a repossession?”
In both panels, there is evidence that individuals who are more pessimistic are more likely to want to increase
leverage going forward, thereby reducing their financial exposure to the housing market. However, while these
results are highly consistent with the key mechanism in the housing-as-consumption scenario, there are other
possible explanations for the observed correlations. For example, in regions where the economy is doing badly,
individuals might expect house prices to decline and might also fear they have to tap into home equity to smooth
out income shocks. Such possibly confounding stories highlight the value of the quasi-orthogonal belief shifters in
our main empirical analysis for identifying causal relationships between beliefs and leverage choice.
41 The Survey of Consumer Expectations is a monthly online survey of a rotating panel of household heads launched by the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York in 2013. A household head is defined as the person in the household who owns, is buying, or rents the home.
It is nationally representative. New respondents are drawn monthly to match demographic targets from the American Community
Survey (ACS), and stay on the panel for up to twelve months before rotating out. The Housing Module is an annual 30-minute add-on
to the SCE conducted in February; the set of questions varies by year. In the 2014 implementation, 85% of SCE household heads
completed the module, for a sample size of 1,213.

34

4.2

Downpayment Motivation Survey

To provide direct evidence on the motivations behind individuals’ mortgage choices, we designed a short
Downpayment Motivation Survey (DMS) to elicit how and why individuals’ mortgage choices depend on their
beliefs about future house price changes.

The most important purpose of this survey is to provide direct

evidence that the mechanism behind the housing-as-consumption scenario features regularly in the narratives
that individuals have about their own mortgage choice process.
The DMS was administered to current homeowners via SurveyMonkey in September 2017. The demographics
of the survey respondents are described in Appendix C.3. The survey presented individuals with different scenarios
about future house price growth, and asked them to recommend one of three possible downpayment choices to a
friend. Specifically, the first wave of the survey, administered to 826 respondents, was designed as follows:42
Your friend is buying a house, and is asking you for advice on what downpayment to choose. The
house costs $100,000, and your friend has a total of $30,000 in savings.
[OPTIMISTIC SCENARIO.] Your friend believes that over the next few years there is an equal
50% chance that house prices will either stay the same or increase by 25%. If the bank offers him the
following three 30-year mortgages, which mortgage would you advise your friend to take?
(i) Downpayment of $20,000, interest rate of 3%
(ii) Downpayment of $10,000, interest rate of 4%
(iii) Downpayment of $3,000, interest rate of 5%
[PESSIMISTIC SCENARIO.] If your friend instead believes that over the next few years there
is an equal 50% chance that house prices will either stay the same or decrease by 25%, which of the
following 30-year mortgages would you advise him to take?
(i) Downpayment of $20,000, interest rate of 3%
(ii) Downpayment of $10,000, interest rate of 4%
(iii) Downpayment of $3,000, interest rate of 5%
The order of the mortgage options and the order of the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios were randomized
across respondents. If the respondent did not change the downpayment recommendation across the two house
price scenarios, we asked the following free-text question: “Why did you decide not to change the mortgage
recommendation for your friend?”; if the respondent did change the downpayment recommendation, we asked:
“Why did you change the mortgage recommendation for your friend?”
The second wave of the survey, which had 794 respondents, presented different house price scenarios. In
that wave, the optimistic scenario was house prices that stayed flat with certainty, while the pessimistic scenario
involved an equal probability each of a 25% increase and a 25% decrease in house prices. We call this second
scenario, which involves a mean-preserving increase in the spread, more pessimistic, because it entails a higher
probability of substantial house price declines.
For each of the two survey waves, we begin by exploring if and how individuals changed their leverage choices
across the two house price scenarios. The left column of Figure 9 analyzes responses to the first survey wave,
the right column to the second wave. The top row of Figure 9 shows the share of respondents that make each of
the three downpayment recommendations, both in the optimistic and the pessimistic house price scenarios. The
42 The

actual survey design did not include the terms in square brackets (“Optimistic Scenario” and “Pessimistic Scenario”).

35

Figure 9: Downpayment Motivation Survey – Responses

80

Distribution of Responses: Wave 2 (N = 794)

80

Distribution of Responses: Wave 1 (N = 826)

71.5

15.7

60
40

60
40

24.2

21.5

24.1

20.4

20

Share of Responses (%)

66.6
60.0

20

Share of Responses (%)

68.5

$20,000 Downpayment,
3% interest rate

$10,000 Downpayment,
4% interest rate

Optimistic Scenario

9.3

8.1

0

0

9.9

$3,000 Downpayment,
5% interest rate

$20,000 Downpayment,
3% interest rate

Pessimistic Scenario

$10,000 Downpayment,
4% interest rate

Optimistic Scenario

$3,000 Downpayment,
5% interest rate

Pessimistic Scenario

Distribution of Responses: Wave 2 (N = 794)
Wave 2: Pessimistic Relative to Optimistic Scenario
77.6

80

80

Distribution of Responses: Wave 1 (N = 826)
Wave 1: Pessimistic Relative to Optimistic Scenario

60
40

Share of Responses (%)

20

60
40

20.5

20

Share of Responses (%)

69.4

Increase Downpayment

14.0
8.4

Same Downpayment Decrease Downpayment

0

0

10.2

Increase Downpayment

Same Downpayment Decrease Downpayment

Note: Figure shows summary statistics on the responses to the Downpayment Motivation Survey. In the left panels, we show responses
from survey wave 1, where the optimistic scenario was a 50% probability of constant house prices and a 50% probability of a 25%
increase in house prices, and the pessimistic scenario was a 50% probability of constant house prices and a 50% probability of a 25%
house price decrease. In the right panels, we show responses from survey wave 2, where the optimistic scenario was house prices that
stayed flat, while the pessimistic scenario was a 50% chance each of a 25% house price increase and a 25% house price decrease. In the
top row we show the share of respondents that make each downpayment recommendation in both the optimistic and the pessimistic
scenario. In the bottom row, we show the share of respondents that either increase, do not change, or decrease their recommended
downpayment in the pessimistic relative to the optimistic scenario.

36

bottom row shows the share of individuals that either increase, do not change, or decrease their recommended
downpayment in the pessimistic relative to the optimistic scenario.
Consistent with the findings in Sections 3.3 and 4.1, and consistent with the predictions from the housingas-consumption scenario, there is a noticeable shift in the distribution of recommendations towards lower
downpayments in the more pessimistic house price scenarios.43 The bottom row confirms this finding: across the
two survey waves, there are twice as many people that recommend making a smaller downpayment in the relatively
more pessimistic house price scenario than there are people that recommend making a larger downpayment.44 In
Appendix C.3, we explore how changes in downpayment recommendations across the two scenarios differ with
demographic characteristics. We find that individuals across all gender, income, and location groups are more
likely to recommend reduced downpayments in response to the more pessimistic house price scenario.
Table 6: Stated Reasons for Recommending Smaller Downpayment Under Pessimistic Scenario
Wave 1

Wave 2

Optimistic First

• Less money at risk when the chance of a decline in value
increases
• Less money invested in potential loss
• No need to put more for a down payment if the value will
drop.
• If he defaults and housing prices decrease so that he
cannot sell to recoup his investment, he loses less deposit
if he puts less down.
• Because the house MAY be worth less I would rather have
cash on hand than tied up in the house

• Put down less money in case house prices go down.
• Risk of losing equity with house devaluation.
• Because I am anticipating that the friend may need to file
for a bankruptcy and would want to be sure to be able to
shield his or her equity in the property.
• If the value of the home decreases substantially, he
wouldn't have as much invested in the asset which is
losing value, yet will still have a better interest rate than
the first option.

Pessimistic First

• Cheaper rate so total cost is lower and down payment is
not in jeopardy
• Could be a chance he defaults on the loan in the first case
to get out from under a mortgage.
• If the house is not going to appreciate in value I wouldn't
put too much money in

• Because if they think they are going to lose money, they
shouldn't risk much.
• So he would put less money/savings down on a house that
could quickly decrease in value.
• As long as the housing market (and his investment in the
house) stays stable, he should go for the smaller monthly
payments he'd have with the smaller interest rate.

Note: Table shows comments from the free-text question in the Downpayment Motivation Survey among those individuals who
recommended a smaller downpayment in the more pessimistic house price scenario. The free-text question asked respondents to
explain their decision for changing the mortgage recommendation. In the left panels, we show responses from survey wave 1, where the
optimistic scenario was a 50% probability of constant house prices, and a 50% probability of a 25% increase in house prices, and the
pessimistic scenario was a 50% probability of constant house prices and a 50% probability of a 25% house price decrease. In the right
panels, we show responses from survey wave 2, where the optimistic scenario was house prices that stayed flat, while the pessimistic
scenario was a 50% chance each of a 25% house price increase and a 25% house price decrease. The top row shows responses from
individuals who were first shown the optimistic scenario, and then recommended a smaller downpayment for the more pessimistic
scenario. The bottom row shows responses from individuals who were first shown the pessimistic scenario, and then recommended a
larger downpayment for the more optimistic scenario.
43 Across all house price scenarios and survey waves, the most common recommendation is to make a downpayment of 20%. In
addition, the majority of respondents did not change their downpayment recommendation in response to changes in house price
expectations. This is consistent with other factors besides beliefs playing an important role in determining individuals’ leverage
choices. The “free text” responses of those individuals who did not change their recommendation provide some insights into what
these reasons are. Very common explanations for keeping the downpayment recommendation fixed, usually at 20%, are a desire to
reduce the interest rate as much as possible (e.g., “Choice is based on objective to reduce interest as much as possible”; “No matter
what, better to have lower interest rate on smaller mortgage”) or to borrow as little as possible (e.g., “Debt, even mortgage debt,
makes me uncomfortable.”; “Proverbs 22:7, Romans 13:8”; “Debt is a four-letter word. Don’t borrow one penny more than you need
to. Most people live in their homes for more than a few years, anyway.”). Consistent with this last response, a second set of responses
suggested that house price beliefs didn’t matter so much for households that did not plan on selling/moving any time soon (e.g.,
“Because the interest rate makes the biggest difference to savings over time. Nothing indicated the friend might want to sell in the
near future.”; “Because it did not state whether or not he would be staying in the house long term.”) Finally, a number of individuals
explicitly recommend at least a 20% downpayment, if at all possible, in order to avoid having to pay private mortgage insurance (“By
putting down 20% they eliminate the required mortgage insurance”; “with 20% down you do not have to have mortgage insurance,
which is a great savings”).
44 Individuals are substantially more likely to report a lower downpayment recommendation in the pessimistic scenario if they first
get presented with the more optimistic scenario than if they first get presented with the more pessimistic scenario.

37

While it is reassuring to find the same relationship between house price beliefs and mortgage leverage choice
in the Downpayment Motivation Survey as in the detailed empirical analysis in Section 3.3, the primary benefit
of the DMS is our ability to investigate the mechanism behind this relationship, by directly asking individuals to
explain why they suggested a smaller downpayment in the more pessimistic house price scenario. Table 6 presents
a number of representative explanations by the survey respondents. Importantly, many of the explanations reflect
a desire to reduce the financial exposure to the housing asset in case of higher expected default probabilities, which
maps directly into the mechanism behind the housing-as-consumption scenario.45 Indeed, a number of individuals
explicitly mention that through bankruptcy or default a smaller downpayment can allow individuals to avoid the
potential capital loss coming from declining house prices.

4.3

Financial Advice Websites

Many homebuyers turn to the internet for help in the home purchase and mortgage choice process (see Piazzesi,
Schneider and Stroebel, 2015). Indeed, financial advice websites and blogs regularly discuss the tradeoffs behind
choosing the size of the downpayment, and therefore offer another window into how considerations about future
house price changes affect leverage choices. In surveying these financial advice websites, we came across many
instances of financial advisors highlighting the risk-shifting benefits of taking out smaller mortgages that are at the
heart of the mechanism in the housing-as-consumption scenario. For example, Ric Edelman (2014), the numberone independent financial adviser as ranked by Barron’s in 2009, 2010, and 2012, described the benefits of a large
mortgage as follows:
Have you noticed that your home is worth much more than it was 10 years ago? You might be worried
that your home’s value will fall. If you’re afraid that your home’s value might decline, you should sell
the house before that happens. But you don’t want to do that! It’s your home, after all. You have
roots in the community. Uproot the kids? And where would you move? No, selling is not a practical
idea. Still, you fret that your home’s equity is at risk. Can you protect it without having to sell? Yes!
Simply get a new mortgage, and pull the equity out of the house. It’s the same thing as selling, except
that you don’t have to sell!
In the language of our model: pessimistic homebuyers with a large collateral adjustment friction can reduce their
exposure to house price changes by taking on higher leverage. Similarly, the following discussion on The Mortgage
Reports (2017) highlights that making a 20% downpayment may not be the ideal choice, since “you’re at risk when
[your] home value drops. A down payment protects the bank, not the home buyer:”
Home values are tied to the U.S. economy. Most of the time, the economy is making incremental gains,
and home prices rise. But sometimes, the economy falters. This usually happens after extended periods
of too-hot growth. That happened in the late 2000s. In this situation, consider two home buyers:
- Buyer A: Puts 20% down on a $300,000 home
- Buyer B: Uses FHA to put 3.5% down on a $300,000 home
45 While respondents usually provided a reasonable explanation for why they did or did not change their mortgage recommendation,
there is a fair amount of noise in the responses (e.g., respondents posting random YouTube links). In addition, some individuals
responded with comments along the lines of “no clue,” “not sure,” and “just a feeling.” The presence of such responses is unsurprising
given the non-incentivized nature of the survey. Also, when asked why they changed their mortgage recommendation, a small number
of individuals responded “I did not.” Investigating these cases suggests that they were most likely responses from individuals who
had picked the answer in the same “position” as their previous one, but which, due to the randomization of the downpayment choices
presented to respondents, now corresponded to a different downpayment recommendation. The complete set of survey responses is
available from the authors on request.

38

Buyer A, thinking he is being “conservative” puts $60,000 down on a home. Buyer B puts down just
$10,500. If home values fall 20% neither Buyer A nor Buyer B have any equity in their homes. However,
Buyer A lost a much bigger amount. Plus, Buyer B carries less risk of being foreclosed on if she can
no longer make her payments. This is because banks know they will take a bigger loss repossessing a
home with a larger outstanding loan balance. So, really, which home buyer is more conservative? The
one who puts the least amount down.
Appendix C.1 shows additional examples of financial advice websites and blogs highlighting that one benefit of small
downpayments is the limited exposure to potential house price declines. This evidence, combined with the responses
to the Downpayment Motivation Survey analyzed in Section 4.2, provides evidence for the channel through which
concerns about falling house prices can motivate individuals to make smaller downpayments. Importantly, we
do not want to suggest that house beliefs are the only, or even the most important determinant of mortgage
leverage choice. However, to the extent that beliefs do affect households’ downpayment decision, there appears to
be strong support for the mechanism through which more pessimistic individuals choose lower downpayments in
the housing-as-consumption scenario.

4.4

Beliefs about Default Costs

One important reason why more pessimistic individuals make smaller downpayments in the housing-asconsumption scenario is their perception that walking away from an underwater mortgage is not overly costly,
either financially or socially. This is very consistent with some of the responses from the Downpayment Motivation
Survey presented in Table 6. In this final section, we explore additional data to investigate households’ beliefs
about the cost of mortgage default.
We first analyze responses to the following question from the SCE described in Section 4.1: “If somebody with
a mortgage like yours and living in your state went through foreclosure, do you think their lender could legally
go after some of their other assets (e.g. bank accounts, cars, other property, etc.) to cover the remaining amount
they owe?” 55% or respondents said that the bank could legally go after other assets, 45% responded that the
bank could not. (As discussed above, the true legal authority of the bank depends on state-level recourse laws.
Unfortunately, the public release data from the SCE do not contain state identifiers that would allow us to explore
whether individual perceptions of banks’ legal authority are correlated with banks’ true legal authority). However,
only 77% of those respondents who said that the bank could go after their other assets (which corresponds to 42%
of all respondents) believed that the bank would actually do this.46 This suggests that the majority of survey
respondents believe that walking away from an underwater mortgage would allow them to discard any negative
equity without putting other assets at risk.
We also review the evidence reported in Guiso, Sapienza and Zingales (2013), who conducted a quarterly survey
on the mortgage default beliefs and attitudes of a representative sample of U.S. households between December 2008
and September 2010. Consistent with the evidence from the SCE, respondents reported an average probability
of 53.4% that lenders would go after other assets of defaulters.47 In addition, 23% of respondents said that they
would walk away from their house (default on their mortgage) if they had more than $100,000 negative equity
in the house, even if they were able to repay their loans; this is despite the fact that 82% of respondents argued
46 The

precise question from the SCE is: “If somebody with a mortgage like yours and living in your state went through foreclosure,
do you think their lender actually would go after some of their other assets (e.g. bank accounts, cars, other property, etc.) to cover
the remaining amount they owe?”
47 The exact question was: “When people default on their mortgage, the lender repossesses the house. Sometimes the mortgage is
more than the value of the house. On a scale from 0 to 100, where 0 equals “absolutely no chance” and 100 equals “absolutely certain”
what do you expect are the chances that the lenders will go after people who default on their mortgage for the full amount of the
mortgage?”

39

that it was morally wrong to default on a mortgage if it were possible to keep making mortgage payments. While
this survey suggests that default costs appear low enough that a substantial proportion of the population would
consider defaulting strategically, recall that strategic default is not a necessary condition for our mechanism to
work (see Section 1.2).

4.5

Collateral Adjustment Friction

The behavior of households documented in Section 3 implies the presence of a significant collateral adjustment
friction. As discussed above, this friction captures that individuals’ decisions about what house to buy are not
just determined by their investment motives, but also by their consumption motives. A high collateral adjustment
friction means that more pessimistic homebuyers could not reduce their exposure to house price movements by
buying a smaller property or moving to a different neighborhood without a substantial decline in their utility from
living in their house. Instead, these pessimistic households chose to reduce their downpayment to minimize their
housing market exposure. In this section, we analyze data from Zillow’s “Consumer Housing Trends Report 2017”
to provide direct evidence for the presence of a sizable collateral adjustment friction.
In the survey, a sample of about 3,000 representative homebuyers were asked about the requirements in the
selection of their property. With respect to location, 71% of buyers required the home to be in a safe neighborhood,
40% required off-street parking, 39% required that the house was in their preferred neighborhood, and 29% required
that the house was in their preferred school district. Other neighborhood requirements were proximity to shopping
(29% of respondents), proximity to work (28%), proximity to family and friends (26%) and proximity to public
transportation (18%). With respect to the actual property, 67% of respondents required the home to be within
their initial price range, 62% required that the property had air conditioning, 62% required that it had their
preferred number of bedrooms, and 53% that it had the preferred number of bathrooms. Other requirements
were that the property had private outdoor space (48% of respondents), that it had the preferred square footage
(47%), that it had a layout that fit the buyers’ preferences (47%), that it had ample storage (41%), and that it
had the buyers’ preferred utilities (40%). Only 40% of respondents required that the property had good potential
to increase in value. This suggests that, consistent with a sizable collateral adjustment frictions, homebuyers
regularly perceive the consumption aspect of the property to be more important than the investment aspect.

5

Conclusion

We develop a parsimonious model of mortgage leverage determination in the presence of heterogeneous beliefs
to show that the relationship between homebuyers’ optimism and leverage crucially depends on the degree of
collateral adjustment frictions faced by homebuyers. When households primarily maximize the levered return of
their property investment (small collateral adjustment friction), more pessimistic homebuyers reduce their leverage
to purchase smaller houses (housing-as-investment scenario). However, when the collateral adjustment friction is
large and considerations such as family size pin down the desired property size, the only way for pessimistic
homebuyers to reduce the size of their exposure to the housing market is by reducing their downpayment and
increasing their leverage (housing-as-consumption scenario). Our empirical findings show that borrowers’ beliefs
indeed play an important role in determining borrowers’ leverage decisions. We show that more pessimistic
individuals take on more leverage, in particular during periods of declining house prices, and in particular in states
with a relatively low cost of default. These findings are consistent with a large collateral adjustment friction, and
map most closely to the housing-as-consumption scenario.

40

References
Adelino, Manuel, Antoinette Schoar, and Felipe Severino. 2016. “Loan originations and defaults in the
mortgage crisis: The role of the middle class.” Review of Financial Studies.
Aguiar, Mark, and Manuel Amador. 2013. “Sovereign debt.” Handbook of International Economics, 4.
Altonji, Joseph G, Todd E Elder, and Christopher R Taber. 2005. “Selection on observed and unobserved
variables: Assessing the effectiveness of Catholic schools.” Journal of political economy, 113(1): 151–184.
Angeletos, G-M, and Chen Lian. 2016. “Incomplete information in macroeconomics: Accommodating frictions
in coordination.” Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2: 1065–1240.
Araújo, Aloísio, Susan Schommer, and Michael Woodford. 2015. “Conventional and unconventional
monetary policy with endogenous collateral constraints.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 7(1): 1–
43.
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, and Johannes Stroebel. 2017a. “The Economic Effects
of Social Networks: Evidence from the Housing Market.” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming).
Bailey, Michael, Ruiqing Cao, Theresa Kuchler, Johannes Stroebel, and Arlene Wong. 2017b.
“Measuring Social Connectedness.” Working Paper, NYU Stern.
Bhutta, Neil, Jane Dokko, and Hui Shan. 2017. “Consumer Ruthlessness and Mortgage Default During the
2007 to 2009 Housing Bust.” The Journal of Finance (forthcoming).
Bulow, J., and K. Rogoff. 1989. “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt.” Journal of Political
Economy, 97(1).
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2016. “Understanding booms and busts in
housing markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 124(4): 1088–1147.
Cao, Dan. 2017. “Speculation and Financial Wealth Distribution Under Belief Heterogeneity.” Economic Journal.
Case, Karl E, Robert J Shiller, and Anne K Thompson. 2012. “What Have They Been Thinking?
Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 265.
Cheng, Ing-Haw, Sahil Raina, and Wei Xiong. 2014. “Wall Street and the housing bubble.” American
Economic Review, 104(9): 2797–2829.
Chetty, Raj, László Sándor, and Adam Szeidl. 2017. “The effect of housing on portfolio choice.” The Journal
of Finance, 72(3): 1171–1212.
Cocco, Joao F. 2004. “Portfolio choice in the presence of housing.” The Review of Financial Studies, 18(2): 535–
567.
DeFusco, Anthony A, Stephanie Johnson, and John Mondragon. 2017. “Regulating Household Leverage.”
Working Paper.
Di Maggio, Marco, and Amir Kermani. 2016. “Credit-Induced Boom and Bust.” Review of Financial Studies.
Elul, Ronel, Nicholas S Souleles, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Dennis Glennon, Robert Hunt, et al.
2010. “What" Triggers" Mortgage Default?” American Economic Review, 100(2): 490–94.
Facebook. 2017. “Facebook Form 10-Q, Quarterly Report, Q1.”
Floetotto, Max, Michael Kirker, and Johannes Stroebel. 2016. “Government intervention in the housing
market: Who wins, who loses?” Journal of Monetary Economics, 80: 106–123.
Foote, Christopher L, Lara Loewenstein, and Paul S Willen. 2016. “Cross-sectional patterns of mortgage
debt during the housing boom: evidence and implications.” Working Paper.
Fostel, A., and J. Geanakoplos. 2012. “Tranching, CDS, and Asset Prices: How Financial Innovation Can
Cause Bubbles and Crashes.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1): 190–225.

41

Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2008. “Leverage cycles and the anxious economy.” The American
Economic Review, 98(4): 1211–1244.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2015. “Leverage and default in binomial economies: a complete
characterization.” Econometrica, 83(6): 2191–2229.
Fostel, Ana, and John Geanakoplos. 2016. “Financial innovation, collateral, and investment.” American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 8(1): 242–284.
Geanakoplos, J. 2010. “The leverage cycle.” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 24(1): 1–66.
Geanakoplos, John. 1997. “Promises, Promises.” The Economy as an Evolving Complex System, II, ed. by W.B.
Arthur, S. Durlauf, and D.Lane.
Geanakoplos, John. 2003. “Liquidity, Default, and Crashes Endogenous Contracts in General.” Working Paper,
Yale University, 170.
Geanakoplos, John, and William R Zame. 2014. “Collateral equilibrium, I: a basic framework.” Economic
Theory, 56(3): 443–492.
Geerolf, François. 2015. “Leverage and disagreement.” Working Paper.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Alberto Martin, and Stefano Rossi. 2014. “Sovereign default, domestic banks, and
financial institutions.” The Journal of Finance, 69(2): 819–866.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny. 2012. “Neglected risks, financial innovation, and
financial fragility.” Journal of Financial Economics, 104(3): 452–468.
Gennaioli, Nicola, Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer. 2016. “Expectations and investment.” NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 30(1): 379–431.
Gerardi, Kris, Kyle Herkenhoff, Lee Ohanian, and Paul Willen. 2017. “Can’t Pay or Won’t Pay?
Unemployment, Negative Equity, and Strategic Default.” Review of Financial Studies (forthcoming).
Gervais, Martin. 2002. “Housing taxation and capital accumulation.” Journal of Monetary Economics,
49(7): 1461–1489.
Ghent, Andra C, and Marianna Kudlyak. 2011. “Recourse and residential mortgage default: evidence from
US states.” The Review of Financial Studies, 24(9): 3139–3186.
Glaeser, Edward L, Joshua D Gottlieb, and Joseph Gyourko. 2012. “Can cheap credit explain the housing
boom?” In Housing and the Financial Crisis. 301–359. University of Chicago Press.
Gottardi, Piero, and Felix Kubler. 2015. “Dynamic Competitive Economies with Complete Markets and
Collateral Constraints.” The Review of Economic Studies, 82(3): 1119–1153.
Greene, W.H. 2003. Econometric Analysis. Pearson Education.
Greenwood, Robin, and Andrei Shleifer. 2014. “Expectations of returns and expected returns.” Review of
Financial Studies, 27: 714–746.
Guiso, Luigi, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. 2013. “The determinants of attitudes toward strategic
default on mortgages.” The Journal of Finance, 68(4): 1473–1515.
Hampton, Keith, Lauren Sessions Goulet, Lee Rainie, and Kristen Purcell. 2011. “Social networking
sites and our lives.” Pew internet and american life project., 16: 1–85.
He, Zhiguo, and Wei Xiong. 2012. “Debt financing in asset markets.” The American Economic Review,
102(3): 88–94.
Hurst, Erik, Benjamin J Keys, Amit Seru, and Joseph Vavra. 2016. “Regional redistribution through the
US mortgage market.” The American Economic Review, 106(10): 2982–3028.
Jones, Jason J, Jaime E Settle, Robert M Bond, Christopher J Fariss, Cameron Marlow, and
James H Fowler. 2013. “Inferring tie strength from online directed behavior.” PloS ONE, 8(1): e52168.

42

Kaplan, Greg, Kurt Mitman, and Giovanni L Violante. 2015. “Consumption and house prices in the Great
Recession: Model meets evidence.” NYU Working Paper.
Koudijs, Peter, and Hans-Joachim Voth. 2016. “Leverage and beliefs: personal experience and risk-taking
in margin lending.” The American Economic Review, 106(11): 3367–3400.
Krishnamurthy, Arvind, and Tyler Muir. 2016. “Credit Spreads and the Severity of Financial Crises.”
Working Paper.
Krishna, Vijay. 2010. Auction theory. Burlington, MA: Academic Press/Elsevier.
Kuchler, Theresa, and Basit Zafar. 2015. “Personal experiences and expectations about aggregate outcomes.”
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, 748.
Kuchler, Theresa, and Johannes Stroebel. 2009. “Foreclosure and bankruptcy-policy conclusions from the
current crisis.” Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper.
Landvoigt, Tim, Monika Piazzesi, and Martin Schneider. 2015. “The housing market(s) of San Diego.”
The American Economic Review, 105(4): 1371–1407.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2011. “Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Affect
Risk Taking?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(1): 373–416.
Malmendier, Ulrike, and Stefan Nagel. 2015. “Learning from inflation experiences.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Forthcoming.
Mian, Atif, and Amir Sufi. 2009. “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the US
Mortgage Default Crisis.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 124(4): 1449–1496.
Mian, Atif R, Amir Sufi, and Emil Verner. 2016. “Household debt and business cycles worldwide.” Working
Paper.
Nathanson, Charles G, and Eric Zwick. 2014. “Arrested development: Theory and evidence of supply-side
speculation in the housing market.” Working Paper.
Piazzesi, Monika, and Martin Schneider. 2009. “Momentum traders in the housing market: Survey evidence
and a search model.” American Economic Review, 99(2): 406–11.
Piazzesi, Monika, Martin Schneider, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015. “Segmented housing search.” Working
Paper.
Simsek, Alp. 2013. “Belief disagreements and collateral constraints.” Econometrica, 81(1): 1–53.
Uribe, Martin, and Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé. 2017. Open economy macroeconomics. Princeton University
Press.
Washington Post. 2011. “Letter to the Editor, June 21, 2011: Walking away from low down payments.”
Xiong, W. 2012. “Bubbles, Crises, and Heterogeneous Beliefs.” Handbook for Systemic Risk.

43

Appendix
A
A.1

Theoretical Derivations
Proofs

Properties of Λi (δi )
The loan-to-value ratio offered to borrower i for a given promised repayment δi corresponds to

R δi −χi

η

g

Λi (δi ) =

gdFL (g) + δi

Rg
δi −χi

dFL (g)
,

1+r

which can be alternatively written in terms of default and non-default probabilities and truncated expectations as
−χi ]+(1−FL (δi −χi ))δi
Λi (δi ) = ηFL (δi −χi )E[g|g≤δi1+r
. Note that Λi (δi ) is strictly positive and that Λ0i (δi ) can be expressed
as
1 − FL (δi − χi )
Λ0i (δi ) = (1 − (ηχi + (1 − η) δi ) λL (δi − χi ))
,
1+r
fL (δi −χi )
where λL (δi − χi ) = 1−F
. In general, Λ0i (δi ) can take positive or negative values, depending on the sign of
L (δi −χi )
1 − (ηχi + (1 − η) δi ) λL (δi − χi ). When η < 1 or χi > 0, the function Λi (δi ) has a well-defined maximum. Note that,
whenever δi > 0, it is the case that Λ0i (δi ) < 1 .
Note that the limits of the LTV schedule offered by lenders correspond to

η
lim Λi (δi ) =

Rg
g

gdFL (g)
=

1+r

δi →∞

ηEL [g]
1+r

and

lim Λi (δi ) = 0.

δi →0

Figure A1 illustrates the behavior of Λi (δi ) when lenders’ beliefs are normally distributed.

Figure A1: LTV schedule Λi (δi )
1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

2

Note: Figure shows the LTV schedule Λi (δi ) offered by lenders with normally distributed beliefs with mean µL = 1.17 and standard
deviation σL = 0.1, for a recovery rate after default of η = 0.9 and a default cost that corresponds to χi = 0.1. The red dashed line
µL
corresponds to the maximum LTV ratio with full recovery, which corresponds to 1+r
.

Borrowers’ problem
The specification of the housing constraint in Equation (2) guarantees equilibrium existence provided that n0i > p0 hi ,
which guarantees that the feasible choice set is non-empty. Exploiting homogeneity, the problem solved by borrowers can

A1

be expressed in terms of the following Lagrangian:

"

Z

δi −χi

max ui (c0i ) + βp0 h0i −χi

c0i ,δi ,h0i

Z

#

g

(g − δi ) dFi (g)

dFi (g) +
δi −χi

g



− λ0i (c0i + p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) − n0i ) + ν0i h0i − hi .
The optimality conditions of this problem regarding consumption, promised repayment, and housing choice, correspond to
Equations (5) to (7) in the text.
In the housing-as-investment scenario, the borrowers’ problem in the housing-as-investment scenario simplifies to
max J (c0i ) ,

J (c0i ) = ui (c0i ) + (n0i − c0i ) βρi ,

where

c0i

and
−χi
ρi = max

R δi −χi
g

dFi (g) +

Rg
δi −χi

(g − δi ) dFi (g)
.

1 − Λi (δi )

δi

We derive all regularity conditions for the leading case κi = χi = 0. Similar conditions apply to the general case.
n0i −c0i
Given c0i and δi , borrowers’ housing choice satisfies h0i = p10 1−Λ
. Note that the problem solved by borrowers can be
i (δi )
decoupled into two problems. First, borrowers maximize the levered return on a housing investment. Second, borrowers solve
a consumption savings problem. Therefore, introducing a consumption margin per se does not affect borrowers’ leverage
choice. If κi = χi = 0 and η = 1, then the borrowers’ leverage choice has a unique optimum if borrowers’ beliefs dominate
lenders’ beliefs in a hazard rate sense, as in Simsek (2013). That condition is not necessary when η < 1 or χi > 0, which we
assume throughout. In that case, the problem that maximizes the levered return on a housing investment always has a well
defined interior solution, since Λ0i (δi ) has to be strictly positive at the optimum, implying that an optimum is reached before
∂J
the maximum feasible LTV level. The consumption-savings problem is equally well defined, since ∂c
= u0i (c0i ) − βρi = 0
0i
and

∂2J
∂c2
0i

= u00i (c0i ) < 0.
In the housing-as-consumption scenario, the problem solved by borrowers can be expressed as

"
max J (δi ) ,

where

δi

δi −χi

Z

J (δi ) = ui (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi ))) + βp0 h0i −χi

Z

(g − δi ) dFi (g) ,

dFi (g) +
g

#

g

δi −χi

where h0i = hi . Borrowers’ first order condition corresponds to


∂J
= p0 h0i u0i (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi ))) Λ0i (δi ) − β (1 − Fi (δi − χi )) .
∂δi
Borrowers’ second order condition satisfies

2
∂2J
= p0 h0i u00i (c0i ) Λ0i (δi ) p0 h0i + u0i (c0i ) Λ00i (δi ) + βfi (δi − χi )
2
∂δi



= p0 h0i

u00i (c0i ) Λ0i (δi )

2

u00i

2

Z

g

p0 h0i + β


dFi (g)

δi −χi


= p0 h0i

(c0i )

Λ0i

(δi )

Z

g

p0 h0i + β
δi −χi





Λ00i (δi )
fi (δi − χi )
+
Λ0i (δi )
1 − Fi (δi − χi )



fL (δi − χi )
fi (δi − χi )
dFi (g) M −
+
1 − FL (δi − χi )
1 − Fi (δi − χi )


,

−((1−η)λL (δi −χi )+(ηχi +(1−η)δi )λ0L (δi −χi ))
where the second line is valid at an optimum and M ≡
< 0. Hence, sufficient
(1−(ηχi +(1−η)δi )λL (δi −χi ))
conditions that guarantee that borrowers’ first order condition corresponds to an optimum are a) a non-decreasing lenders’
hazard rate, and b) that borrowers’ beliefs dominate lenders’ beliefs in a hazard rate sense.

Proof of Proposition 1. (Parametric predictions)
In the housing-as-investment scenario, given Equation (10) and the sustained regularity conditions, it is sufficient to establish
the behavior of




Fi δ̃ − χi
 + Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi
ΨHAI δ̃ ≡ −χi
1 − Fi δ̃ − χi

A2

to characterize the effect of beliefs on leverage. Any change in parameters associated with an upwards point-wise shift in

ΨHAI (·) for a range of δ̃ implies a higher equilibrium level of δi . Under the assumption that g ∼ N µi , σi2 , we can express



Ei g|g ≥ δ̃ − χi and Fi δ̃ − χi as follows
Ei g|g ≥ δ̃ − χi = µi + σi λ (αi )







Fi δ̃ − χi = Φ (αi ) ,
where λ (αi ) =

φ(αi )
1−Φ(αi )

and αi =

δ̃−χi −µi
,
σi



which allows us to express ΨHAI δ̃ as



ΨHAI δ̃ = −χi

Φ (αi )
+ µi + σi λ (αi ) .
1 − Φ (αi )

The relevant comparative statics in µi and σi are given by48
∂ΨHAI δ̃


= χi

∂µi
∂ΨHAI δ̃
∂σi


= χi

φ (αi )

1
σi

(1 − Φ (αi ))2
φ (αi )

1
α
σi i
2

(1 − Φ (αi ))

+ 1 − λ0 (αi ) > 0
+ λ (αi ) − λ0 (αi ) αi = χi

|

λ (αi ) αi
+ λ (αi ) (1 − (λ (αi ) − αi ) αi ),
1 − Φ (αi ) σi |
{z
}

{z

>0

}

R0

where we have used the properties of the Normal hazard rate from Fact 2. Note that the sign of the comparative statics
λ(αi ) αi
on σi is strictly positive for low or moderate values of χi , since limχi →0 χi 1−Φ(α
= 0. Importantly, the qualifier for
i ) σi
sufficiently low default costs is only a sufficient condition, not a necessary one. These results establish the conclusions for
the housing-as-investment scenario.
In the housing-as-consumption scenario, given Equation (13) and the sustained regularity conditions, it is sufficient to
establish the behavior of


(A1)
ΨHAC δ̃ ≡ 1 − Fi δ̃ − χi = 1 − Φ (αi ) ,
where αi = δ̃−χσii−µi , to characterize the effect of beliefs on leverage. Any change in parameters associated with an upwards
point-wise shift in ΨHAC (·) for a range of δ̃ implies a lower equilibrium level of δi .
The relevant comparative statics in µi and σi are given by
∂ΨHAC δ̃


=

∂µi
∂ΨHAC δ̃

1
φ (αi ) > 0
σi



∂σi

= φ (αi )

φ0 (αi )
αi
=−
,
σi
σi

which is negative when the probability of default is less than 50%, that is, when αi < 0 or, equivalently, when δ̃ < µi + χi .

Proof of Proposition 2. (Interaction with cost of default)
As described in the text, we exclusively focus on the direct effects of how changes in χi affect the sensitivity of
leverage choices to beliefs. Abstractly, in an optimization problem in which agents choose x to solve maxx F (x; θ, α),
where θ are parameters and where an interior optimum x? is characterized by Fx (x? ; θ, α) = 0 and Fxx ≤
 0, we can
characterize first-order comparative statics by
? dx?
?
?
+Fxxα dx
+Fxθx dx
+Fxθα
Fxxx dx
dα dθ
dθ
dα
.
−Fxx

dx?
dθ

=

Fxθ
−Fxx

and second-order comparative statics by

?
d dx
dθ

dα

=

d 2 x?
dθdα

=

When we state that we characterize the direct effect of recourse non-recourse, we refer
to the term of the form Fxθα , which does not rely directly on assumptions about the curvature of the model, as Fxxx and
Fxxα do.
48 At

times, we use the fact that φ0 (αi ) = −αi φ (αi ). The following results are also relevant for our derivations:
∂

Φ(αi )
1−Φ(αi )

∂µi
as well as


=

−φ (αi )

1
σi

(1 − Φ (αi ))2

∂
and

∂αi
∂αi
1
=
=−
∂µi
∂χi
σi

Φ(αi )
1−Φ(αi )

∂σi
and

A3


=

∂αi
αi
=− .
∂σi
σi

−φ (αi )

αi
σi

(1 − Φ (αi ))2

,

In the housing-as-consumption scenario, where ΨHAC is defined in Equation A1,
∂ 2 ΨHAC δ̃


=−

∂µi ∂χi

1 0
φ (αi ) ,
σi2

which is negative when the probability of default is less than 50%. The marginal cost of borrowing goes up by less when
the cost of default is higher.
∂ 2 ΨHAC δ̃


=

∂σi ∂χi

1 00
φ (αi ) ,
σi2

which is positive as long as δ̃ − µi − χi > σi . Hence, it is needed that δ̃ < µi + χi − σi , which is valid whenever the
probability of default is less than 16%.
In the housing-as-investment scenario, to be able to derive unambiguous predictions, we focus for simplicity on the case
in which χi → 0. In that case,
∂ 2 ΨHAI δ̃

=

∂µi ∂χi
2

∂ ΨHAI δ̃
∂σi ∂χi

1



φ (αi ) σi
1 00
λ (αi ) +
>0
σi
(1 − Φ (αi ))2


=−

i
i
φ (αi ) α
φ (αi ) α
1 0
αi 00
1
αi 00
σi
σi
λ (αi ) +
λ (αi ) + λ0 (αi ) +
λ
(α
)
+
=
,
i
2
σi
σi
σi
σi
(1 − Φ (αi ))
(1 − Φ (αi ))2

which is negative when the probability of default is less than 50%, that is, when αi < 0 or, equivalently, when δ̃ < µi + χi .

Proof of Proposition 3. (Interaction with average belief) In the housing-as-consumption scenario, where
ΨHAC is defined in Equation A1,
∂ 2 ΨHAC δ̃


=−

∂µ2i

1 0
φ (αi ) ,
σi2

which is negative when the probability of default is less than 50%, that is, when δ̃ < µi . We also find that
∂ 2 ΨHAC δ̃
∂σi ∂µi



1
1
1
− φ0 (αi ) αi − φ (αi )
σi
σi
σi

φ (αi )  2
=
αi − 1
σi2
=

h

φ (αi )
=
σi2

"

δ̃ − χi − µi
σi

2

i

#
−1 ,

which is positive as long as δ̃ − χi − µi > σi . Hence, it is needed that δ̃ < µi + χi − σi , which is valid whenever the
probability of default is less than 16%.
In the housing-as-investment scenario, to be able to derive unambiguous predictions, we focus for simplicity in the case
in which χi → 0. In that case,
∂ 2 Ei g| g ≥ δ̃




= λ00 (αi )

∂µ2i
∂ 2 Ei g| g ≥ δ̃



∂σi ∂µi

1
> 0, ∀δ̃
σi


= −λ0 (αi )

1
1
1
αi 00
+ λ00 (αi ) αi + λ0 (αi ) =
λ (αi ) ,
σi
σi
σi
σi

which is negative when the probability of default is less than 50%, that is, when δ̃ < µi .

A4

Proof of Proposition 4. (Parametric predictions for lenders’ beliefs)
∂Λ0 (δ )

i (δi )
i i 49
To provide comparative statics in the case of lenders’ beliefs, we must characterize the behavior of ∂Λ∂µ
and ∂µ
.
L
L
Formally, we find that both the LTV schedule offered by lenders and its derivative with respect to δi shift pointwise with
changes in µL :

ηΦL
∂Λi (δi )
=
∂µL

δi −χi −µL
σL



−

(ηµL −δi )
φL
σL

δi −χi −µL
σL



δi −χi −µL
σL

+ ηφ0L



1+r

∂Λ0i (δi )
δi − χi − µL
= (ηχi + (1 − η) δi ) λ
∂µL
σL

 

h

+ 1 − (ηχi + (1 − η) δi ) λ





δi − χi − µL
−
σL

δi − χi − µL
σL

i

1 φ
σL



δi −χi −µL
σL

1 φ
σL

δi −χi −µL
σL

> 0,



1+r



1+r

> 0,

where we use the fact that the pdf of the Normal distribution satisfies φ0 (x) = −xφ (x) and that 1

(ηχi + (1 − η) δi ) λ δi −χσiL−µL at any interior solution. Both results, when combined, imply that
d



Λ0i (δi )
1−Λi (δi )

dµL

>


> 0.
Λ0 (δ )

i i
In the housing-as-investment scenario, Equation (10) directly implies that upward point-wise shifts on 1−Λ
are associated
i (δi )
with a higher equilibrium leverage choice δi . Hence, a higher µL is associated with a higher equilibrium leverage choice δi .
In the housing-as-consumption scenario, Equation (12) directly implies that upward point-wise shifts on
u0i (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi ))) Λ0i (δi ) are associated with a higher equilibrium leverage choice δi . Note that

∂ (u0i (·) Λ0i (δi ))
∂Λ0i (δi )
∂Λi (δi ) 0
= u0i (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )))
+ p0 h0i u00i (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )))
Λi (δi ) ,
∂µL
∂µL
∂µL
whose sign is ambiguous. An increase in µL generates both a substitution and an income effect. More optimistic lenders
offer more attractive LTV schedules at the margin, so borrowers substitute towards higher leverage. More optimistic lenders
offer more attractive schedule, which makes borrowers effectively richer at date 0, reducing their need to borrow, which
reduces their equilibrium leverage. The results in both scenarios, when combined, establish the result in Proposition 4.

A.2

Auxiliary results

Facts 1 and 2 follow from Greene (2003). Fact 3 follows from Krishna (2010). When needed, we respectively denote the
pdf and cdf of the standard normal distribution by φ (·) and Φ (·).



Fact 1. (Truncated expectation of a normal distribution) If X ∼ N µ, σ 2 , then
E [X |X > a ] = µ + σλ (α) ,

where

φ (β)
,
Φ (β)

where

E [X |X < b ] = µ − σ

φ (α)
1 − Φ (α)
b−µ
β=
.
σ

λ (α) =

and

α=

a−µ
σ

φ(α)−φ(β)
More generally, E [X |a < X < b ] = µ + σ Φ(β)−Φ(a)
, where α and β are defined above.

Fact 2. (Properties of normal hazard function) The function λ (·), which corresponds to the hazard rate of the normal
distribution, is also known as the Inverse Mills Ratio. It satisfies the following properties:
1. λ (0) =
49 Note

p2
π

, λ (α) ≥ 0, λ (α) > α, λ0 (α) > 0, and λ00 (α) > 0.

that we can express LTV schedules as
ηΦL

δi −χi −µL
σL




µL − σL

φL
ΦL

Λi (δi ) =
=

δi −χi −µL
σL
δi −χi −µL
σL


 + 1 − ΦL

1+r
δi + (ηµL − δi ) ΦL

δi −χi −µL
σL



− ησL φL

1+r

A5

δi −χi −µL
σL



δi −χi −µL
σL



δi

2. limα→−∞ λ (α) = limα→−∞ λ0 (α) = 0, and limα→∞ λ0 (α) = 1.
1
α

3. λ (α) <

+ α, λ0 (α) =

φ0 (αi )
1−Φ(αi )

+ (λ (αi ))2 = λ (α) (λ (α) − α) > 0, λ0 (α) < 1, and λ00 (α) ≥ 0.

Fact 3. (Hazard rate dominance implies first-order stochastic Rdominance) The hazard rate of a distribution with cdf F (·)
x
−
λ(t)dt
f (x)
(x))
is defined by λ (x) = 1−F
= − d ln(1−F
, so F (x) = 1 − e 0
. If λj (g) > λj (g), ∀g, then it trivially follows that
(x)
dx
Fi (·) > Fj (·).

A.3

Generalized environment

Two assumptions crucially allow us to derive tractable analytical results: the risk neutrality of borrowers and our formulation
for housing preferences. Here, we show how our framework can be extended to incorporate borrowers’ risk aversion and
smooth preferences for housing.
It is conceptually easy to make borrowers in our model risk averse. We assume that, at date 1, borrowers derive a
continuation utility of wealth vi (·). We also assume that their date 0 flow utility corresponds to ui (c0i , h0i ), which satisfies
appropriate regularity conditions,

"Z

δi −χi

max ui (n0i − p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) , h0i ) + β

vi

δi ,h0i

D
w1i



Z

#

g

vi

dFi (g) +

N
w1i



dFi (g) ,

δi −χi

g

N
D
= n1i − κi h0i = n1i − χi p0 h0i .
where w1i
= n1i + p1 h0i − b0i = n1i + p0 h0i (g − δi ) and w1i
Borrowers’ optimality conditions in this case correspond to
∂ui

∂ui
∂h0i
(1 − Λi (δi )) =
−χi β
∂c0i
p0

δi −χi

Z

D
w1i

vi0



N
dFi (g),
(g − δi ) vi0 w1i



dFi (g) + β
δi −χi

g

|
∂ui 0
Λi (δi ) = β
∂c0i

g

Z
{z

}

Expected Return

g

Z

N
vi0 w1i
dFi (g),



δi −χi

|

{z

Mg. Cost of Borrowing

}

which are the counterparts of Equations (6) and (7) in the main text. We highlight the terms through which the expected
return and downpayment protection channels materialize. Equation (8) corresponds in this case to
∂ui
=β
∂c0i

Rg
δi −χi

N
vi0 w1i
dFi (g)



Λ0i (δi )

=



∂ui
∂h0i

p0 (1 − Λi (δi ))

−χi

R δi −χi

+β

g

D
vi0 w1i
dFi (g) +



Rg

N
(g − δi ) vi0 w1i
dFi (g)



δi −χi


.

1 − Λi (δi )

In this more general scenario, changes in borrowers’ beliefs only affect borrowers’ decisions insofar as they affect the expected
return and downpayment protection terms, which now include marginal utilities. We now study several alternative modeling
assumptions.

Risk aversion
We now assume that housing does not enter borrowers’ utility directly. In that case, we can combine borrowers’ optimality
conditions for housing and leverage to find a condition that generalizes (10). In particular, assuming κi = 0 for simplicity,
Λ0i (δi )
=
1 − Λi (δi )

1
N g≥δ
Ei [ (g−δi )vi0 (w1i
)| i ]

,

N g≥δ
Ei [ vi0 (w1i
)| i ]

where

N
Ei (g − δi ) vi0 w1i





g ≥ δi

N
Ei [ vi0 (w1i
)| g ≥ δi ]



N
Covi g − δi , vi0 w1i
|g ≥ δi



= Ei [ g − δi | g ≥ δi ] +



N
Ei [ vi0 (w1i
)| g ≥ δi ]


.

This more general expression includes a new term that separately affects borrowers’ leverage choices. Unfortunately, it is
not possible to analytically characterize how a change on borrowers’ beliefs affects the new term. In numerical simulations,
we find that the directional theoretical predictions that we find in Proposition 1 remain valid for a wide range of plausible
parameter combinations. This is not surprising, since the effects characterized in Proposition 1 remain active.

A6

In the housing-as-consumption scenario, a simple result can be found when borrowers are prevented from defaulting. In
that case, the first-order condition for borrowing corresponds to
∂ui 0
Λi (δi ) = β
∂c0i

Z

g

vi0 (n1i + p0 h0i (g − δi )) dFi (g) .

g

In this case, it is easy to show that more optimistic borrowers, in a first-order stochastic dominance sense, decide to borrow
more. Intuitively, optimism is associated with a desire to transfer resources from the future and lower precautionary savings,
both of which are associated with higher borrowing.

Smooth preferences for housing
In this case, we preserve borrowers’ risk neutrality and focus on the case in which preferences for housing are separable,

2

so ui (c0i , h0i ) = vi (c0 ) + α2 h0i − h̄
optimality condition for housing as

and

h0i = h̄ +

∂ui
∂h0i
p0

p0
α



= α h0ip0−h̄ . Setting again κi = 0 for simplicity, we can express borrowers’

∂ui
(1 − Λi (δi )) − β
∂c0i

Z

g


(g − δi ) dFi (g) .

δi

In the limit in which α → ∞, it must be that h0i → h̄, so changes in borrowers’ beliefs do not affect housing choices. In
that case, borrowers’ make leverage choices according to
∂ui 0
Λi (δi ) = β
∂c0i

Z

g

dFi (g) ,
δi

as in the housing-as-consumption scenario.

Alternative savings opportunities
Finally, although we have introduced consumption at date 0 as homebuyers’ alternative use of funds, they could be indifferent
at the margin between their investment return on housing and an alternative investment opportunity. In particular, if we
assume that households have access to a savings opportunity with a constant gross returns Rs , their date 0 budget constraint
becomes
n0i = p0 h0i (1 − Λi (δi )) + s,
(A2)
where s denotes savings. Therefore, at the optimum, the counterpart of Equation (8) corresponds to
β
Rs =

Rg

h

β −χi

dFi (g)

δi −χi
Λ0i (δi )

=

R δi −χi
g

dFi (g) +

Rg
δi −χi

1 − Λi (δi )

(g − δi ) dFi (g)

i
.

(A3)

Intuitively, homebuyers’ housing and borrowing decisions must at the margin yield a return Rs , so every argument in the
paper remains valid. We adopt the formulation with consumption in the paper because for this alternative formulation to
be well-behaved in the housing-as-investment case, we would need to impose some curvature in the return Rs .50

B
B.1

Non-Parametric Predictions
Theoretical results

While the parametric assumption underlying Propositions 1 through 3 are natural, given that the distribution of g is
uni-modal and symmetric in the data, these results impose a priori unnecessary distributional restrictions. An alternative
approach is to consider cross-sectional comparisons among borrowers that do not rely on parametric assumptions. This
approach uses the ability to potentially observe shifts of the whole distribution of beliefs, which is a unique feature of our
empirical setup.
In general, there are numerous ways in which one borrower may be “more optimistic” than another in a non-parametric
sense. For example, two borrowers could disagree primarily about the probability of very large declines or very large
50 By slightly changing the default formulation, one can allow for borrowers to save at date 0 to use some of those funds to avoid
default at date 1. In that case, Equations A2 and A3 still determine the equilibrium after accounting for the different default behavior.

A7

increases in house prices. In this section, we identify the appropriate definition of stochastic dominance that allows us to
provide unambiguous directional predictions for borrowers’ leverage choices across both the housing-as-consumption and
housing-as-investment scenarios. Because of the inherent difficulties with establishing general comparisons between infinitedimensional distributions, our non-parametric results only provide a partial order when comparing borrowers in the data
— there are many pairwise comparisons of borrowers’ distributions that cannot be ranked according to the appropriate
dominance notion.
We use three different stochastic orders to define optimism. Given two distributions with cumulative distribution
 
functions Fj (·) and Fi (·) with support g, g , we define truncated expectation stochastic dominance, first-order stochastic
dominance and hazard rate dominance as follows:
1. Truncated expectation stochastic dominance: Fj stochastically dominates Fi (borrower j is more optimistic
than i) in a truncated expectation sense if
Ej [ g| g ≥ δ] ≥ Ei [ g| g ≥ δ] ,





∀δ ∈ g, g .

2. First-order stochastic dominance: Fj stochastically dominates Fi (borrower j is more optimistic than i) in a
first-order sense if
 
Fj (δ) ≤ Fi (δ) , ∀δ ∈ g, g .
3. Hazard rate stochastic dominance: Fj stochastically dominates Fi (borrower j is more optimistic than i) in a
hazard rate sense if
 
fi (δ)
fj (δ)
≤
, ∀δ ∈ g, g .
1 − Fj (δ)
1 − Fi (δ)
All three definitions capture different notions of optimism. We show in Appendix A.2 that if Fj (·) dominates Fi (·) in a
hazard rate sense, then Fj (·) also dominates Fi (·) in a first-order and a truncated expectation expectation sense. The
converse is not true: first-order stochastic dominance and truncated expectation dominance do not imply hazard rate
dominance. Figure A2 illustrates the relation between the different orders. Hazard rate dominance is equivalent to saying
1−F (g)
that 1−Fji (g) is increasing on g. It captures the idea that optimists are increasingly optimistic about higher house price
growth realizations.

Figure A2: Relation between stochastic orders when κi = 0

Housing-as-Investment

Housing-as-Consumption

h
i
h
i
Ej g| g ≥ δ̃ ≥ Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ , ∀δ̃ ⇒ LT Vj ≥ LT Vi

 
 
Fj δ̃ ≤ Fi δ̃ , ∀δ̃ ⇒ LT Vj ≤ LT Vi

Truncated Expectation Stochastic Dominance

fj (δ̃ )
1−Fj (δ̃ )

≤

First Order Stochastic Dominance

fi (δ̃ )
1−Fi (δ̃ )

, ∀δ̃

Hazard Rate Stochastic Dominance

We have showed that in the housing-as-investment scenario, when κi = 0, there are clear predictions for the leverage choices
across two borrowers whose belief distributions could be ranked according to truncated-expectation stochastic dominance.
We also showed that in the housing-as-consumption scenario, clear predictions were obtained for belief distributions that
could be ranked according to first-order stochastic dominance. However, neither of these dominance concepts implies
the other, so it is unclear how to compare belief distributions if we are ex-ante agnostic about whether the housing-asconsumption or the housing-as-investment scenario applies, especially when κi > 0. Therefore, we adopt hazard rate
dominance as the appropriate definition of optimism that allows to test non-parametrically for the effect of beliefs on
leverage regardless of the underlying scenario, as formalized in Proposition 5.
Proposition 5. (Non-parametric predictions.) Compare two borrowers i and j with different distributions Fi (·) and Fj (·)
about the growth rate of house prices changes.
a) In the housing-as-investment scenario, if Fj (·) dominates Fi (·) in a hazard rate sense (or in a truncated expectation
sense when κi = 0), all else equal, borrower j chooses a higher LTV ratio and a larger house than borrower i.

A8

b) In the housing-as-consumption scenario, if Fj (·) dominates Fi (·) in a hazard rate sense (or in a first-order sense), all
else equal, borrower j chooses a lower LTV ratio and lower consumption than borrower i.
Proposition 5 shows that borrowers’ optimism, measured as hazard rate dominance, has opposite predictions in the polar
scenarios we consider for any value of κi . More optimistic borrowers take on more leverage in the housing-as-investment
scenario, but they take on less leverage in the housing-as-consumption scenario. These results generalize the insights from
the case with normally distributed beliefs, but they are not exactly identical. We show in the Appendix that, when beliefs
are normally distributed, a distribution with a higher mean dominates in a hazard rate sense a distribution with a lower
mean (holding its variance constant). Hence, when comparing means in the normal case, the results of Proposition 1
are implied by those of Proposition 5. However, we also show that, in the normal context, a distribution with a higher
variance does not dominate in a hazard rate sense a distribution with a lower variance (holding its mean constant). This
illustrates that hazard rate dominance is only a sufficient (not a necessary) condition to derive unambiguous predictions for
the relationships between beliefs and leverage choice.

Proof of Proposition 5. (Non-parametric predictions)


In the housing-as-consumption scenario, it follows that an upward pointwise shift in 1−Fi δ̃ , ∀δ̃, is associated with a lower
equilibrium value of δi . If the beliefs of borrower j first-order stochastically dominate the beliefs of borrower i (borrower j




is more optimistic), then Fj δ̃ < Fi δ̃ and 1 − Fj δ̃ > 1 − Fi δ̃ , which implies that borrower j takes on more leverage
on equilibrium.
Fi (δ̃−χi )
In the housing-as-investment scenario, from Equation (10), it follows that an upward pointwise shift in −χi 1−F δ̃−χ +
i(
i)


Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − χi , ∀δ̃ is associated with a higher equilibrium value of δi . To compare the leverage choices of two different
borrowers i and j, it is thus sufficient to show that Fj HRD Fi implies that
Ej g| g ≥ δ̃ − Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ > 0,









∀δ̃,

to conclude that the more optimistic borrower j takes on more leverage, since hazard-rate dominance implies first order
Fi (δ̃−χi )
Fj (δ̃−χi )
stochastic dominance, which trivially implies that 1−F δ̃−χ < 1−F δ̃−χ . To this purpose, we can define h (δ) as
j(
i)
i(
i)
h δ̃ = Ej g| g ≥ δ̃ − Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ .













We can express the derivative of h δ̃ as



0



h δ̃ =
=

∂Ej g| g ≥ δ̃
fj

∂δ

δ̃

=

−



∂δ





1 − Fj δ̃

|



∂Ei g| g ≥ δ̃

 Ej g| g ≥ δ̃ − δ̃ −


1 − Fj δ̃
fj δ̃



−
{z

>0



f δ̃





1 − Fi δ̃

 


 Ei g| g ≥ δ̃ − δ̃

!



1 − F δ̃

fi δ̃

Ej g| g ≥ δ̃ +







fi δ̃



1 − Fi δ̃


 h δ̃ .

(A4)

}

When δ̃ → 0, it follows from hazard-rate dominance that Ej [g] − Ei [g] > 0. Note that all elements in A4 are strictly

positive under hazard rate dominance, which implies that the solution to the ordinary differential equation for h δ̃ must

be weakly positive everywhere, implying that h δ̃ is positive, which shows our claim.

B.2

Non-Parametric Test

The empirical results presented in Sections 3.3 and 3.4 test the predictions from our model under the assumption
that individuals’ beliefs about future house price changes are normally distributed. We argued that this is a realistic
approximation, given the shape of the distribution of actual house price changes. In Section B.1, we also derived nonparametric predictions on the relative mortgage leverage choices of individuals with arbitrary belief distributions. In
particular, we showed that an individual whose belief distribution dominated that of an otherwise identical individual in
the sense of hazard rate dominance would choose higher leverage in the housing-as-investment scenario, but lower leverage
in the housing-as-consumption scenario.

A9

While we are not able to measure the full belief distribution of each individual, we can compare how the leverage
choices of individuals vary with the full distribution of the house price experiences of their friends.51 Specifically, we
conduct pairwise comparisons of the distributions of the house price experiences of all friends (and all out-of-commuting
zone friends) of individuals purchasing houses in the same county in the same month, and who borrow from the same
lender. We then test whether one distribution dominates the other in a hazard rate dominance sense. We only focus on
county-month-lender combinations with at least three mortgage originations: at the average (median) such combination, we
have 9.8 (5) mortgage originations. Of all the pairwise comparisons across these originations, we can rank the distribution
of all friends’ house price experiences in a hazard rate sense for 3.5% of transaction pairs, and the distributions of outof-commuting zone friends’ house price experiences for 8.1% of transaction pairs. When comparing the mortgage leverage
choices across the individuals with a clear ranking using the experience distribution of all friends, we find that individuals
with an experience distribution that is hazard rate dominant will choose 90 basis points lower leverage; this difference is
highly statistically significant. When comparing the experience distribution of individuals’ out-of-commuting zone friends,
those with a hazard rate dominant distribution choose a 68 basis points lower leverage. Both of these results provide
additional evidence that the housing-as-consumption scenario with a sizable collateral adjustment friction is dominant in
the data.

C
C.1

Additional Evidence
House Price Changes

Figure A3 shows the distribution of county-year level annual house price changes in the United States since 1993, as
measured by Zillow.

0

.02

Density
.04

.06

.08

Figure A3: Distribution of house price changes (1993-)

-30

-20
-10
0
10
20
12-Month County-Level House Price Change (%)

30

Note: Figure shows the distribution of county-year level annual house price changes in the United States since 1993, as measured by
Zillow.

C.2

Downpayments and Expected Default

As discussed in Section 4, many personal financial advice websites and blogs discuss the tradeoffs between making larger
and smaller downpayments. Many of these highlight explicitly the tradeoffs that we formally model in Section 1. For
example, the real estate brokerage website Home Point Real Estate describes one of the benefits of high leverage as follows:
51 This test builds on the survey evidence in Section 3.2, which showed that, on average, the first and second moments of the house
price experiences of an individual’s friends affect the corresponding moments of her belief distribution about future house price changes.
The assumption underlying the test in this section is that additional moments of the distribution of individuals’ friends’ house price
experiences will also shift the corresponding moments of those individuals’ belief distribution.

A10

This last reason for putting down a small down payment is kind of twisted, but sadly practical. I doubt we
are going to have any down turn in the market soon, and I really doubt it will be like the one we just came
through if it does come; but the less you put down the less you lose. Yet, if you are upside down on your home
and have to walk away (or lose to foreclosure) the less down payment you put into it the less you lose.
Reuters (2011) outlines similar reasons for making a smaller downpayment:
Even if you have the money for a bigger down payment, there can be good reasons to save your cash. Mortgage
rates continue to skirt all-time lows: Why not put your money to work for yourself and borrow as much as you
can reasonably afford, on a monthly basis, at today’s rates? You can put the money you’re not paying into a
down payment to work elsewhere. If home values rise, you will have done your best to leverage a small down
payment into bigger equity. If they fall, you’ll have less skin in the game, and that could put more pressure on
your banker to improve your loan terms lest you walk away.
US News (2017) described the benefits of a smaller downpayment as follows:
The last major housing crash scared some people away from low down payments after many homeowners
found themselves owing more than their homes were worth when values plummeted. But even a 20 percent
down payment won’t protect you against a 50 percent drop in home values. In fact, if you lost your home to
foreclosure or did a short sale, you may have lost less money if you made a small down payment.
MK Real Estate (2016) describes why making smaller downpayments is the more conservative choice for home buyers
worried about potential house price drops.
The link between the economy and home prices is the third reason to consider a small down payment. In
general, as the U.S. economy improves, home values rise. When the U.S. economy sags, home values sink.
Buyers with large down payments find themselves over-exposed to economic downturns compared to buyers
whose down payments are small.
Consider the purchase of a $400,000 home and two home buyers, each with different ideas about how to buy a
home. One buyer makes a 20% down payment to avoid Private Mortgage Insurance (PMI). The other buyer
wants to stay as liquid as possible, and puts down just 3.5%. The first buyer takes $80,000 from the bank and
converts it to illiquid home equity. The second buyer puts $14,000 into the home.
Over the next few years, the economy falters. Our two buyers lose 20% of the value of each of their homes,
bringing their values down to $320,000. Neither buyer has any equity left. Our first buyer lost all $80,000 of
their money. That money is lost and cannot be recouped except through the housing market’s recovery. The
second buyer lost only $14,000. While the second buyer’s home is “underwater,” with more money owed on
the home than the home is worth, the bank has the risk of loss and not the borrower.
Let’s say that both borrowers default and no longer make their payments. Which homeowner will the bank
be more likely to foreclose upon? It’s counter-intuitive, but the buyer who made a large down payment is less
likely to get relief during a time of crisis and is more likely to face foreclosure. A bank’s losses are limited to
when the home is sold at foreclosure. The homeowner’s twenty percent home equity is already gone, so the
remaining losses (legal and home prep costs) are easily absorbed by the bank. Foreclosing on an underwater
home will lead to great losses. All of the borrower’s money is already lost. The bank will not only have legal
and home prep costs, but will also have to write down $66,000 in lost value.
Conservative borrowers recognize that risk increases with the size of the down payment. The smaller your down
payment, the smaller your risk.

C.3

Downpayment Motivation Survey

In Section 4.2, we described results from our Downpayment Motivation Survey. In this Appendix, we provide additional
information on the respondent demographics, and more details on how the responses vary with these demographics. For
complete disclosure, the full data set is available from the authors upon request.
We ran two waves of the survey between September 19, 2017, and September 21, 2017. The survey was designed using
the SurveyMonkey survey. Each wave was targeted at approximately 800 homeowners, and no additional filters for the
target audience were selected. In each wave, respondents were presented with two different house price growth scenarios,
and asked to select one of three different mortgage choices for each house price scenario. In Table A1, we show the changes
in the downpayment recommendation between the optimistic and the pessimistic scenario (“Decreased Downpayment”
represents individuals who suggested a smaller downpayment in the more pessimistic house price scenario).

A11

Table A1: Downpayment Motivation Survey - Results by Demographics
Wave 1

Wave 2

Total

Decreased
DP

Same
DP

Increased
DP

Total

Decreased
DP

Same
DP

Increased
DP

All

826

20.5%

69.4%

10.2%

794.0%

14.0%

77.6%

8.4%

Income
$0 to $9,999
$10,000 to $24,999
$25,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $74,999
$75,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $124,999
$125,000 to $149,999
$150,000 to $174,999
$175,000 to $199,999
$200,000 and up
Prefer not to answer

17
38
92
56
35
15
50
103
122
117
125

11.8%
13.2%
14.1%
23.2%
20.0%
6.7%
26.0%
28.2%
22.1%
18.0%
16.0%

82.3%
63.2%
76.1%
73.2%
71.4%
86.7%
66.0%
59.2%
68.0%
75.2%
76.8%

5.9%
23.7%
9.8%
3.6%
8.6%
6.7%
8.0%
12.6%
9.8%
6.8%
7.2%

12.0%
37.0%
84.0%
46.0%
40.0%
18.0%
51.0%
88.0%
122.0%
108.0%
137.0%

8.3%
10.8%
8.3%
15.2%
17.5%
16.7%
7.8%
13.6%
13.1%
16.7%
16.8%

91.7%
62.2%
88.1%
60.9%
80.0%
83.3%
84.3%
77.3%
80.3%
74.1%
77.4%

0.0%
27.0%
3.6%
23.9%
2.5%
0.0%
7.8%
9.1%
6.6%
9.3%
5.8%

Age
18-29
30-44
45-59
60+

51
168
215
336

23.5%
18.5%
16.7%
21.4%

62.8%
68.4%
76.3%
70.5%

13.7%
13.1%
7.0%
8.0%

42.0%
154.0%
216.0%
331.0%

14.3%
11.7%
16.2%
13.0%

78.6%
76.6%
76.4%
79.2%

7.1%
11.7%
7.4%
7.8%

Gender
Male
Female

324
446

19.4%
21.5%

67.9%
70.8%

12.6%
7.7%

294.0%
449.0%

14.3%
9.2%

77.2%
83.1%

8.5%
7.7%

Region
East North Central
East South Central
Middle Atlantic
Mountain
New England
Pacific
South Atlantic
West North Central
West South Central

130
46
94
58
44
133
131
59
74

21.5%
15.2%
18.1%
13.8%
13.6%
23.3%
22.1%
17.0%
20.3%

70.8%
73.9%
73.4%
82.8%
77.3%
65.4%
64.1%
78.0%
71.6%

7.7%
10.9%
8.5%
3.5%
9.1%
11.3%
13.7%
5.1%
8.1%

130.0%
41.0%
90.0%
63.0%
47.0%
111.0%
134.0%
55.0%
68.0%

9.2%
9.8%
16.7%
14.3%
12.8%
10.8%
18.7%
18.2%
11.8%

83.1%
82.9%
75.6%
74.6%
78.7%
79.3%
72.4%
76.4%
79.4%

7.7%
7.3%
7.8%
11.1%
8.5%
9.9%
9.0%
5.4%
8.8%

Note: This Table shows behavior in the Downpayment Motivation Survey separately by the reported demographic of the respondents.
The results show how the downpayment changes in the pessimistic house price scenario relative to the optimistic house price scenario.

A12

