NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROSPECTS FOR LIBERALIZING
THE INTERNATIONAL TRADING SYSTEM

Anne 0. Krueger

Working Paper No. 2409

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1987

Paper prepared for International Economic Association Conference on "Survival
and Growth in a Polycentric World Economy," Basel, Switzerland, October 14-17,
1987. The research reported here is part of the NBER's research program in
International Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER Working Paper #2409
October 1987

Prospects for Liberalizing the International Trading System

ABSTRACT

mis oa.per analyzes the equiliorium oeqree ot urotecton as tfle outcome ot
the interaction of demands for protection ano the demand for a lberai
then assesses the current balance. Lin one
international tradinq order.
hand the nature of technical progress, the institution o+ the UrLiqusy Round
the mounting costs of agricultural protections and the increasingly nigh costs
of protection as the world economy integrates all conduce toward a more
liberal trading order. Demands For protection will intensify to the e:<tert
that growth decelerates, that trade negotiators fail to find mechanism to deal
with nontariff barriers and that the United States fails to assume this
leadership role that was earlier taken.

It

Anne 0. Krueger
Department of Economics
Duke University
Durham, NC 27706

Prospects for Liberalizing the International Trading S,'stem

The first half of

the

l980s was perhaps the most turbulent period for the

international economy since the Second World War. The second oil price increase in 1979—80 and the disinflationary response of most OECD goverments

led to a series of major economic difficulties. Worl&jide recession resulted,
and with it came a nurrber of highly—publicized economic ills. These included

the "debt crisis' of some developing countries, the drop in primary commodity

prices, ultimately including oil, and the first drop (in 1982) in the value
and volume of world trade in any year since the end of the Second World War.

For the United States, some of the difficulty was at first hidden as expanas most

sionary fiscal policy offset tight monetary policy. However,

economists had forecast, that irrbalance gave rise to a series of events — in-

cluding strong appreciation of the dollar, a sharp rise in real interest rates
in the United States and abroad, and large swings in current account balances

among the developed countries — which led to further dislocations both in the
United States and in other major trading nations.

In

these

circumstances, it was small wonder that protectionist pressures

grew strongly in many countries. Indeed, as I shall arge later, the real
surprise

fact

should be that

protectionism did not

increase even more

than

it

in

did!

Now

that the worst of

the

recession

is

several

years behind us and moderate

growth has resumed,. it can be argjed that the world economy is at a
crossroads: either the protectionist pressures and measures of recent years

will continue to mount, or there rrust be a fundamental reversal of those
trends. Given the irrportance of that choice in affecting the future economic
growth and levels of well—being of all nations, of conference on Survival and

Growth in a Polycentric World Economy is certainly an appropriate place to

1

assess the extent to which protectionism has increased, and to evaluate the

prospects for future liberalization of the international economy.
As Adam Smith long ago pointed out, protectionist pressures are always
with us. That has been true throughout the period since the Second World War.

At

any point in time,

regime of any country,
"eqjilibrium' between

those for

and also

the forces

of the
and

world

at large,

of the prospects

can be viewed as an

demands for protection, on one hand, and

a liberal international trading order, on the

Analysis
start

the degree of liberalization of the trade and payments

other.

for a liberal international order must

therefore

by identifying the factors tending to increase protectionism and those

working toward free trade. That is the major thrust of this paper.

factors

A natural starting point, in Section 1, is a brief review of the

that led

to the

liberalization

and growth of the

international

economy that

was the hallmark of the 1945—1973 period. A second section contains an
analysis of the changes in pressures, and the resulting shifts in trade policy
and international economic relations in the period 1973 to 1986 from a macro-

economic perspective. The third section then focuses on some institutional

issues that have arisen as a result of trade and growth in the international
economy.

Their resolution may prove the key to resunption of a trend toward

liberalization. A final section provides an assessment of those factors in the

international economy that can be expected to be conducive to continued
liberalization of the system and those that seem likely to give rise to further

pressures for protectionism.

1. The Golden Years of Trade Liberalization: 1945 to 1973.

There is little doubt that, several hundred years hence, economic his-

torians will mark the third quarter of the twentieth century as being
phenomenal in two interrelated regards: 1). the period witnessed sustained

2

growth of the international economy at a rate far in excess of any rate earher experienced in any part of the globe for a coffparable time period; and 2)
the long and sustained boom was accoTpanied (and in part led) by a tremendous

liberalization in the economic relations among the developed countries.

It is now frequently forgotten that conteirporary observers in the late
1950s and early 1960s attributed the rapid growth of the first postwar years
to recovery, and regarded it as a transitory phenomenon. Instead, however, if

anything economic growth accelerated, and with it the international economy
became increasingly integrated. The late l940s witnessed the formation of the
European Payments Union, as Europe began to move away from strictly bilateral

clearing arrangements. During the early 1950s, convertibility for current account transactions rose dramatically and European and Japanese exports began

to grow rapidly. By the late l950s, the first round of rrjlti1ateral negotiations for tariff reductions took place, and currencies were becoming increasingly convertible. It is now often forgotten that as late as 1958 there
were only four countries that had declared convertibilty under Article VIII.
Further trade and payments liberalization aocoupanied growth throughout the

1960s and into the early 1970s. For present purposes, the iriportant question

is to identify those factors that contributed to the ilTpetus to liberalization. It must, of course, be recognized that the process, once started, had a

built—in momentum, as the rapid economic growth, resulting in part from
liberalization itself, made further liberalization possible. Not only did
growth make further liberalization easier, but in addition, some liberalization was a natural result

of increasing foreign exchange

earnings

which per-

mitted the authorities to remove remaining controls on current account trans—
actions.

But a nurrber of other pressures toward liberalization also facilitated the
process. The Treaty of Rome and the success of the Coninon

3

Market

in its early

phases resulted in de facto liberalization of trade.1
Some of it was the result

of

the continued trend toward lower real costs

of transport and conmjnications — itself a major force for increasing the integration of the international economy. In addition to all of these phenomena,

there was also the growth — gracijal at the beginning but accelerating in the
1960s —of the private international capital market, especially between North

nerica and Europe which was not only important in its own right but also
served as a further liberalizing factor in trade relations.
For understanding the momentum
to

toward liberalization, it

is

also irrportant

recognize the role of the United States. (t least until the 1970s, there

was a reasonably solid consensus that an open multilateral trading system was

in (merican political and economic self—interest. Partly because foreign
policy interests were regarded by some as being at least as important as
economic interests, the United States could assume something of a leadership

role in the international economy which was inportant in assuring the continued trend: (merican support for the European Payments Union, the Coiiiion

Market, and the successive round of multilateral tariff negotiations under
GTT at least facilitated these trade—creating activities and may have been a
necessary condition for them.

If one were to identify forces for liberalization in the 1950s and l960s,
then, they would include: 1) the political momentum of growth which in part
reciced political pressures against liberalization (which permitted the redjc—

1. This is one important illustration of the proposition that institutions do
significantly matter. See, for example Jean—Francois Hennart, The Political
Economy of Comparative Growth Rates: the Case of France, in Dennis C. Muelth ,l983, Yale University Press. Hennart
o f Gr
E c°nom
ler, ed. • T.h , P.l ..t
argues that the Common Market resulted in the neutralization of growth—
retarding common—interest organizations:..first, French sovereignty over some
important economic matters has been reduced. Second, the power of French organized interests has been adversely affected by the internationalization of
the French economy. (P. 189). .
.

4

tion of trade restrictions within the Camon Market to accelerate), 2) the
strong cooinitment of the United States to an open international trading system

and the willingness of that country to take a leadership role in the GATT and

in successive rounds of trade negotiations (notwithstanding the I½erican

Congress' refusal to ratify the International Trade Organization), 3) the
costs (which had been an almost constant source of increasing integration of
the international economy since the early iBOOs); and 4) rapid economic growth

itself, which both resulted from and fed the liberalization process among the
developed countries.

There were, however, some offsetting pressures toward increased protec-

tionism. Chief among these was the tendency among almost all developing

countries to adopt highly restrictionist trade and paents regimes, and to
attelTpt to insulate their domestic economies from the international market; by

the 1960s, this was strongly reflected in the declining shares of exports and

irrports in most developing countries' national incomes and

developing

countries' demands for a Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) and depar-

tures from the multilateral system. However, there were other protectionist
pressures.

The first nontariff measures restricting trade in textiles were

taken in 1955, with a precursor of the current Ntiltifiber Arrangement (NFA).2

In similar vein, the United States had opposed the inclusion of trade in
agricultural products within the GTT and the EC was developing policies which

were, at first, only mildly restrictionist but which would, later on,

become

highly so as European agriculture responded to these measures.

The extent of protectionist pressures during the 1950s and l960s, is often

forgotten. Writing in the mid—l970s, Charles R. Frank, Jr. could talk about

2. For a history and analysis of the MFA, see Donald B. Keesing and Martin

De ye
Wolf, Textile Quotas Aga
London,
1980,
Chapters
2
and 3.
tsr,

n ccY.n

5

tr s, Trade Policy Research Cen—

the "crisis of protectionismof the late 1960s.3 The most restrictionist piece
of legislation to gain serious support in the U.S. Congress was the Burke—
Hartke Bill in 1969, which was defeated in the House of Representatives by one
vote.
all

in the heyday of trade liberalization, it was

Thus, even

pressures worked toward liberalization, nor that

there

not

true that

was no opposition

to an open nultilateral trading system.
Table

1

provides some data on the growth of world trade and world (P. As

can be seen world real P is estimated to have increased 2.6 times in the two
decades following 1950, inplying an average annual rate of growth of 4.96 per-

cent and a rate of growth of per capita income of about 3 percent. This con-

trasts with economic historians' estimates that the most rapidly growing
countries in the nineteenth century experienced growth rates of about 1.5 per-

cent per capita, and of course, most parts of the world experienced little or
no growth during

that

century..4

During the same two decades from 1950 to 1970, the volume of world trade
expanded even more rapidly, increasing 4.8 times, for an average annual growth

rate of 8.1 percent. As already mentioned, most of that growth of trade was
concentrated in the OECD countries, as the shares of most developing countries

in world trade

were

falling.

Table 2 provides sumary statistics showing the relationship of trade
growth to world G\P growth. The first column provides estimates of the elas-

ticity of world trade in manufactures with respect to real growth of world
Q'1P. From 1950 to 1955, for exanple, world trade in manufactures grew 1.2 per-

cent for every percentage point growth in world trade. The overall volume of
3. Charles R. Frank, Jr., Fo re ign Tra de and Do me stic Aid , Brookings Institution, 1977.
4. See A. G. Kenwood and A. L. Loughheed, The Growth of the International

o

my 1 82 0— 19 80 ,

Allen

and Unwin, London, 1983, Oh.. 1.

6

trade, manufactures and primary cownodities, grew 1.14 percent for every per-

centage point of real growth. Those elasticities INCREASED throughout the
1950s and 1960s, reaching 1.32 for manufactures and 1.19 for total trade in

the 1965—70 period. Because an elasticity greater than 1 implies a rising
share of trade in &'IP, the rising elasticities are even more remarkable: ultimately they must decline and approach 1 (as all goods become traded, if not
before).
As

the data in Tables 1 and 2 bring out clearly, by the early l970s, the

international economy was vastly more open and integrated than it had been

twenty years earlier. It could fairly be said that successive rounds of
liberalization of trade had resulted in a situation in which tariffs were no

longer a significant barrier to trade in manufactures among the OECD
countries. At the end of the Kennedy Round, it was estimated that tariffs on
dutiable nonagricultural products averaged 9.9 percent in the Uni ted States,
8.6 percent in the European Community, 10.8 percent in the United Kingdom and

10.7 percent in Japan.5. Further cuts, negotiated during the Tokyo Round, and

scheduled to take effect during the 1980s, had left tariffs which were bound
at extremely low levels among the industrial countries.
As already mentioned, the European Community was not, in its early years, a

trade—diverting organization. Increases in agricultural productivity in the
early post—war years were probably economically efficient and thus it is

likely that agricultural protectioniii did not significantly worsen at least
until the late 1960s and possibly until the entry of the U.K. into the Common
Market.6 Trade in manufactures expanded rapidly both within Europe and between

5. Robert E. Baldwin, No nta

Institution,

f. D io rt io n of rite ma tio nal T ma de , Brookings

1970, P. 1.

Protectionism,
6. For an elaboration of this argument, see Anne 0. Krueger,
r—
.n
Exchange Rate Distortions, and Agricultural Trading Patterns, 1½iie
a 1 o A gr icu

ra . E

ics,

Decen*Der

1983.

7

Europe and the rest of the world

in response

to reduced tariff barriers.

2. Conflicting Trends:1973 to 1986
The inflationary

pressures and conodity boom of the early l970s

cul-

minated in the three—fold increase in the price of oil in the fall of 1973.
Until that happened, world trade had expanded rapidly. Uthough the major
trading nations had abandoned the Bretton Woods systein of fixed exchange rates

by the spring of 1973, that abandonment had come about because of the in—

tolerable pressures placed on countries attenpting to support their currencies

in the faóe of large international capital flows — themselves the result of
the integration of the private international capital market.

With the oil price increase, however,7

a new set of strains enveloped

the world economy. Between 1973 and 1980, for the most part, these tensions

were met primarily through accelerated inflation. Protectionist rhetoric grew
sharply, and world economic growth decelerated. Nonetheless, in an inflation—

ary environment, deceleration was not pronounced, as can be seen in Table 1:
between 1960 and 1970, world real GNP had increased by 69 percent; between

1970 and 1980 it rose by 47 percent. Likewise, the growth of world trade con-

tinued to outpace the growth of world GNP, rising by 63 percent over the
decade. cuthough slightly less buoyant than in the 1960s, the elasticity of
manufactured trade with respect to output remained well above one, while the

elasticity with respect to total world trade fell to 1.04 and 1.06, largely
reflecting a reduced volume of trade in oil.

s in the l950s and l960s, there were some pressures for increased
protection and some for more liberal trade. Noteworthy among those factors

7. It can plausibly be argued that had the exchange rate system not changed

prior

to the oil price increase, the magnitude of the effects would have been
far greater and more serious than it in fact was.

8

tending to integrate the international econoni' were the shift in policies of a
significant nunter of developing countries.8 Likewise, concern over inflation
rates was a significant consideration for many countries in their decisions
maintain

open

to

trade policies. Lower real costs of transport and co4wnunication

continued to serve as an integrating force. And, of course, the Tokyo Round of

trade negotiations insured further cuts in already—low tariff rates among the

incijstrial countries.
Offsetting

these

factors, however, some protectionist pressures inten-

sified. There were several renewals of the Niultifiber Arrangement,

ap-

each

parently on more restrictive terms than the last. A nurrber of other "Voluntary

Export Restraints, and an EC agricultural policy which was increasingly
protectionist in effect also reflected an increase in protectionist pressures.
In addition, pressures on iron and steel, shipbuilding, and other traditional

indjstries intensified, and, in the context of labor market rigidities and
high unemployment, these phenomena also increased protectionist pressures.

Underlying these intensified pressures were several identifiable factors:
1) higher unemployment rates in Europe and North nerica following the oil

price increase clearly increased the calls for protection; 2) associated with
higher unemployment was slower growth of real (P, which also contributed; and

3) the emergence of some developing countries as significant exporters of
labor—intensive manufacturers intensified pressures for adjustments in domes-

tic injstries which were naturally resisted.
These three sources of pressure were clearly interrelated: slower growth

was in part the cause of high unemployment, and, to the extent that

high

unemployment rates were structural, they contributed to slower growth.
8. See Anne 0. Krueger, F ore ign

ra de

egim es and Eco nc...n.c Dev .op

14P er aliz at io n A .t
a r..1. C .n e qu nc es, Ball i nger Press, 1978, Pp. 37—40 for
a discussion of this trend. See also World Bank, W
1987.

orld op me t Po

9

Likewise, the

penetration of developed countries' markets for manufactures

have resulted in less discomfort in an envirorinent of more rapid growth

would

and more rapidly expanding employment opportunities in the expanding ac-

tivities of the industrial countries.
However, it was difficult to provide meaningful nurrbers with which to
document the rise in protectionism. Indeed, in 1982, Helen Righes and I wrote
a paper in which we attempted to show that the data did not bear out the then—

prevalent view that protectionism had increased sharply, at least toward the

developing countries that were widely believed to be the target of most
protectionist measures. Je concluded that:
overwhelming impression is that

.the

of protection and the political

despite

all the public discussion

pressures for it, the effects

on imports of

manufactures from developing countries of protectionist measures were rela-

tively small.
that

it

higher

The rate

is difficult

in the

The

growth

nized

to imagine

market shares was sufficiently

that rates

these

Moreover,

would have been significantly

remarks are also borne out

by

the data in Tables

earlier

been, but it was

insofar

as world real GNP had grown

with

more slowly, there was further

that

was

maintenance of the open international trading system.l°

Helen Hughes and Anne 0. Krueger,

9.

recog-

earlier rates of growth of trade were probably unsustainable.

reason to accept the recorded figure as being well within the range

consistent

1

elasticity of trade in manufactures with respect to world GNP

was 1.14, somewhat lower than it had

that

great

absence of any protectionist measures.'9

In the aggregate
and 2.

of increase of LDC

Effects of Protection in Developed

Countries on Developing Countries' Exports of Manufactures', in Robert E.
nd Ev olu tio n o f Re ce nt T rad
Baldwin and Anne 0. Krueger, eds. • The St ruc

c

0

University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1984.

10. There is also a question as to whether the more rapid growth of services
trade might not tend to lower the recorded trade—GNP elasticities. For present
purposes, however, that question is not central to the argument and is therefore ignored.

10

Overall, the diagnosis on the period 1973—1980 ifust be that protectionist
pressures increased enough ring the late l970s to rece the momentum toward

a more liberalized international econorry but that protectionist forces had not

grown enough to lead on balance to a more restrictive international trading
system. While protectionist pressures had intensified enough to slow down the

thrust of liberalization, they were not strong enough in that period, at least

according to observable data,

to outweigh the continuing momentum of

liberalization.
Then came the events of the early 1980s: the antiinflationary response to

the oil price increase by the CCD countries, the worldwide recession of the
early 19805 and the inability of many developing countries to continue servic-

ing their debts in those circumstances, the appreciation in real terms of the

U.S. dollar and the large capital inflows into the U.S. in response to high
real interest rates associated with expansionary fiscal and tight monetary
policy.

It cannot be doubted that protectionist pressures intensified. The higher
unenployrnent associated with worldwide recession was one key factor. As always, the

tionist

slowdown in growth itself contributed directly to increased protec-

pressures. Likewise, in developing countries, the trend toward more

open trade and payments regimes of the l970s was halted and in many cases sig-

nificantly reversed as debt—servicing difficulties led to

qiantitative
restrictions on inports and the reintroduction of high barriers to inports.
And, as heavily indebted developing countries redjced their irrports from the
developed countries while sirrultaneously atterrpting to increase their exports,

that put further pressure on significant sectors of economic activity in the
developed countries. And, perhaps most significant of all, the real appreciation of the dollar put tremendous pressure on f½Terican exporting and irrçort—

competing interests, and led to wholesale reduction of support for an open

11

trading system in that important country.

Meanwhile, some protectionist tendencies, earlier at work, intensifed.
Chief among these was the impact of the EC agricultural policies; earlier, the
EC's protectionism had resulted in reduced imports of agricultural commodities

from the rest of the world; by the 1980s, those policies had resulted in such
large increases in output that the EC became an exporter. For many countries,

including the United States, this put considerable pressure on agricultural
exporting interests, and eroded yet another base of support f or free trade.

Even the early l9BOs was not entirely bleak, however. P few significant
developments did tend to result In pressures for increased trade liberaliza-

tion. First and probably most important, the technology of the "third industrial revolution' In information and communications system greatly increased the gains to be realized from an open international trading system.
Not only were time and distance costs of communication and transmission of in-

formation reduced, but the new technology permitted the geographic separation

of engineering and other highly skilled activities from physical production to
a much greater degree than was earlier possible. Simultaneously, the new tech-

nology increased the premium to be placed on large production runs of highly
specialized parts and components of complex equipment: a situation in which

the gains from trade are enormously greater, and in which firms which can
operate in more than one geographic region will have an enormous competitive

edge over firms constrained by protection to operate only in their home
markets.

Secondly, a nuirber of countries' policy—makers reversed past protectionist

policies, either because the need for greater efficiency was recognized or be-

cause the harsh realities of the world of the 1980s dictated such a reversal.
Notable and early starters among them were such diverse countries as Turkey
and New Zealand. While those early starts were to a considerable extent offset

12

by increases in protectionism elsewhere, they maintained their momentum toward

more liberalized and open economies, while other countries began moving in the
same direction by 1984 and 1985.

As the data in Tables 1 and 2 indicate, the growth of world G'IP slowed down

markedly in the early 19805. Despite that, the elasticity of world trade with
respect to world Q'W remained L03, while that for manufactured exports was

L12. Although
figjres

those

numbers are

not

as irrpressive as the 1.32 and 1.19

for 1965—70, they nonetheless are not consistent with the view that

the world had turned entirely away from the earlier open international
economy -

Some further evidence supporting this conclusion is contained in Table 3.
There, data used by Hughes and Krueger is updated. Focussing on developing

countries' exports (which have, after all, been a major focal point of protectionist pressures), the numbers clearly show that the developing countries'
shares of world exports of manufactures rose from 8.9 percent in 1980 to 11 9
percent in 1985. Except for the 1984-85 drop (and it might be argjed that 1984

was the abnormal year), there is little in the data to show any significant
retardation of the trend toward larger shares. While the increase might have

been larger in the absence of protectionist measures, an increase of about
one—third in share in a period of five years is hardly consistent with highly

restrictionist trade practices on the part of the iirporting countries. Given
theslow economic growth in the international economy and the turbulence of the

early 1980s, what is perhaps most remarkable is that developing countries'
share of world trade continued to grow, and that there continued to be an in-

creasing fraction of world output that entered into international trade.
It is evident, therefore, that the world economy is at a crossroads: either

the pressures for liberalization will increase, or the world will move away
from the open rrultilateral

trading system

13

that served it so well over the

1945—1980 period. Before assessing the pressures working toward and against

liberalization, however, a nurrber
portant bearing
3. Institutional

Thus
for

on the outcome, require examination.

rrangements

far,

pressures.

lateral

Prospects for Liberalization

and

discussion has

trade liberalization and
matter, and

institutions

institutionalissues,that may have an im-

of

for

taken

place in terms of conflicting pressures

protection. However, it was recognized that

that institutional arrangements strengthened some

The GATT itself was such an institution as the existence of rr&ilti—

trade negotiations, and

the

practice of binding negotiated tariffs,

was conducive to greater reductions in tariffs than might have been politically feasible unilaterally.
g

question

arises as to the efficacy of the present institutional structure

in restraining or intensifying protectionist pressures. On one hand, tariffs
are no longer the principal instrument of restrictive trade policy. Moreover,
a nurrber of countries have emerged as important international traders and it

can be

questioned whether the

techniques

of bilateral tariff negotiations

among a limited number of large trading blocks, the

institution which worked

so well for tariff reductions, is appropriate in today's world.

If one examines

the list

of issues

that trade

representatives have raised

for the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, many of them focus on areas where

the current international institutional arrangements seem less adequate than

they were for tariff negotiations.
Clearly the
distortions,

concerns which have led to the emergence

of

NTB5, agricultural

and protectionist measures against the NICs are to some degree

the outcome of the competing pulls of pressures for protection and for an
open trading system discussed

in Sections 1 and 2.

Economic growth and techni-

cal change have both served to increase the relative importance of trade in

14

services, another issue over which some degree of trade friction has arisen.

In all these cases, however, institutions matter. The institution of the
EC, when it was founded, was itself a force for liberalization. Likewise, the
successsive rounds of trade negotiations were an institution which restrained

countries from unilateral increases in tariff protection and simultaneously
made is relatively easier to resist protectionist pressures in particular sectors.

If institutions can be adapted to address the new issues reasonably

satisfactorily, protectionist pressures will have less force relative to those
for an open international economic order. In this section, the main institutional issues associated with the major

trouble areas

are

addressed.

3..l Nontariff Barriers
The success of the GPTT has been that tariff barriers to trade, at least

among most of the industrial countries, have been virtually eliminated. It

might be argjed that many of the nontariff barriers (NTB5) to trade in
manufactures have been put in place becausee tariffs were bound and countries

could not resort to their use under the G(TT. On that view, elimination of
tariffs has siirply induced countries to substitute less transparent for more
transparent means of protection.

However, it is at least equally plausible that, mercantilist though they

are in spirit, multilateral negotiations for reducing trade barriers are an
effective institutionredjcing the force of protectionist pressures.

The in-

stitutional arrangement of multilateral negotiations may in fact lead to a
recognition that protection of some activities is disprotection of others, and

lead to irrproved societal decision making as it forces recognition that
protecting some activities necessarily foregoes exports in other lines of
economic activity.
To

the extent

that

this latter view has validity, finding mechanisms to
15

permit multilateral negotiations to reduce nontariff barriers to trade assumes
urgency. For, to date, NTBs have been negotiated on a sector-by—sector basis.
For

exaJTDle, the FFA is negotiated separately from NIBs

in steel, which are

again treated separately from agricultural NIBs. fl-js far, countries have not

found means of putting NIBs on the table in a manner which would permit, for
example, reduction or removal of the MFA by the developed countries, reduction

in agricultural NIBs by Europe and Japan, reduction in quantitative restrictions on imports of capital goods by developing countries, and liberalization

of the NICs' markets for labor-intensive goods. Clearly, institutional arrangements which lead to sector—by—sector negotiations are more likely to be

protectionist than arrangements which result in negotiations among Ministers

responsible for an overview of the economy. And, to date, there seems little
basis to believe that "Codes" are an entirely satisfactory answer.

There are precedents, such as the phased liberalization of quantitative
restrictions under the European Payments Union and Japanese removal of QRs,

which could be used to devise across—the—board quantification of NTBs with a

view to negotiations as to the rate at which they would be eliminated.

To

date, however, there has been little effort aimed at developing such a framework. Failure

to do so will

surely strengthen

the

ability of protectionists in

the affected sectors to increase barriers to trade.
3.2 Barriers to Trade in Agriculture
If one were to attempt to identify trends in the world economy since 1970,

one important one would surely be the impact of increasingly restrictive
agricultural policies by Japan, the EC, other European countries, and to a
lesser extent the United States.

It can, of course, be argued that there are pressures for liberalization

within those countries that are protecting their agriculture. Chief among
16

these is that the budgetary costs of continued protection are rising. Secondarily, there are some indications that consumer awareness of the costs of

protection in agriculture is increasing.J' Possibly more important, however,

is the fact that there are a significant nurrber of countries, both developed

and developing, that are net exporters of agricultural coffrnodities. These
countries' goverrinents recognize the damage that agricultural protection is
inflicting

upon their own pro<±Jcers.

Because of

this, several institutional questions

agricultural issues

arise.

are outside the sphere of GATI. Their omission has cer-

rendered agricultural protection easier. A second

tainly

question is whether

means can be devised so that coalitions of countries can repre—

institutional

sent their interests jointly. That issue has ramifications far
ture, and is

3.3

A first is why

the

subject

beyond

agricul-

of Sect. 3.3

Bilateral Bargaining

The GAIT represented a highly satisfactory forum for trade negotiations
among the large trading

nations:

the U.S., the EC, EFTA, and Japan. However,

now that the large trading nations themselves are concerned with the trade
policies and practices of NICS and some of the

larger developing countries, it

is questionable whether the bilateral reciprocity
terized

techniques that charac-

the earlier rounds of trade negotiations will be quite as effective in

inckjcing the multiple—party, multiple—coiiodity negotiations that current
issues seem to
The

warrant.

absence of workable techniques for establisrnent of coalitions of ex-

porters renders their effective representation difficult. Although the so—
11. See Kym Anderson and Yojiro Hayami ,The 01 .c 1 E•poo my pf Ec ultu ra

Protection, Allen and Unwin, Australia, 1986, for an analysis of the factors
leading

to protection, especially in Japan.

17

called "Cairnes group of agricultural exporters has certainly made a start in
that direction,

the institutional problems

(which are probably mirrored by exporters
are

far from resolved..

of

their conon representation

of

textiles, clothing and

Even among the Cairnes

footwear)

Group, there are identifiably

separate interests between exporters of temperate and of tropical comodities,
for example.

There are, however, also comon interests among all agricultural

exporters. Existing arrangements seem conducive to emphasizing the differences
in interest, and to discourage coalitions of a kind which would provide incentives for acting in concert for cormion interests.

If institutional mechanisms could be devised for simultaneous bargaining
between,

say, agricultural exporters and

porters and importers,

importers, textile and clothing ex-

exporters and importers of electrical and electronic

equipment, and exporters and inporters of mechanical machinery and equipment,
it would certainly increase the

barrier

likelihood

that attractive

packages of trade

reductions could be devised. Nonetheless, as even this simple example

suggests, finding a mechanism to accomplish this is fraught with difficulty.
The "Cairnes Group' represented the first attempt

tion. The

problems associated with devising

to devise one

such coali-

arrangements conducive to coali-

tional representation seem formidable. Their absence, however, reduces
strength

of the

pressures

the

for liberalization in a polycentric world.

3.4. Trade in Services
In

the past, the majority of international trade consisted of the exchange

of physical goods among countries. These goods might have been produced with

services as irputs, but the technology of international trade was largely that
of transporting commodities from one country to another. That technology, in
turn, led to the use of tariffs and other measures which could be administered
at the border, when the good physically entered the country.

18

Services, and especially services of a type used as an

tion,

have

increased in ilTportance as

gineering skills, and

other

specialized finance,

lines of activity have developed.

revolution, currently in progress, will increase

To

a considerable extent, this trend in

toward

i rpu t

this

into proJc—

insurance, enThe informatics

tendency even further.

itself represents

a

presssure

liberalization. It is far more difficult (and it may prove far more

costly) to regulate international transmission of conuter designs and finan-

cial data than it is to relate shipments of coal and steel. However, there
may be national concerns (such as a desire to have at least a specified frc-

tion of television originating from national sources) which lead to some interventions, and these may not be border interventions.12

At the present

time, there are few satisfactory institutional arrangements for dealing with
these issues. As

the

informatics revolution proceeds, and as services grow in-

creasingly irrportant, the development of such mechanisms may prove increas-

ingly irrportant as a factor in oonjcing toward an open international trading
system.

3.5. Role of the Developing

Countries

Many of the issues discussed above — NIBs (and especially the r'FA), trade

in agricultural comiodities, and coalitional issues — are of irrinediate concern

to the developing countries. They need not be repeated here. There are,
however, two additional issues which deserve at least brief mention.

First, many developing countries have liberalized their trade and payments

regimes in their own self—interest, often in conjunction with ItF and/or World
Bank programs. At present, there appears to be no very satisfactory mechanism

12. See Richard Snape, Trade in Services, W orid Ba E .0 no m...c ev law , Vol,
2,No. 1, July 1987, for a full analysis of the issues that arise in connection
with service trade.

19

by which they can "get credit" for prior liberalization ctjring GPTT negotiations.. (lthough developing countries could, in the course of GTT nego-

tiations, bind their liberalized tariffs, a significant issue of credibility
might arise because

of

the

balance of

payments provisions and infant

exceptions to which they often resort. Mechanisms

tion on the
serve
would

as

part

The

recognizing liberaliza-

of developing countries as part of a the

new Round could

an additional inducement to trade liberalization on their part,

simultaneously

countries

for

industry

represent

a constructive move in bringing

and

developing

more into the GATT framework.

second issue is somewhat less obviously institutional in nature, but

nonetheless requries

tionally asked

mention. That is,

the developing

countries have tradi-

for, and received, special and differential treatment within

the GPTT. Thus, they have received preferential tariff treatment under the

Generalized System of Preferences from

most industrial countries, and have

focussed much more on that aspect than on their stake in the multilateral sys—

tern. If mechanisms could

portance of the

be devised which would more

multilateral

clearly reflect the

system to the developing countries, that

serve as a useful force toward maintaining an open trading system.

also be useful as a step

in

It

developing useful coalitional arrangements,

im-

might

could
and

in

bringing aid officials in developed countries to support trade liberalization
more strongly within their own goverments..'3

4. The Crossroads

s Sections 1 and 2 demonstrated, there are always pressures for protec-

tion and forces leading to a more open international economy. During the
13. For an analysis of some

of

the issues concerned with developing countries'

use of the balance of payments provisions of the GTT, see S. 3. (njaria,
Balance of Payments and Related Issues in the Uruguay Round of Trade
Negotiations, No rl d B an . Ep.n
Re wJuly 1987.

20

period up to 1973, the tendency toward a more open international trading and
payments system clearly was stronger than protectionist pressures,
they were

by no means absent.

From

creased enough in strength so that,

1973 to 1980,
for

protectionist

although

pressures

in-

the international economy as a whole,

there was something close to an impasse: protectioni may not have resulted

in increased protection, but

it

did increase

enough to dampen halt

the

trend

toward an increasingly open world economy.
During the early 19805, protectionist pressures clearly had the upper

hand: worldwide recession and the high unemployment that accompanied it
strengthened

commodity

protectionist forces in the developed countries,

prices and

problems

while declining

associated with heaW indebtedness

led many

developing countries to reverse earlier efforts to liberalize their trade and
payments regimes. The nerican support for a free trade position was significantly weakened by the strength of the dollar, which along with disinfla-

tion, put

considerable pressure on a large number of economic activities.

worldwide growth has resumed,

albeit

at rates

slower than those of the 19505 and l960s. Agreement has been

reached

on a new

The

round
and

recession is over, and

of

trade negotiations, aimed at liberalizing the international economy

addressing, in particular, some of the issues discussed in

Section 3.

It

can plausibly be argued that the antiinflationary programs of most of the OEOD

countries have been successful in reducing inflation, and that many of the

structural problems that afflicted some countries, especially in Europe, in
the 19705 and early l980s, appear to be approaching resolution.

On that reading, one could argue that if the pressures toward liberalization were once again on the ascendancy,

worldwide growth

would likely ac-

celerate which, in turn, would be conducive to further liberalization. The
"virtuous

circle" of liberalization—growth—liberalization which characterized

the 19505 and l960s might reappear.

2].

However, one of the critical qjestions is whether forces for liberalization
will increase in strength, or whether in fact protectionist pressures have not
so strengthened as to irrply that the open international trading system of the

l950s and l960s is a thing of the past. Clearly, no one can forecast the out-

come. ll that can be done is to identify those elements in the international
economy conducive to

liberalization, and those resulting in increased protec-

tionist pressures.
4.1 Factors Conducive to Renewed Liberalization

There are several factors conducive to renewed liberalization of the international economy.

By and large, they are underlying trends, and not the

sorts of things that make day—to—day headlines, but their power should not be

underestimated. Indeed, it can be argued that the failure of the world economy

to turn even more protectionist in the early 19805 can only be attributed to

the strength of these forces, and that what is really surprising, in light of
the severity of the recession and the rise in unerployment, is that the open
international trading system survived as well as it did.

P first factor, already mentioned, is the nature of technological change

currently

in progress. Both because economic

growth is

now taking place in

tivities with very low transport costs and because it is

focussed on

ingly specialized activities where large production runs of

ac-

increas-

highly specialized

items call for large, international markets, technological change appears to

be largely on the side of further liberalization of the international
economy. 14

14. In this regard, it is interesting to note that the strength and intensity
of opposition to the U. S. Pdministration's effort to prevent imports of

Toshiba's products to the U.S. market. Not only have consumer groups
protested, but a surprising number of large cmerican corporations have
publicly protested, claiming dependence on the importation of items they cannot obtain elsewhere at reasonable cost. See New York Times, Sept. 17, 1987,
P.

22

A second factor, perhaps eqjally strong, is the powerful pull of the idea
of an open international economy. Despite the numerous pressures for protec-

tion, most advocacy is couched in terms of "unfair practices of the other
country, "national defense, or other reasons which broadly accept the notion

of open international trade as the norm. The fact that the 1950s and l960s
were so prosperous and that trade liberalization was then occurring supports
and reinforces
The

this ideology.

third factor is the start of the Uruguay Round itself. Although the

fact that the Round has started by no means assures its success, it does im-

pose a certain discipline on the Contracting Parties. Should sufficient agree-

ment be reached for the Round to be deemed a success, that will further
diminish protectionist pressures.

There is also some basis for optimism with regard to agricultural protectionism. In part, optimism must be based on the very high, and rising, costs
of maintaining protection. Both because some of these costs are budgetary and

rising, and because the authorities are confronted with the painful choice
between passing on increasingly high costs to consumers and incurring ever-

greater budgetary costs, there is a basis on which to believe that agricultural protectionism must diminish of its own weight.

Fifth, there is the consideration that financial and trade linkages are now

so important that a significant polarization of the world economy will prove
highly unattractive to almost all goverrinents. The most visible manifestation
is linkage between developing countries' abilities to expand their exports and

their ability to maintain their debt service. In itself, that represents a
coepelling reason why many indjstrial countries must contain protectionism.
Other ties, represented by foreign direct investment, multinational firms, and
established trading relations, should not be underestimated.

Sixth, a number of developing countries are starting, or continuing, to
23

liberalize their trade and paents regimes unilaterally. In many instances,
these decisions are the result of a painful recognition of the degree to which

earlier, highly restrictionist, trade and paents regimes had been inimical
to growth.

Finally, to the extent that economic growth is resuming in Europe, and
that trade irrbalances between Japan and the industrial countries are somehow
remedied, pressures for protection should be diminished.

4.2 Pressures for Protectionism

Despite these factors tending toward a more open international economy,

there are a nurrber of factors tending in the opposite direction.

Perhaps chief among them is that the cocritment to an open multilateral

system has eroded, and that in itself reduces the discipline that earlier
helped

the

reduced support for an open

States.

part

of that

international trading

system

reinforce liberalization. An important

erosion

in

has been

the

United

Although the strength of the American dollar in the early l980s con-

tributed significantly to that reduction, the American current account
deficit, and the associated economic pressures, are
as the U. S. fiscal lirbalance remains
Many

likely to

persist. as long

sizeable.

observers believe that the American fiscal difficulties will not be

resolved without a period of slow growth or recession. If that view is correct, that would strengthen protectionist pressures both in the United States
and in the rest of the world. The United States is important both because of
her size

and

because of her traditional role, now largely abandoned, as

leader in the international economy.

Should the

United

States

a

experience

economic difficulties, that would certainly tend to brake economic growth in
the rest of the world, thereby strengthing protectionist forces there. Vuch

therefore depends on the American ability to resolve the current fiscal—

24

monetary inbalance without incurring high costs in terms of foregone output.
Thirdly • however, the absence of adequate institutional mechanisms that

would permit sinultaneous bargaining over a variety of NTBs, the development

of meaningful coalitions, and the other issues discussed in Section 3 clearly

does not portend well for the prospect that trade liberalization will once
again reach ascendency over protectionism. Whether it is this inadequacy or
the strength
tainly

of protectionist forces itself is difficult to evaluate, but cer-

a great deal hinges on the prospects for a successful conclusion of the

Uruguay Round. Just as success would almost certainly tip the balance toward

resuniption of liberalization of the international economy, failure would intensify protectionist trends. The absence of visible momentum in those nego-

tiations is therefore a factor itself tending toward the strengthening of
protectionism.

Fourthly, it is surely easier to forego the imposition of a tariff or quan-

titative restriction than it is to remove an existing one. Once in place,
protectionist measures tend to induce the formation of political interest
groups comitted to their maintenance. To the extent that the early 1980s witnessed the introduction and/or strengthening of protectionism, it will be more

difficult to roll back those measures than it would have been to move forwrd
in their absence.

Fifth, at present there is

no visible leadership to

push for liberaliza-

tion. The role played by the United States in the 1950s and 1960s has not been

assumed by any country or group of countries. While leadership alone cannot

determine the direction of trade negotiations, the presence of.a visible
country or group of countries representing the systemic interests in the international economy was clearly important in the l9SOs and l960s. The absence

of corresponding leadership in the mid—1980s will certainly weaken the effec-

tiveness of those pressures tending toward liberalization.

4.3. The Balance

Any attempt to assess the relative strength of the pressures toward
liberalization and protectionism

must necessarily involve

a great deal

of

judgment and in any event be subject to an extremely wide margin of error.
Certainly,there

are

pressures in both directions, and

means clear what the

conflicting

outcome will be. Because

both

tionism tend to be somewhat self—reinforcing, the
truly

it is by no

liberalization and
international

protec—

economy is

at a cross—roads.

Rather than attempt the impossible task of forecasting the outcome, it may
be

preferable to conclude by examining the likely shape of an increasingly

protectionist world. In such a world, it is probable that sizeable trading
blocks would

emerge:

the EC and EFTA would constitute one

convention

block,

incorporating

into their trading relations. Japan

many

of the

would

surely lead another block, consisting arguably of some Southeast Asian

LOME

countries

nations, possibly of Australia and
American countries. The

United

New Zealand,

and possibly some Latin

States would almost surely lead a trading group

containing some Latin American countries and Canada, with possibly some

others. Where the trading ties of the Middle East, the Indian Subcontinent,
and China
Even

would be is purely speculative.

attempting to imagine the economic and

political

ramifications of such

a polarization is enough to lead to a conviction that such an outcome would be

vastly inferior, from the viez>oint of each of these

blocks, to an open inter--

national trading system. Those persuaded of this can shift the likelihood of

such an outcome if the institutional issues, discussed in Sect. 3, can be
satisfactorily addressed.

26

Table 1.

Growth of World Exports and Real GDP, 1950—1985

Volume of Exports 1970100
griculture Manufactures

Total

Value of Exports
World
(billions of dollars) Real GNP
61

38

93
129
187
312

49

1950

42

16

1955
1960

50

25

21
31

1970

68
85
100

37
58
100

44
65
100

1975
1977

106
118

143
169

127
148

1979

132

188

163

875
1125
1635

1980

141

199

163

1989

135
145
147

1981

147

1963

149

144
146
152
150

207
204

164

1982

160

1844

148

214

165

150

239

179
185

1808
1907

1922

163

1965

1983

1984
1985

252

Source GAIT, International Trade 85—86 Table Al.
Note: Exports cover merchandise exports only

59
77
100
121

157

Table 2. Elasticity of Trade Volume with Respect to GNP Growth
Manufactures
1950
1955
1960
1965

to
to
to
to

Total

1955
1960
1965
1970

1.21
1.23

1.20
1.32

1.14
1.18
1.14
1.19

1970 to 1975
1975 to 1980
1980 to 1985

1.18

1.04

1.14

1.06

1.12

1.03

Sources Derived from Table 1.

Developing Countries' Exports and Shares of Major Markets
1963 to 1985
Total Exports

Exports of Manufactures
To Developed World Share of DC

Mfd. Imports
Countries
(billions of dollars) (percent)

3.9

To Developed World
Countries

(billions of dp1lr_sjprcoL

1

4

1979

53

86

8.5

1980

o3

too

8.9

23
83
299
356

1981
1982
1983

67

1984

96

1985

97

116
114
124
147
149

9.9
10.2
11.3
12.6
11.9

373
318
295
314
295

1963
197.

2

67
77

3

6.6

Share of
DC Imports

Source: GAIT International Trade 85/86. Table A3.

20.6

32
110
414

555

19.2
25.3
27.9

545
480
447
465
440

27.7
26.0
24.7
24.4
22.9

