                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       COST SHARING IN INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR PRECISION MEDICINE

                                       Mark V. Pauly

                                     Working Paper 24095
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w24095


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017




I thank Thomas Buckingham for superb research assistance. The views expressed herein are those
of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mark V. Pauly. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Cost Sharing in Insurance Coverage for Precision Medicine
Mark V. Pauly
NBER Working Paper No. 24095
December 2017
JEL No. I11,I13,O32

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper describes current pattern of insurance coverage for precision medicines and,
especially, companion diagnostics and explores what coverage would improve efficiency. We
find that currently coverage is common for tests and treatments with clinical acceptance used at
high volumes but is haphazard across both private insurers and Medicare for precision medicines
in general. Analysis of the case of homogenous patient preferences finds that discovery and use
of the test that converts an ordinary drug into a precision drug can either increase or decrease total
spending, and might call for full or no coverage of test and treatments. Heterogeneity in marginal
benefits from testing and treatment can call for partial coverage. Finally, varying threshold levels
for diagnostic test results can lead to a demand curve to test and treatment that calls for partial
cost sharing. Numerical examples and case studies of several test-treatment combinations
illustrate these points.


Mark V. Pauly
Health Care Management Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
208 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu
Cost Sharing in Insurance Coverage for Precision Medicine

Mark V. Pauly


Introduction.


       Many medicines (and other treatments) work well for some otherwise apparently

similar patients but not others. One of the factors known to determine effectiveness of a

treatment is the genetic makeup of the patient or the disease. While physicians for centuries

have honed the skill of determining which patients are good candidates for which treatments,

the advent of “precision medicine” adds a tool in the form of a genetic test to predict

effectiveness (or its absence) of a treatment regimen. The main advantages of such a test are

avoiding the cost, side effects, and false hope for those for whom the treatment is unlikely to

work, while at the same time reassuring those willing to go through the treatment that they

will ultimately benefit. The widely-touted promise is that testing probably will both lower

total spending (on the specific treatment whose effectiveness can now be predicted) and

improve health outcomes by avoiding specific treatment side effects for those for whom it

would have been ineffective (Aspinall and Hamermesh, 2007). But are cost reduction and

outcome improvements sufficient reasons for or necessary outcomes of generous insurance

coverage of tests? More specifically, what is the optimal pattern of insurance coverage for

tests and related treatments? It may well be efficient to have some cost sharing to discourage

low value uses of testing and treatment, but such potentially improved incentives trade off

against less protection from financial risk. The economic theory of optimal insurance

coverage (Pauly 1968; Zeckhauser 1970) shows how to characterize the ideal tradeoff in

simple cases, but what is ideal in this more complex case?



                                                                                                  2
       Some insurance coverage is now near universal in the United States but insurance

appropriately does not fully cover everything a physician or patient might think useful.

Coverage is incomplete, with sometimes substantial patient cost sharing (as high

deductibles, coinsurance, or copayments), both to avoid insurer administrative cost, and to

inhibit inefficient stimulation to low or no-value use. Coverage may also wholly exclude

some products and services judged experimental or overpriced. In this paper, I will outline

some theoretical models of the ideal role of insurance in such settings with genetic testing

and a specific treatment whose effectiveness is predicted by the test. I will contrast those

theoretical prescriptions with what appears to be current practice in public and private

insurance coverage.

       Coverage of the specific treatment will not usually be a major issue in this paper,

though proportional cost sharing of the cost of specialty drugs can add up, and high

deductibles usually apply to all tests and treatments. However coverage of testing will be an

interesting question, in part because some testing is still experimental, some insurances do

not cover purely diagnostic tests at all, and many insurance deductibles (including the most

popular plans on exchanges) will leave tests uncovered until the deductible is exceeded.

Coverage decisions by insurers involve both the binary decision whether to cover a test

and/or treatment at all (presumably in part as a function of evidence on cost effectiveness),

and the continuous question of what level of positive cost sharing to impose, given that

there is to be some coverage some of the time. The pricing of tests, the alternatives to testing,

and the effect of testing on the pricing of treatment will all be important.


An Important digression.


       We will explore later in the paper the pricing of test and treatment when either or

                                                                                                    3
both markets are not competitive (as opposed to prices resulting in P=MC). However, we

should note here that it is very likely that the price of the treatment, especially if it is a drug

treatment under patent protection and/or FDA exclusion, is likely to exceed marginal cost by

a wide margin. This means that if we use price rather than marginal cost in the benchmark

model, we are much more likely to find the test is “efficiency” improving from an insurer or

consumer perspective because it helps to avoid a treatment which, in addition to possible

side effects, carries a very high price offset. However, this saving is not true saving from a

societal welfare perspective because (at least in the short run and without more complexity)

the financial benefit from reduced spending on precision medicines to the insurer or the

patient substantially overstates the benefit to society since the avoided price is well above

the value of the resources saved. Pricing of drugs above marginal cost can engender a

significant overuse of precision medicine tests even for treatments with small side effects,

while overpricing of proprietary genetic tests can lead to underuse.

Heterogeneity.


        In the general theory of optimal coinsurance, the key determinant of the level of cost

sharing for a product or service, if it is to take on a value between zero and one, is the shape

of distribution of marginal benefits (otherwise known as the demand curve). If patients are

identical, with identical marginal benefits from care and identical disutility from side effects

of testing (so there are perfectly horizontal demand curves for testing and treatment for

everyone at risk), and if the population at risk can be defined and limited precisely, we either

get optimal coverage being 100% or zero (Pauly, 2015). We will first treat that case,

equivalently one of a representative person or a world of identicals, before introducing

heterogeneity.

                                                                                                      4
       Here we assume that physicians provide the insurer with all the clinical information

they know, while patients retain private information on the value they place on health

outcomes (e.g., as measured by QALYs). With that assumption, it is variation in the

monetary value attached to expected outcomes that can generate negatively sloped demand

curves. These values are known by the patient-consumer, but not by the insurer. The

conventional Quality Adjusted Life Years (QALY) measure already assumes away

differences across subjects in the value of length of life (from successful treatment) versus

quality of life (from treatment side effects), but there is considerable reason to believe that

the monetary valuation of a QALY varies across people, based on both income and tastes. It

is this variation that will be our primary focus as a rationale for insurance to contain partial

cost sharing.

       The cases just discussed furnish the primary and most consequential reason for

“interior” cost sharing of tests or treatments in precision medicine, but there are some other

possible rationales. If the cost of either test or treatment is very low, the administrative

expense of paying claims may not justify the benefit of a tiny reduction in risk. If the plan has

standard coinsurance rates that it applies across the board to categories of clinical services in

the interest of administrative simplicity, it may choose to do so for precision medicine tests

and treatment rather than make coverage even more complex than it really is. We also

abstract from the problems raised by Filipova-Neumann and Hoy (2014) that a test may

change subsequent incentives to engage in preventive behaviors (like monitoring through

other tests). Finally, if patients underestimate the benefits of tests or treatment, there may be

a case for value-based cost sharing (Pauly and Blavin, 2008) to encourage the use of

undervalued services.


                                                                                                    5
Situations and solutions.


       While positive cost sharing can improve efficiency by reducing moral hazard in the

heterogeneous-hidden information case, the extent to which it will do so depends on how

responsive demand is to such charges. The classic optimal insurance proposition is that, the

more responsive is use to insurance coverage, the higher the ideal level of cost sharing. We

will show that this proposition still applies to genetic and genomic testing, but it is more

complicated than usual.

       This proposition becomes more complex because of interrelated demands such as

we have here—insurance design needs to take into account both price responsiveness of

demand for tests and price responsiveness of demand for treatment. But one baseline

finding is that if neither testing nor treatment responded to cost sharing and the

combination always has net benefit greater than the threshold value, there would be no

point in any cost sharing—just make care free. Later we will see what empirical evidence

we have on this question.




Insurance and pricing.


       Often the seller of test or treatment has patent protection or other source of market

exclusivity and is inclined to charge the monopoly price (which of course can much

exceed marginal cost). What are the issues in optimal insurance design when either or both

markets are not competitive?



                                                                                               6
        There are three possible (non-competitive) situations here with respect to IP

protection: (1) both test and treatment are patented; (2) testing is competitive but treatment is

monopolized; (3) testing is monopolized but treatment is competitive. In case (1) there is

also the issue of whether the same firm holds both patents.

        If either the test or the treatment is monopolized alone, the equilibrium total price

will be the same, since the monopoly rent can be collected at either stage of the production

process, ignoring game theory issues. Adding monopoly control of one component when the

firm already controls the other component will not add to profits since the monopoly price

can only be collected once. If the firms are separate, the outcome is ambiguous and depends

on bargaining.

        The profit maximizing combination price for test and treatment when sold by a

single firm is thus different from that if the two monopoly firms are separate. Compared to

the absence of a test, the price of a treatment will increase when the test becomes available

because its marginal effectiveness will increase. For example, if there is a 50-50 chance the

treatment will work but the test picks out the half of the population where it will work, the

treatment price will at least double (Pauly, 2009). This increase in markup will also increase

the bias in favor of testing as noted above. While a drug firm may not increase its price to

match increased effectiveness if a test becomes newly available, its price for the specific

treatment when a companion diagnostic already exists will reflect that value. There will also

be an addition to the total price to reflect the ability to avoid side effects of useless treatment

for those who test negative. Compared to the price of a single firm monopolizing both test

and treatment, the price under bilateral monopoly will be higher unless the seller of the

treatment subsidizes the price of the test.

                                                                                                      7
       How do these pricing considerations feed back into the design of cost sharing in

insurance, especially if prices sometimes vary?

       The most important consideration here is the proof by Gaynor, Haas-Wilson, and

Vogt (2000) that consumers cannot be made better off by monopoly pricing of insured

services if insurance markets are competitive. While prices higher than marginal cost will

discourage the use of care under a given level of proportional coinsurance, insurance firms

will set coinsurance rates with competitive pricing of products and services that always

improve welfare compared to that under “ideal” coinsurance with monopoly pricing (and

higher benefit payouts). As a general conclusion, the dollar amount of cost sharing will be

higher under monopoly and may discourage both test and treatment.

       The other issue is whether monopoly pricing may make the entire therapeutic

approach not cost effective from the perspective of an insurer with customers who attach

lower value to outcomes (and who must pay the price charged, not the marginal cost). The

answer seems clearly affirmative and it is unclear if there is an obvious work-around this

overpricing.


Current patterns of insurance coverage for genetic tests and related treatments.

       There is considerable variation across clinical conditions and types of insurance

coverage—both the gross prices paid for genetic tests and genetic counseling, and for the

prices of treatments whose selection depends on test results. In this discussion, I will

focus primarily on tests and treatments for cancer, but will also comment on some broader

patterns.

       Prices of common genetic tests have generally been dropping as the technology for


                                                                                              8
genetic tests has become faster and more accurate (though new expensive tests are also being

introduced). The price of a test obviously depends both on what genetic variation is being

explored and how extensive a description of the genome in terms of genetic variants is sought.

Simpler genetic tests can now be obtained for as little as $200-$500 for common tests targeted

at common parts of the genome, up into thousands of dollars for tests for all variants and all

modifications.

       In addition to tests per se, often genetic counseling is either required or useful. The

cost of counseling has not been falling and generally exceeds $200 for a single test for a single

treatment. The prices of treatments also vary greatly, depending on type and payer. The

more restrictive intellectual property protection and the fewer close substitutes available, the

higher the price.

       Both the maximum reimbursement and the willingness to restrict use varies across

insurers. Private sector insurers have the ability both to negotiate the prices for tests,

counseling, and treatments, and (less commonly) to refuse to cover or only partially cover

except on favorable terms. Some Medicaid managed care carriers also have this process.

Traditional Medicare, in contrast, cannot negotiate prices for Part D drugs, can only set

administrative prices for Part B drugs, and is required to cover all FDA approved drugs when

they are clinically appropriate. It has somewhat more flexibility in coverage of genetic tests,

and different Medicare carriers seem to have different policies as to which they will cover and

how. Part D (oral drugs) are subject to Part D cost sharing. Part B specialty drugs in

medicine can be subject to coinsurance (and in Medicare Advantage plans as well), usually at

20-30% if it is required. Most beneficiaries buy Medigap coverage to offset patient cost

sharing.

                                                                                                   9
       Private insurers usually cover genetic tests under the same cost sharing provisions

(deductibles and coinsurance) as they apply to other tests. Thus cost sharing can vary across

carriers and across employer customers within insurers. If genetic tests are designated clinical

laboratory tests, they are often covered in full. Full coverage is not required for all tests for

screening or prevention.

       There is some consistency in coverage patterns. The ACA requires zero coinsurance

for BRAC tests (two genes only) for women with breast cancer for testing and counseling.

The more common genetic tests (e.g., for Lynch Syndrome in colon cancer) are generally

covered, though cost sharing may still vary based on overall cost sharing provisions in a

policy. More rare and more experimental tests are subject to enormous variation, from full

coverage (e.g., as part of a trial) to no coverage at all for a test deemed experimental by

insurers. Beyond these obvious cases, there has been considerable variation in coverage of

testing across insurers and over time.

       There have been a few surveys of insurers asking about their testing coverage policy.

Results generally show that in the 2000-2010 decade, coverage generally became more

available for tests that entered routine clinical use. A survey in 2013 by Graf et al found that

77% of large insurers indicated coverage of at least one genetic test. A 2016 review

sponsored by the Commonwealth Fund of tests for women found only 15% (of 109 insurers)

excluded coverage of common genetic tests even when they were not required by law. We

examined more recent website data from large insurers (Table 1) and found similar patterns of

coverage in principle for tests accepted as clinically useful. As indicated there, all large

insurers (except for Medicare) cover genetic testing in general. But as the table shows,

coverage for specific tests is irregular. In addition, websites tell us that the amount of cost

                                                                                                    10
sharing varies with policy cost sharing provisions (deductibles and coinsurance) which

themselves vary widely; for this reason they do not give an average amount of cost sharing.


                                             Table 1
                  Website Coverage Information: 30 Large Private Insurers*


                    Genetic         Genetic         BRCA 12        Oncotype Dx         Lynch
                    Testing        Counseling                                        syndrome
  Covered             30              26                27              25              24
 Not covered           0               0                 0               2               0
     Not               0               4                 3               3               6
 mentioned


                                *Enrollment ≥ 2 million persons



        We requested internal analysis of a large claims data base from a nationwide

commercial insurer that describes cost sharing for genetic test codes over calendar year 2016

linked to the drugs Erbitux (for colon cancer), Keytruda (for lung and other cancers) and

Herceptin (for breast and ovarian cancer). (The tests were KRAS (for Erbitux and Keytruda),

PDL-1 and EFGR (for Keytruda), and FISH (for Herceptin). The claims data also includes

these tests used for purposes other than as companion diagnostics.) The claims data indicated

that usually tests were fully covered by insurance (65% of claims) and that, among those

claims where cost sharing was positive, its average level ranged between $100 and $200

depending on the test, with the median likely below the mean. Thus high cost sharing for the

tests in precision medicine is not typical, but cost sharing still may matter because there is

other evidence that relatively low levels of cost sharing for drugs can still have a decided

impact on quantity compared to free care (Hillman et al, 1999)



                                                                                                 11
       Over time, as more genetic tests have been clinically linked to therapy with specific

drugs, Medicare coverage has become more extensive (Medicare.gov, 2016). There is

apparently still some variation across carriers, but most carriers now follow the “Palmetto” list

of approved genetic and genomic tests. Medicaid coverage is more variable across state

programs, with explicit coverage specification often not publically accessible. The ACA

required that BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 tests and counseling be covered in full, but that is

virtually the only regulatory regularity (Kaiser Foundation, 2015).

       Insurers explain their determination of coverage by appeal to the concept of “medical

necessity.” One large insurer (CIGNA, 2017) defines “medical necessity” in the context of

genetic tests as having three requirements:

1)     The test is FDA approved and/or performed in a CLIA-approved lab.

2)     The test is medically necessary for the diagnoses indicated.

3)     Results of the test will directly impact clinical decisionmaking.

       However, different insurers have different interpretations of these criteria (especially

the second one). In some cases, as in the case of testing for BRCA, there is “a clear algorithm

for whether or not to test {for BRCA mutations},” and sometimes testing is required by the

FDA for use of a treatment, but in other cases pathways and protocols are unclear.

       As genetic test prices have fallen, the willingness of insurers to cover them has risen—

an example yet again of the vacuity of the concept of medical necessity (Ho, 2017). In

addition to tests per se, often genetic counseling is either required or useful. The price of

counseling has not been falling. Some insurers require genetic counseling before approving

testing or treatment (CIGNA, 2017)

                                                                                                  12
       The prices of cancer treatments also vary greatly, depending on type and payer.

Generally a treatment whose selection and use might be determined to be a test is in the

(wide) range of $50,000 to $500,000, although some oral and generic treatments sell for less

depending on patents and FDA exclusions. The more restrictive intellectual property

protection and the fewer close substitutes available, the higher the price.

       There is no information on the demand elasticity for genetic tests or counseling. The

demand elasticity for cancer treatment has been estimated to be in the range of -0.01 to about -

0.2. The demand elasticity for drugs in general is said to range from 0.2 to 0.6. Coinsurance

for specialized cancer drugs is common in Medicare Advantage and Part B plans unless the

person has purchased Medigap insurance.

       Estimates of demand elasticity for specialty drugs cover the range from 0.01 to 0.2 – a

wide range but one consistent with low demand elasticity (as deductibles or copayments). The

theory of optimal coinsurance suggests strongly that in such cases, high cost sharing is not

optimal. Explanations of insurer behavior in imposing high cost sharing in a desire for higher

profits or lower premiums are quite unsatisfactory, because such provisions make insurance

unattractive and thus reduce demand. Higher cost sharing may be a risk selection device,

required precisely to discourage cancer patients from enrolling because their higher risk is not

adequately offset by risk adjustment payments. Medigap insurance may also play a role in

offsetting the effects of Medicare cost sharing, and diminishing any cost containment effects

of Medicare cost sharing in curtailing moral hazard.


Relationship to our Analysis.

       Our theoretical analysis generally supports the view that cost sharing for current


                                                                                                13
genetic tests, many of which appear to be cost effective, should be low. The ultimate

argument in favor of coverage with lower cost sharing for tests and treatment, in either private

or public sector, must be based on cost and effectiveness results. If the treatment, and

therefore coverage of them, can be shown to generate high net value, employers can ensure

profits by offering better benefits and Medicare and Medicaid can enhance social value. The

empirical work needed to document demand elasticity and marginal clinical effectiveness

relative to cost of much of precision medicine remains to be done, as does analysis of the

pricing choices in the face of government-enforced market power through the patent system

and FDA grants of exclusivity. But these goals can in principle be accomplished and result in

some lives saved for moderate spending.



Some Simple Theory.

       We now provide a brief sketch of the theoretical possibilities for cost and health

outcomes with and without genetic testing being possible. This discussion will characterize

situations in which the use of testing is or is not undertaken in an efficient end-state outcome.

It will also describe the potential changes in patient behavior from a setting when no testing is

available. Many scenarios are possible in theory, but some of them will be ruled out for

institutional reasons. For example, in many situations, FDA regulations rule out the use of an

approved drug treatment unless testing is first done.

Notation and description:

π = probability of being in high risk population

p = probability of genetic mutation, given a person is high risk


                                                                                               14
Let:
Β = voluntary increase in marginal benefits from successful treatment T =
(ΔQALYS)M(VQALY)


ΔT

(where VQALY is the assumed uniform monetary value of a quality adjusted life year and

(ΔQALYS)M is in the increase in QALYs from successful treatment).

This increase in benefit occurs with probability p.




L = side effects of treatment = (ΔQALYS)S(VQALY)
                                          ΔT
Where (ΔQALYS)S is the decrease in QALYs from the treatment side effects.

This reduction in benefit occurs with probability one.

Pt = Ct = price or marginal cost of specific treatment

Pg = Cg = price or marginal cost of genetic test plus counseling

Cf =marginal cost of treatment for future illness for patient with positive result (present

discounted value)

Before the test exists, two behaviors are possible (in the world of identicals):

Case A

     (1) p(B+Cf) – L > Pt → cover treatment and expect all to be treated

Case B

     (2) p(B+Cf) – L < Pt → do not cover treatment and expect none to be treated



                                                                                              15
When the test becomes available, the marginal conditions are:

Cover test and treatment if

      (3) p(B+Cf – L)> Pg + pPt

and

      (4) (1-p) Pt+L > Pg

         In case A, if (4) holds, condition (3) will hold as well. Since the treatment is chosen

even when there is a “cost” of treating and causing side effects for those who do not test

positive, it must be optimal to treat if it becomes optimal to test, that is, if the avoided cost and

side effects for those who do not test positive are greater than the price of the test.

         In case B, it is optimal to cover test and treatment if conditions (3) and (4) hold.

However, condition (4) may hold (given treatment, it is optimal to test) but condition (3) may

not. This can either happen because the treatment does not provide net benefit for those who

test positive or the treatment does provide net benefit but that benefit is not large enough to

cover the cost of the test.

         What is the impact of availability of the test on treatment volume and total cost? In

case A, treatment volume falls as the test winnows out those who do not test positive and

otherwise would incur treatment cost. Total cost will fall if the expected cost savings from

not treating those who do not test positive exceeds the cost of the test, but costs need not fall

even if treatment volume falls if the value of avoided side effects is large and that test is

expensive.

         Treatment volume rises in case of risks in Case B if the two conditions hold, because


                                                                                                   16
the test avoids the unnecessary disutility and treatment cost for those who would not benefit

and that will clear the way for those who would benefit to use the treatment. However, if

either of the marginal conditions does not hold (the treatment is not worth it to those who test

positive or the test costs more than the avoided adverse consequences for those who would not

test positive), then the availability of the test will not affect the optimal outcome: it should still

be no treatment along with no testing.

In these cases, what should be the optimal level of insurance coverage?

    1) If (a) testing provides more benefits (in terms of avoided cost of treatment and the

        value of avoided side effects of treatment) than its price and (b) the combination of

        testing and treatment provide more benefits (in terms of net QALYs gained and

        avoided future treatment cost) than the sum of the price of testing and the expected

        price of treating those who test positive, then both testing and treatment should be

        fully covered. Those for whom the expected side effects of treatment (e.g.,

        prophylactic colectomy) outweigh the benefits will not opt for testing and treatment

        even at a zero user price.

    2) Treatment should be fully covered but not testing If condition (a) does not hold but the

        benefits from treatment in terms of expected net QALYs gained from treating all—

        expected value of QALYs gained from treatment plus avoided future treatment costs

        from those who would have tested positive minus QALYs lost from side effect of

        treating all — is greater than the price of treatment.

        If both (a) and (b) do not hold, neither test nor treatment should be covered.


Going From Homogeneity to Heterogeneity.



                                                                                                   17
       If consumers differ in the values they place on QALYs but are identical in terms of

expected clinical outcomes, there can be variation in the cost effectiveness of treatment and

testing, or treatment alone, around a mean measure of net benefits per person (value of net

QALYs gained minus incremental spending on treatment and testing). The mean cost

effectiveness ratio for alternative strategies combined with the shape of the distribution of

these values will determine whether there should be insurance with partial cost sharing,

assuming uniform financial risk aversion. In what follows, we provide both some illustrative

hypothetical examples of different possible scenarios and insurance coverages and then

discuss ideal insurance coverage from some examples of genomic testing to determine the

effectiveness of treatment. To focus on the effect of testing, we assume that insurance

coverage of the specific and expected future treatments is either 100% or zero, and consider

positive cost sharing for testing and counseling. We first present two polar case examples of

the cost impact of that availability (Tables 2 and 3).




                                                                                                18
Table 2


EXAMPLE 1: RARE CONDITION


Cost of test: $4,000


Probability test is positive: 0.1


Cost of specific treatment conditional on positive test: $50,000


Present discounted value of future treatment costs without treatment: $10,000


Case A: Treat all


Total cost/person (in $ thousands): 50-(0.1) (10)=49


Case B: Treat none


Total cost/person: (0.1) (10) = 1


Test and treat


Total cost/person: 4+(0.1) (50-10) = 8


Incremental costs: TT vs. Treat all: -41


Incremental costs: TT vs Treat none: +7


Implications for efficiency and insurance coverage


If initial state is treat all, do testing since it is a dominant strategy: lower cost and the same outcome unless

there is high disutility to treatment. Insurance coverage of testing should be 100% if treatment is cost

effective. If initial state is treat none, the efficient strategy depends on the value of net benefit from treatment

compared to incremental cost of $7,000 per person at risk. Either cover the test 100% or not at all.


Treat none 0.1 (B-L)
                                                                                                      19
Table 3These two numerical examples indicate that the potential for genetic testing to lower q


EXAMPLE 2: COMMON CONDITION


Probability test is positive IS 0.95


CALCULATIONS FOR EXAMPLE 2, COMMON CONDITION


Price of test: $4000


Probability test is positive: 0.95


Cost of specific treatment conditional on a positive test: $50,000


Present discounted value of future treatment costs without specific treatment: $10,000


Case A: treat all


Total cost per person: 50-(0.95)(10)= 40.5


Case B: treat none


Total cost/person: (0.95) (10) = 9.5


Test and treat:


Total cost per person: 4+ (0.95)(50-10)=42

Incremental cost: TT vs treat all =1.5


Incremental cost: TT vs. treat none= 32.5


Then cost of treating all (40.5) is less than cost of test and treat (42); gain from testing only if disutility

from treating those who would have tested negative is larger than $1500. There is a much larger

incremental cost compared to treating none but a larger gain in outcomes: ICER is unaffected.



                                                                                                          20
        These two numerical examples indicate that the potential for genetic testing to lower

cost depends on the frequency in the population at risk of the condition the test will detect. If

the condition is rare but takeup of the treatment is high, the test will reduce total costs because

it will eliminate expensive treatment of no benefit. Conversely, if the condition is common

but the takeup of the treatment is low (because of fear of side effects), testing may lower cost

if the alternative to treatment is costly future care. In these dominance cases, full coverage of

testing will be optimal. In both cases, testing will be cost reducing if the price of testing is

low relative to the (net-of-future-costs) price of treatment.

        But there can be cases in which testing adds to cost yet improves outcomes. Then the

issue is the magnitude of the improvement in outcomes (net of any side effects) and the value

attached to that improvement. Cost effectiveness results depend as well on the threshold

value attached to health outcomes. If it is high, full coverage for testing may be optimal, but

if it varies across the population at risk partial cost sharing will be ideal.

        To estimate the net change in utility from raising cost sharing in such “interior” cases

from zero to some positive fraction we need to calculate two effects of the change. One effect

is that consumers are exposed to greater financial risk because their out of pocket payment

now becomes positive. The monetary amount of that out-of-pocket payment for this high-risk

population is the volume of tests (compared to zero cost sharing) times the out of pocket

percentage. The risk premium that comes from the risk of incurring this part of the cost of the

test is assumed to be some proportion of the incremental expected out of pocket cost. One

way to approximate that additional willingness to pay to avoid the risk of having to pay the

designated amount out of pocket is to observe the marginal loading on insurance at which

many are willing to buy coverage. We assume that the marginal insurance buyer will

                                                                                                   21
purchase individual insurance with a loading of 33% or less.

       The other component is the marginal reduction in the welfare cost of moral hazard

associated with this change in insurance coverage. In terms of Figure 1, where the demand

curve is the (net) marginal value of testing, it is the rectangle ABCD plus the triangle DCE,

which (in the case of 0.3) coinsurance equals [ 0.7 (net change in expected cost) (change in

volume) + ½(0.3) (Net change in cost) (change in volume)].

Figure 1




We now present an example, using the data from table 3, of optimal and partial cost sharing:




                                                                                                22
Table 4


INCREMENTAL COST WITH TESTING AND DETERMINATION OF WELFARE COST AND RISK PREMIUM

OF PARTIAL COST SHARING.


EFFECT OF COST SHARING AT 30% OF TEST AND 0% OF TREATMENTS (VS. TEST AND TREAT ALL)


ASSUME THAT COST SHARING FOR TESTING REDUCES QUANTITY OF TESTING BY 20%, THAT RISK

PREMIUM IS 33% OF OUT OF POCKET COST, AND THAT PROBABILITY OF POSITIVE TEST IS 0.95,


COMPUTING OPTIMAL INSURANCE COVERAGE:


INITIAL STATE: FULL COVERAGE OF TEST AND TREATMENT.


   I.        Cost sharing when alternative is treat all:

             MWC=(0.7(4-(0.05(50))(0.2) + 0.5((0.3)(4-(0.05)(50))(0.2)=210+45=255


             RP= .3 (.8) (4)(.33) =320


          This implies that cost sharing of 30% is only a little higher than optimal.


   II.        In the “treat none” case the reason for no treatment is the FDA rule requiring testing

             before treatment, not the valuation of the treatment. If the specific treatment and any

             future related treatments are fully insured, probably the optimal insurance for the test is

             no coverage, so as to impose some limit on the use of expensive treatments of low value

             to some consumers.




                                                                                                 23
    Imperfect Test Predictability.

    The model discussed so far of testing with a companion diagnosis to predict effectiveness

of a treatment assumes that a given value of the test is associated with a single known

probability of effectiveness of a given magnitude. For example, the probability that the

treatment will provide benefit is p if the test is above a certain threshold and is zero if it is

below.

    But there is an interesting and more general case: when the value of the test is positively

correlated with the probability the treatment will produce benefit B—when the expected value

of the benefit pB increases as the test value indicates increased p. When is coverage for such

a test optimal? Even more interestingly, we can in this case answer the question of how a firm

with market power selling the treatment simultaneously sets its price and how insurers would

respond by varying cost sharing.

    Suppose the price of the treatment is C. At any given threshold, expected benefits are

p(R)B-C, where p is a function of the test reading R. What is the optimal threshold for R from

an insurer’s perspective, and the associated price charged by the monopoly seller of the

treatment? What is the inefficiency that arises from the seller’s pricing?

    The relevant comparison is the value of the change in expected total benefit when the

threshold is lowered relative to increase in treatment cost per person. That level depends both

on the distribution of persons by threshold value and how different values map into

probabilities of effectiveness.

    Assume that all persons with given risk characteristics are to be tested. If you know the

ideal threshold, you can enforce it by making coverage for the treatment conditional on


                                                                                                    24
evidence showing the person exceeding the threshold. However, beyond recommendations

and FDA approvals for treatment conditional on some threshold, it does appear that sellers of

treatments with companion diagnostics let insurers set the levels at which they will cover the

treatment.

    A surprising implication is that the behavior of the treatable population at various levels of

the threshold and its associated treatment effectiveness define a demand curve for the

treatment (even if subjective values of health outcomes are uniform). A small number of

people with “high” test results are willing to pay a high price, but as the price is reduced more

people are willing to buy. Then we can determine the price a seller of the treatment with

market power will choose by using the usual monopoly pricing rule—comparing marginal

revenue (along this demand curve) with marginal cost of production and distribution.

    As already noted, how quantity demanded changes as price is reduced depends on two

parameters: the number of people at each test value and the relationship of that test value to

the effectiveness of treatment. Beginning at the highest price at which anyone will buy, with

a bell shaped curve on test values, the numbers of customers brought in by lower prices at first

increases rapidly and then falls off. It is not clear what assumption is plausible about how test

values are related to effectiveness. What is clear is that, as usual, use of the treatment will be

suboptimal if the seller has market power. We provide some numerical examples of different

elasticities of effectiveness with respect to test value.

    The box provides a numerical example to illustrate these points:




                                                                                                 25
    Some Current Examples of Genetic Testing and Treatment.



      Table 5

      OPTIMAL AND PROFIT MAXIMIZING USE OF TREATMENTS WITH IMPERFECT COMPANION
      DIAGNOSTICS: NUMERICAL EXAMPLE

      Parameters: distribution of test results per 100 persons at risk: High 25, medium 50, low 25

      Proportion of users at each threshold who obtain benefit B: High 0.8, medium 0.4, low 0.2. This
      implies total number benefitting in each increment is 20, 20, and 5 with cumulative totals of 20, 40,
      45.

      Suppose the marginal cost of treatment C=1. Suppose that the 50 people who have medium test
      levels would at most be willing to pay 3C= 3. That implies that B= 7.5 and the maximum price that
      will bring in the first 25 is 6, and that which will bring in the last 25 is 1.5.

      Revenues and profits at each “threshold”:

      High: 25 (6-1) =125; Medium 75 (3-1) =150; Low 100 (1.5-1) = 50. Hence the profit maximizing
      threshold is “medium” with price of 3 and demand of 75.

      However in this example the socially optimal quantity is 100 since 45(7.5) -100, or 237.5, is greater
      than 40 (7.5) -75, or 225, or 20(7.5) -25, or 125.

      As is usually the case in economics, profit maximization by a seller with market power leads to an
      equilibrium with a smaller than socially optimal rate of use of the product being sold. The reason is
      that the incremental social benefit of treating the lowest threshold group is (5x7.5) which is more
      than the marginal cost of 25, even though the marginal revenue from bringing in those 25 new
      buyers (by cutting the price from 3 to 1.5) is negative since the price halves but the quantity
      increases only by 25/75 or 33%.




   The data on test and treatment cost and outcomes for three prominent examples of the use

of genomic testing is displayed in Table 6. Here we discuss what is known about those cases

and speculate about what it implies for insurance coverage.



Table 6



                                                                                                     26
Test/Treatment      BRCA –          BRCA –            PDL1+ –    KRAS      KRAS test –
                    Prophylactic    Tamoxifen         Keytruda   test –    Erbitux +
                    surgery         Prophylaxis                  Erbitux   FOLFIRI v.
                                                                 +         Avastin +
                                                                 FOLFIR    FOLFIRI
                                                                 I v.
                                                                 FOLFIR
                                                                 I Alone
Price of test and   2933            2933              790        247       1467
counseling ($)                      (81211+81213
                                    + 230
                                    counseling)
Price of specific   15925 (2006     623 (5y)          82201      105216    300018
treatment for       price)
those who test
positive
Avoided future      3601 per        1396 per testee   N/A        N/A       N/A
costs for those     BRCA positive   (avoided
who test            (no             cancer costs)
positive and        mammograms)
have treatment      9742 (avoided
                    cancer costs
                    for BRCA+)
Proportion          0.25*           0.25*             0.255      0.67      0.67
testing positive
Total spending      12389           16910             36031      83668     283489
per person with
testing and
treatment
Total spending      10023           14546             35241      83014     282022
per person with
treatment only
Total spending      16686           16686             19168      37939     245485
per person with
no testing or
treatment (usual
care)
Gain in QALYs       N/A - Cost      0.30/testee       1.05       0.51      0.5
with avoiding       Saving
illness

Loss In QALYs       N/A - Cost      ?                 ?          ?         ?
from side           Saving
effects of
treatment


                                                                                    27
 Comparator          Test none;        Test none;       Test none;        Test        Test none;
 (test all or test   cancer costs as   costs from       chemotherapy      none;       FOLFIRI +
 none)               normal            mammograms       for all           FOLFIR      Avastin for
                                       and cancer                         I for all   all
 Change in total 4297 saved per        224 increase         3140704804;   1302899     1082813102;
 cost from test       patient          per patient          16863/patient 556;        38004/
 and treatment                                                            45729/      patient
 relative to                                                              patient
 comparator
 Cost-                N/A                737/QALY           62982/QALY        133827/ 113445/
 effectiveness                                                                QALY       QALY
 ratio if change
 is positive
*- indicates risk of testing positive for testing high risk patients (<1% of total population)




                                                                                             28
       BRCA 1/2: Women who test positive for a particular set of genes (BRCA-1 and

BRCA-2) are much more likely than average to develop breast and ovarian cancer at an early

age and to die from cancer. The medical costs incurred by a designated high risk population

(definitions vary but include those with breast cancer at an early age and those with first

degree relatives who contracted breast cancer at an early age) have been studied under the

alternative scenario of no genetic testing versus genetic testing and then prophylactic surgery

if the test is positive. Testing and counseling of the high-risk population has been

recommended (with a “B” recommendation) by the US Preventive Services Task Force and

consequently all insurers are currently required to cover both testing and counseling for this

population. The alternative to surgery is a plan of more frequent mammograms and

preventive cancer chemotherapy such as taxol.

       In what follows we assume that the alternative to testing and a treatment with large

negative side effect is no treatment and no testing. We assume that surgery has negative

effects on short term and long-term quality of life, but avoids future lifetime costs for this type

of cancer.

       Looking only at medical care costs, studies have compared the cost of testing and

counseling all members of the population and the cost of surgery for those with positive

findings with the future costs for screening for, biopsing, and future surgery and treatment for

these cancers. The cost offset in terms of the present discounted value of related future

medical costs is larger than the cost of testing and treatment. Unless a high value is attached

to reduction in quality of life from surgery, the net change in QALY is usually estimated to be

positive.


                                                                                                 29
       Hence, compared to no testing and no treatment, use of genetic testing followed by

prophylactic surgery for positive test results is a dominant strategy. It saves money and leads

to outcomes which are better. It follows that testing and treatment should be fully covered by

insurance to protect against the risk of becoming at high risk for this condition. Cost

effectiveness has not been determined if a non-surgical alternative is chosen after a positive

test, but cost reduction is unlikely in this case. It would be difficult to condition insurance

coverage for testing on follow-up with preventive surgery.

       Erbitux and testing for metastatic colon cancer. The FDA currently approves Erbitux

(cetucimab) for treatment of colon cancer following a test to determine whether the person’s

genetic makeup has an abnormality or is “wild type” with no abnormality. Erbitux is only

effective for wild type genetic profiles, and about 2/3 of those with colon cancer have this

profile. Though one might suppose that a strategy of universal treatment might be reasonable,

the FDA currently recommends Erbitux only after testing and a finding of no genetic defects.

The alternative to testing and treatment with Erbitux is a colectomy (surgical removal of the

colon) or more frequent colonoscopies.

       Studies find that, compared to a strategy of treating everyone at high risk with Erbitux

without testing, testing and then Erbitux treating based on test results is cost reducing.

However, compared with usual care (no testing, no Erbitux), testing and then treating with

Erbitux adds to total cost but improves health outcomes. If FDA guidelines are followed, it is

the second case that is more relevant.

       Because testing is a mandatory gateway to Erbitux treatment, we can consider cost

sharing for testing as effectively an increase in cost sharing for treatment with probability p.

There is no benefit to those who test negative. The average $/QALY for Erbitux is $113,000

                                                                                                   30
to 138,000 per QALY, lower value for the test-treatment combination than the conventional

threshold of $100,000 per QALY.

Keytruda and testing for non-small-cell lung cancer. Keytruda is a new and expensive drug

that has shown efficacy against non-small-cell lung cancer and other tumors. In the NSCLC

case, the drug is effective only if the patient tests positive for PD-L1 and negative for the

genes EGFR and ALK. In some cases, the drug is used if EGFR and ALK inhibitors have

failed as has platinum based chemotherapy.

       About 80% of NSCLC patients would pass both of the genetic screens just described.

The test and counseling to determine the status of a patient costs about $1000. Compared to a

strategy of no testing and no treatment, there is a positive cost and positive health benefits

from adding both testing and Keytruda. There has been no analysis of the costs and benefits

from testing if all NSCLC patients were using Keytruda. Hence the case is similar to Erbitux

but with a more effective treatment. The mean estimated incremental cost per QALY is

$63,000 per QALY, below the conventional threshold.

       Coverage. The average cost effectiveness ratio for Erbitux would often be regarded as

above the threshold for efficient use of the testing and treatment program, but if there is

variation across consumers around the mean ratio because of variation in the values attached

to increments in health or side effects, there may still be demand for and optimal provision of

coverage for the combination for those with high values. However, mandatory coverage by

private insurance is not warranted nor is universal coverage for all Medicare beneficiaries.

Medigap insurance will also not cover costs of care that is experimental or not deemed

medically necessary.



                                                                                                 31
       The FDA requirement for testing before treatment effectively rules out the “treat all/no

test” option for consumers, so the value of testing per se is irrelevant. Private insurers may or

may not choose to cover the Erbitux program, without additional conditions or restrictions.

Medicare coverage is uncertain; if Medicare determines that testing for Erbitux

responsiveness is not medically necessary, coverage is unlikely to be provided by private

insurers. One response of Medicare when clinical evidence is not conclusive (as in the case of

genetic testing to predict responsiveness to warfarin) is to limit coverage to those participating

in clinical trials of effectiveness, so called “coverage with evidence determination.” Private

insurers generally restrict their coverage until the clinical evidence is generated.

       Optimal coinsurance when no treatment is the alternative to testing and treatment. In

both the cases of Erbitux and Keytruda, If there is variation in the value attached to net

QALYs added by test and treatment (additional years of survival minus reduction in quality

of life due to treatment side effects), there will be a demand curve for test-treatment

combination that will be affected by any cost sharing for the test. In effect, cost sharing on

either test or treatment raises the user price of the combination package. The distribution of

these values determines the response to test cost sharing. It is possible that the key

assumption behind the QALY measure is violated—for example, if the person attaches no

value to a few more months of survival but wants to avoid the side effects of an aggressive

treatment—but in that case there will be no demand for testing even a zero price and no value

to insurance coverage of either test or treatment.

       The relevant price here is, as before, the price of the test plus p times the price of

treatment— any cost offset from avoided illness. The latter savings can be “taken off the top”

so the percentage cost sharing depends on whether we analyzed the gross price or the price net

                                                                                                 32
of cost offsets; cost sharing as a proportion of net cost will be larger than cost sharing as a

proportion of gross price.

       Summary. These cases show some of the practical range of considerations that would

govern specification of insurance coverage for testing and treatment. In the case of BRCA

testing leading to prophylactic surgery, the evidence that total cost is reduced by testing while

the health levels of those who opt for testing and this treatment is improved implies that

coverage should be complete for both testing and treatment. In the two examples where

testing is required for treatment but one has a higher cost effectiveness ratio than the other, the

ideal pattern of insurance depends on the extent and form of variation in values attached to

health improvements. If it is small, and if the threshold value for the great majority of the

population is equal to or greater than $100,000 (say), then coverage should be nearly complete

for Keytruda but lower for Erbitux. If there are few people with values per QALY above the

mean value for Erbitux, it may be (second best) efficient to have high cost sharing for testing

and, if feasible, for treatment. If health plans can sort consumers by their personal values of

health improvements, plans with full coverage of testing and treatment for Keytruda should be

more common than plans with full coverage for Erbitux.

       Other companion diagnostics. We also examined the Tufts registry of cost

effectiveness studies, a comprehensive listing of all such studies. We searched using the key

words “precision medicine,” “personalized medicine,” “genetic,” or “genomic.” We found 44

articles that matched. Following the procedure in Glick et al. (2015), we deleted studies

outside the US or those that did not use QALYs as a measure of outcome; the resulting sample

had 28 studies (including the ones used in our case studies above). Table 7 shows the overall

pattern of results in terms of incremental cost and incremental benefits measured in QALYs.

                                                                                                  33
Table 7

 Cost-Effectiveness Range              Study Estimate Count (38 total)

 Dominant (Cost-saving)              4
 $0-50,000/QALY                      12
 >$50,000/QALY                       22
 >$100,000/QALY                      8
Taken from 23 articles, some with multiple comparisons.


Study Inclusion Criteria:
   •   US-based
   •   Published after 2002
   •   Measured provided cost/QALY



       About 14% of the studies found the test and treatment to be cost saving, relative to the

comparator, implying full coverage of test and treatment is optimal; this was a smaller fraction

than the 28% of cost saving studies found in the sample of all studies investigated by Glick et

al. Most of the studies showed cost effectiveness ratios below the conventional $100,000 per

QALY cutoff, but eight did not. As noted earlier, these studies do not show the distribution of

values around the mean estimate, but those studies with favorable values considerably below

the $100,000 threshold would probably be good candidates for complete or nearly complete

coverage of both treatment and companion diagnostic. However the case for full coverage or

even any coverage of the 30% of cases above that cutoff is questionable.




Conclusion.

       Our review of coverage for genetic testing reveals a trend toward a more general


                                                                                             34
acceptance of such tests as having clinical utility and therefore in principle appropriate

candidates for insurance coverage. There is still a reluctance to cover tests deemed

experimental and relatively high bars for the evidence that can make coverage routine—

though in most cases the coverage usually follows rather than facilitates clinical practice.

       Genetic testing to determine the effectiveness of treatment is still relatively new

though growing rapidly. There does seem to be a common cycle in which three trends

compete: Evidence for and use of genetic testing increase over time; insurance coverage

(though present) imposes higher cost sharing; then test prices fall and coverage improves.

       In principle, cost effectiveness studies could provide the basis for determining those

tests so efficient that coverage should be 100%, but this determination may vary across

consumers depending on their willingness to pay for health outcomes and avoiding side

effects of treatment. So coverage may become broader but shallower.

       The other conflicting influence is that new but initially expensive tests appear that do

impose a financial burden but, with dubious evidence for their effectiveness or cost

effectiveness, are generally not covered. Thus there is likely to be continued debate on how

insurance should deal with both the testing and treatment associated with personalized

medicine.

References

Aspinall, Mara G. & Richard G. Hamermesh. 2007. Realizing the promise of personalized
medicine. Harvard Business Review (October) Available online at:
https://hbr.org/2007/10/realizing-the-promise-of-personalized-medicine




                                                                                                35
CIGNA. 2017. Medical coverage policy: Genetic testing for hereditary and multifactorial
conditions. August 15.

Commowealth Fund. 2016. Women’s health coverage since the ACA: Improvements for
most, but insurer exclusions put many at risk. August 2.

Filipova-Neumann, Lilia & Michael Hoy. 2014. Managing genetic tests, surveillance, and
preventive medicine under a public health insurance system. Journal of Health Economics 34
(March): 31-41.

Gaynor, Martin, Deborah Haas‐Wilson & William B. Vogt. 2000. Are invisible hands good
hands? Moral hazard, competition, and the second‐best in health care markets. Journal of
Political Economy 108(5)(October): 992-1005

Glick, Henry A., Sean McElligott, Mark V. Pauly, Richard J. Willke, Henry Bergquist, Jalpa
Doshi, Lee A. Fleisher, Bruce Kinosian, Eleanor Perfetto, Daniel E. Polsky, & J. Sanford
Schwartz. 2015. Comparative effectiveness and cost-effectiveness analyses frequently agree
on value. Health Affairs 34(5): 805-811. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2014.0552.

Graf, Michael D., Denise F. Needham, Nicole Teed, & Trisha Brown. 2013. Genetic testing
insurance coverage trends: A review of publicly available policies from the largest US
payers. Personalized Medicine 10(3): 255-243.

Hillman, Alan L., Mark V. Pauly, Jose J. Escarce, Kimberley Ripley, Martin Gaynor, Jon
Clouse, & Richard Ross. 1999. Financial incentive and drug spending in managed care.
Health Affairs 18(2): 189-200.

Ho, Catherine. 2017. Insurers help make genetic testing available. San Francisco Chronicle.
May 15.

Kaiser Foundation. 2015. Preventive services covered by private health plans under the
affordable care act. Available on line at: http://kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/preventive-
services-covered-by-private-health-plans/. Accessed August 25, 2017.

Medicare.gov. 2016. Is your test, item, or service covered? Available online at:
https://www.medicare.gov/coverage/is-your-test-item-or-service-covered.html. Accessed
August 23, 2017.

Pauly, Mark V. 1968. The economics of moral hazard: Comment. The American Economic
Review 58(3)(1)(June): 531-537.


                                                                                                 36
Pauly, Mark V. 2009. Is It time to reexamine the patent system’s role in spending growth?
Health Affairs 2009 28(5) (September/October):1466-1474 doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.28.5.1466

Pauly Mark V. 2015. Cost effectiveness analysis and insurance coverage: Solving a puzzle.
Health Economics 24(5)(May): 506-15. doi: 10.1002/hec.3044. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Pauly, Mark V. & Frederic E. Blavin. 2008. Moral hazard in insurance, value-based cost
sharing, and the benefits of blissful ignorance. Journal of Health Economics
27(6)(December):1407-17. doi: 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2008.07.003. Epub 2008 Jul 18.

Zeckhauser, Richard. 1970. Medical insurance: a case study of the tradeoff between risk
spreading and appropriate incentives. Journal of Economic Theory 2(1): 10-26.




Appendix A

References
BRCA– Prophylactic Surgery, Row 1-3, CMS Medicare Provider Utilization and Payment
Data; Anderson, K. et al., (2006). Cost-Effectiveness of Preventive Strategies for Women with
a BRCA1 or a BRCA2 MutationCost-Effectiveness Analyses among BRCA1 or BRCA2
Mutation Carriers. Annals of internal medicine, 144(6), 397-406.;
BRCA– Prophylactic Surgery, Row 4, Sauven, P., & Association of Breast Surgery Family
History Guidelines Panel. (2004). Guidelines for the management of women at increased
familial risk of breast cancer. European Journal of Cancer, 40(5), 653-665.
BRCA– Prophylactic Surgery, Row 5-12, CMS Medicare Provider Utilization and Payment
Data; Anderson, K. et al., (2006). Cost-Effectiveness of Preventive Strategies for Women with
a BRCA1 or a BRCA2 MutationCost-Effectiveness Analyses among BRCA1 or BRCA2
Mutation Carriers. Annals of internal medicine, 144(6), 397-406.; Manchanda, R. et al.,
(2014). Cost-effectiveness of population screening for BRCA mutations in Ashkenazi Jewish
women compared with family history–based testing. Journal of the National Cancer Institute,
107(1), dju380.
BRCA – Tamoxifen Prophylaxis, Row 1-3, CMS Medicare Provider Utilization and Payment
Data; Anderson, K. et al., (2006). Cost-Effectiveness of Preventive Strategies for Women with
a BRCA1 or a BRCA2 Mutation Cost-Effectiveness Analyses among BRCA1 or BRCA2
Mutation Carriers. Annals of internal medicine, 144(6), 397-406.;
                                                                                            37
BRCA– Tamoxifen Prophylaxis, Row 4, Sauven, P., & Association of Breast Surgery Family
History Guidelines Panel. (2004). Guidelines for the management of women at increased
familial risk of breast cancer. European Journal of Cancer, 40(5), 653-665.
BRCA – Tamoxifen Prophylaxis, Row 5-12, CMS Medicare Provider Utilization and
Payment Data; Anderson, K. et al., (2006). Cost-Effectiveness of Preventive Strategies for
Women with a BRCA1 or a BRCA2 Mutation Cost-Effectiveness Analyses among BRCA1 or
BRCA2 Mutation Carriers. Annals of internal medicine, 144(6), 397-406.; Manchanda, R. et
al., (2014). Cost-effectiveness of population screening for BRCA mutations in Ashkenazi
Jewish women compared with family history–based testing. Journal of the National Cancer
Institute, 107(1), dju380.
PDL1 –Keytruda v. Carboplatin + Pemetrexed, Row 1, Romanus, D. et al, (2015). Cost-
effectiveness of multiplexed predictive biomarker screening in non-small-cell lung cancer.
Journal of Thoracic Oncology, 10(4), 586-594.
PDL1 –Keytruda v. Carboplatin + Pemetrexed, Row 2, Aguiar Jr, P. N. et al., (2016). Cost
effectiveness and estimate of economical impact of immune checkpoint inhibitors for NSCLC
relative to PD-L1 expression.
PDL1 – Keytruda, v. Carboplatin + Pemetrexed, Row 4, Reck, M. et al., (2016).
Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for PD-L1–positive non–small-cell lung cancer. N Engl
J Med, 2016(375), 1823-1833.
PDL1 – Keytruda, v. Carboplatin + Pemetrexed, Row 5-12, Aguiar Jr, P. N. et al., (2016).
Cost effectiveness and estimate of economical impact of immune checkpoint inhibitors for
NSCLC relative to PD-L1 expression.; Aggarwal, C., & Borghaei, H. (2017). Treatment
Paradigms for Advanced Non‐Small Cell Lung Cancer at Academic Medical Centers:
Involvement in Clinical Trial Endpoint Design. The Oncologist, 22(6), 700-708.; Huang, M.
et al., (2017). Cost Effectiveness of Pembrolizumab vs. Standard-of-Care Chemotherapy as
First-Line Treatment for Metastatic NSCLC that Expresses High Levels of PD-L1 in the
United States. PharmacoEconomics, 1-14.; Handorf, E. A. et al., (2012). Cost effectiveness of
personalized therapy for first-line treatment of stage IV and recurrent incurable
adenocarcinoma of the lung. Journal of oncology practice, 8(5), 267-274.
KRAS test – Erbitux + FOLFIRI v. FOLFIRI Alone, Row 1-12, Kircher, S. et al., (2015).
Cost estimates and economic implications of expanded RAS testing in metastatic colorectal
cancer. The oncologist, 20(1), 14-18.; Tumeh, J. W. et al., (2009). A Markov model assessing
the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of FOLFOX compared with FOLFIRI for the initial
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. American journal of clinical oncology, 32(1), 49-
55.; Mittmann, N., & Seung, S. J. (2011). Rash rates with EGFR inhibitors: meta-analysis.
Current Oncology, 18(2), e54.; Van Cutsem, E. et al., (2009). Cetuximab and chemotherapy
as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. New England Journal of Medicine,
360(14), 1408-1417.; Lawrence, D. et al., (2013). Economic analysis of bevacizumab,
cetuximab, and panitumumab with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy in the first-line
treatment of KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Journal of medical

                                                                                             38
economics, 16(12), 1387-1398.
KRAS test – E rbitux + FOLFIRI v. Avastin + FOLFIRI, Row 1-12, Kircher, S. et al., (2015).
Cost estimates and economic implications of expanded RAS testing in metastatic colorectal
cancer. The oncologist, 20(1), 14-18.; Tumeh, J. W. et al., (2009). A Markov model assessing
the effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of FOLFOX compared with FOLFIRI for the initial
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. American journal of clinical oncology, 32(1), 49-
55.; Mittmann, N., & Seung, S. J. (2011). Rash rates with EGFR inhibitors: meta-analysis.
Current Oncology, 18(2), e54.; Van Cutsem, E. et al., (2009). Cetuximab and chemotherapy
as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. New England Journal of Medicine,
360(14), 1408-1417.; Lawrence, D. et al., (2013). Economic analysis of bevacizumab,
cetuximab, and panitumumab with fluoropyrimidine-based chemotherapy in the first-line
treatment of KRAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC). Journal of medical
economics, 16(12), 1387-1398.; Shankaran, V. et al., (2015). Cost-effectiveness of cetuximab
as first-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer in the United States. Am J Clin Oncol.




                                                                                             39
