NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PROPERTY RIGHTS, LAND MISALLOCATION AND AGRICULTURAL EFFICIENCY IN
CHINA
A.V. Chari
Elaine M. Liu
Shing-Yi Wang
Yongxiang Wang
Working Paper 24099
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the ESRC-DFID. This paper has benefitted from
comments from Santosh Anagol, S. Anukriti, Chang Tai-Hsieh, Rachel Heath, Melanie Khamis,
Adriana Kugler, Annemie Maertens, Laura Schechter, and seminar participants at the
Agricultural and Development Conference (at Yale University), Columbia University, University
of Virginia Darden, Stanford University, University of Delaware, Wharton and the World Bank.
All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24099.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by A.V. Chari, Elaine M. Liu, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Property Rights, Land Misallocation and Agricultural Efficiency in China
A.V. Chari, Elaine M. Liu, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 24099
December 2017
JEL No. Q15
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the impact of a property rights reform in rural China that allowed farmers to
lease out their land. We find the reform led to increases in land rental activity in rural households.
Consistent with a model of transaction costs in land markets, our results indicate that the
formalization of leasing rights resulted in a redistribution of land toward more productive
farmers. Consequently, the aggregate productivity of land increased significantly. We also find
that the reform increased the responsiveness of land allocation across crops to changes in crop
prices.
A.V. Chari
University of Sussex
A.Chari@sussex.ac.uk
Elaine M. Liu
Department of Economics
University of Houston
McElhinney Hall 223D
Houston, TX 77004
and NBER
emliu@uh.edu

Shing-Yi Wang
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
was@wharton.upenn.edu
Yongxiang Wang
Marshall School of Business
University of Southern California
Los Angeles, CA 90089
Yongxiang.Wang@marshall.usc.edu

1

Introduction

Growth in agricultural productivity has long been viewed as central to the process of structural
transformation and economic growth (Gollin, Parente and Rogerson 2002, Ranis and Fei 1961).
Yet labor productivity in agriculture remains remarkably low in most developing countries, and
this can (at least mechanically) account for most of the overall differential in labor productivity between rich and poor countries (Caselli 2005, Restuccia, Yang and Zhu 2008). Research
suggests that this phenomenon cannot be explained by low capital per worker (Chanda and Dalgaard 2008, Vollrath 2009, Lagakos and Waugh 2013), implying that residual factors, or total
factor productivity, must be the major source of the productivity differential in agriculture.
Some recent studies suggest that the observed productivity differentials in agriculture may
be a result of frictions that produce a misallocation of productive resources (Adamopoulos and
Restuccia 2014, Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis 2017). This idea extends an influential literature that emphasizes factor misallocation as a source of low productivity in the manufacturing
sector (Chari 2011, Hsieh and Klenow 2009, Midrigan and Xu 2014, Restuccia and Rogerson
2008). The argument is supported by the stark differences in the inputs and scale of agricultural production in developing and developed countries (Foster and Rosenzweig 2012). These
differences may reflect market failures or institutional frictions in developing countries that act
as a constraint on the growth of more productive farmers.1 Understanding which policies and
institutions underlie these frictions, and quantifying their associated costs, is important for both
researchers and policy-makers.
We contribute to this literature by leveraging a property rights reform in China. Specifically,
we analyze the impact of the Rural Land Contracting Law (RLCL), a reform that gave farmers
legal rights to lease their land while re-iterating existing protections for the security of land
rights, on land allocation and efficiency in agricultural production. This occurred in a context
where farmers do not have full ownership rights to their land, but rather only use rights granted
by the local government. The RLCL provides a valuable opportunity to estimate the importance
of land market imperfections in generating misallocation and the potential for property rights
reforms to improve outcomes in the agricultural sector.
1

A possible alternative is that the differences do not reflect market failures in developing countries. For
example, low wages in developing countries may not be caused by market failures and may correspond with
labor-intensive, small-scale production being the most efficient market outcome.

2

In theory, well-defined property rights over land should facilitate efficiency-improving transactions. In practice, however, the extent to which property rights in land markets matter is
unclear. First, there may be other market failures or constraints that prevent the efficient reallocation of land, and which may not (at least in the short run) be relieved by restoring the
missing market for land. Second, the importance of formal rights has itself been questioned in
the literature: some evidence on the role of property rights in agriculture suggests that informal institutions that adequately substitute for lack of formal land titles and tenure may arise
(Besley 1995, Carter et al 1994, Brasselle, Gaspart and Platteau 2002). However, other papers suggest an important role for tenancy rights and tenure security in agricultural outcomes
(Banerjee, Gertler and Ghatak 2002, Goldstein and Udry 2008). The impact of formalizing
exchange rights therefore remains an open empirical question.
Our approach for addressing this question is to exploit variation across provinces in the
timing of their implementation of the central reform that was announced in 2003.2 We collected
novel data on the timing of implementation in each province and use the staggered timing to
identify the impacts of property rights. We combine this information with panel data on input
decisions and output realizations of agricultural households collected from the Chinese Ministry
of Agriculture (called the National Fixed Point Survey or NFP) from 2003 to 2010. In addition
to the long panel dimension, this data set is somewhat rare among agricultural household surveys
in its large sample size and broad geographic coverage.
We begin our analysis with difference-in-difference estimates of the impact of the reform.
We find evidence of a significant increase in land rental activity following the reform, with the
probability of new renting transactions increasing by about 10% and the area of land rented out
increasing by 7%. At the village level, overall output and the productivity of land also increase
significantly by about 7%.
While the previous set of results have the advantage of not requiring any assumptions on
the agricultural production process, we are also interested in testing for reallocation of land
across producers and quantifying the extent to which this may be responsible for the observed
improvement in aggregate output and productivity. To examine whether the share of land within
2

Deininger and Jin (2009) and Zhao (2014) examine the same property rights reform in China, but they
focus on different outcomes (land reallocations by the government and labor market outcomes, respectively).
Furthermore, their identification is based on a before-after 2003 comparison whereas we utilize the staggered
nature of implementation across provinces.

3

villages farmed by the more productive farms increases, while the share of land cultivated by
less productive farms falls, we use a production function approach to estimate farmer TFP
after controlling for a variety of inputs.3 We find that the reform increased the amount of land
farmed by relatively more productive farmers, while reducing the amount of land cultivated
by relatively less productive farmers, consistent with the notion that reducing frictions in the
land market should produce a more efficient allocation of land. The results on reallocation are
very similar if we look for land reallocation along the gradient of marginal product of land or
agricultural profits instead of TFP.
We also observe a corresponding reallocation of labor, which is a complementary input to
land: the amount of hired labor increase on relatively more productive farms but decline on
less productive farms, suggesting a within-village reallocation of labor. Interestingly, we do not
find evidence of labor moving out of agriculture (within the village) or into migration (out of
the local area). We apply a simple decomposition of aggregate productivity to find that nearly
85% of the observed increase in aggregate productivity can be attributed to input reallocations
associated with the reform.
In addition to their effect on income and productivity, land market restrictions also hinder
farmers’ ability to respond to economic fluctuations. This is an important implication in the
context of the agricultural sector, where agricultural households’ profits and incomes are sensitive to price changes. We examine whether the reduction in land transaction costs due to the
reform allowed farmers to respond better to changes in agricultural prices, an important source
of risk in the agricultural sector.4 We find that an increase in the price of a crop induces greater
reallocation of land toward that crop in the post-reform period (relative to the pre-reform period). This result provides some insight into one way in which the reform has reduced frictions
in the efficient allocation of land resources.
In the context of agriculture in developing countries, ownership and use rights over land are
often poorly-defined and this plausibly affects the ability and incentives of farmers to transact in
land. Our results establish both the importance of land misallocation as a source of productive
3
This builds on a large existing literature on agricultural production function estimations. See Gollin and
Udry (2017) for an overview. A concurrent working paper by Adamopoulos, Brandt, Leight and Restuccia (2017)
estimate farm-level production functions in China to examine the misallocation of land and capital. In addition
to examining a later period in China, the approach in our paper is quite different in that we exploit a reform
that aimed to improve the functioning of rural land markets.
4
This relates to an existing literature in agricultural economics that estimates the response of yields to crop
prices (see for example, Choi and Helmberger 1993, Houck and Gallagher 1976, Menz and Pardey 1983).

4

inefficiency in the agricultural sector, as well as the positive role that well-defined property
rights can have in ameliorating the problem.5
Our paper constitutes a distinct contribution to the literature on property rights in agriculture that has largely focused on the ability to leverage land as collateral or on the implications of
land tenure for agricultural investments, but has paid relatively less attention to the importance
of exchange rights in achieving a more efficient allocation of land. Studies of the relationship
between exchange rights and efficiency in rural areas are Ravallion and van de Walle’s (2003)
examination of the 1993 Land Law in Vietnam which bundled selling rights with a titling system
and Chen, Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis’ (2017) analysis of leasing behavior and efficiency
in Ethiopia. The approaches of both papers are different from ours. In the absence of data
on agricultural production and data prior to the reform or a control group, Ravallion and van
de Walle (2003) use consumption outcomes to measure efficiency in a counterfactual exercise.
In a concurrent working paper, Chen, Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis (2017) demonstrate a
positive relationship between land leasing and productivity, but in the absence of data prior to
the leasing reform; their analysis requires the assumption that post-reform changes in observed
leasing activity are exogenous to the outcomes of interest.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides detailed institutional background on land
tenure laws and reform in China. Section 3 presents a simple theoretical model that provides
intuition for the empirical analysis. Section 4 presents the empirical analysis, and Section 5
concludes with a discussion of the results.

2

Institutional Background

Beginning in 1979, the Household Production Responsibility System (HRS) was created to dismantle the existing collective organization of agricultural production and to give households
control of farming decisions and output. After 1979, farmers had private use rights to agricultural plots but these land rights were relatively insecure as local governments could reassign
plots until the late 1990s. In 1998, the Land Management Law granted farmers 30-year formal
land contracts from their village governments, providing security of land tenure. This paper
5

Our study also contributes to an existing literature that documents sources of inefficiencies related to land
allocation and agricultural production. Udry (1996) studies inefficiencies in the intra-household allocation of land
in Burkina Faso; in contrast, we document inefficiencies in land allocation across agricultural households within
villages.

5

focuses on the property rights reform that occurred with the official announcement of the Rural
Land Contracting Law (RLCL) in 2003. In addition to re-iterating the existing policy of 30year contracts between village governments and farmers, the RLCL provides farmers the legal
right to rent out and rent in land.6 Prior to 2003, there were instances of informal land rental
agreements, including contracts based on verbal agreements among family and neighbors. The
2003 reform offered legal security to both parties of a leasing contract.7
Regarding the RLCL, Li (2003) writes, “This landmark law represents the most important
legal breakthrough for securing land rights for China’s 210 million farm households since the
adoption of the HRS.” The RLCL makes no statements about inheritance rights and does not
reverse a prior law’s prohibition of using land rights as collateral. Thus, the main mechanisms
of the RLCL are the decreased threat of expropriation and legal protections offered to rural
households who lease land.
Summary statistics presented in Zhao (2014) suggest that a large drop in government-led
land adjustments occurred starting 1998 (following the Land Management Law) but that there
was very little change in government-led land readjustments occurring after 2003.8 The share of
villages engaging in major government-led land reallocations was under 4% from 2001 to 2006
and zero in 2007 and 2008.9
While the central government adopted the RLCL in 2003, it also stated in Article 64, “The
standing committees of the people’s congresses of the provinces, autonomous regions and municipalities directly under the Central Government may, in accordance with this Law and in light
of the actual conditions of their administrative areas, work out measures for implementation of
this Law.”10 This follows many other market reforms that started after 1978 where the central
6

The law outlines the legal protection granted to leasing rights, rules for leasing and transferring leases, and
how to address land disputes in leasing contracts.
7
In cases of disputes over rental contracts and private negotiation between the two parties fail, they can ask
the village or town government to assist in the negotiations. If that fails, either party can initiate arbitration or
a lawsuit in the local court system.
8
We reprint Figure 1 from their paper in Appendix Figure A.1. This figure is based on data that were collected
by the author and we do not have access to them. The main data of our analysis (NFP) do not have questions
on perceptions about security or the occurrence of reallocations.
9
In later data collected by some of the authors of this paper (Liu, Wang and Wang) from 1930 households
across 22 provinces in 2012, only 2.5% of households had experienced a government land reallocation in the past
five years.
10
We discuss a few articles of the central RLCL with Jilin province’s law in 2005 to shed some light on the
scope of changes at the provincial level. Provinces can add regulations; for example, Article 14 of Jilin’s law
states that the county-level and town-level governments must build a database registering the land leases, and
publicize information on this leasing registry. The provincial law can also remove requirements stipulated at the
central level; for example, Article 27 of the central RLCL states a requirement of a two-thirds vote to adjust
contract terms between villagers and the local government in the case of natural disaster, but Jilin doesn’t allow

6

government issued general guidelines on the priorities, and local governments were encouraged
to implement and to experiment within the guidelines (Xu, 2011). Thus, we use subsequent
province-level variation in the implementation of the property rights reform. By the end of 2014,
24 provincial governments have made official announcements about the local implementation of
RLCL.11 According to a World Bank (2002) report on land tenure in China, local authorities
are the major obstacle to the implementation of central initiatives over agricultural land tenure.
In a report by Li (2003), a former Chinese representative for the Rural Development Institute
also suggests that local capacity and cooperation are key to the successful implementation of the
RLCL. Thus, we use the dates of the provincial-level implementation of RLCL as the relevant
time in which agricultural households could exercise these new land rights.
Anecdotal evidence supports the idea that farmers responded to the reform by changing their
leasing behavior and substantially increasing their income. After the law was implemented in
the province of Ningxia in 2015, a newspaper article describes an interview with a farmer named
Xueying Wang: “he rented out all 29 mu of his land to a large-scale farm at the price of 700 RMB
per year. Thus, he can get 19,600 RMB per year from the land, and at the same time, his wife is
working for that farm and she can earn 24,000 RMB per year... His income doubled compared
to the past [before receiving the right to contract out land]” (Ningxia Daily 2015). This case
also highlights the potential changes in the distribution of land within villages following the
reform.
The number of people potentially affected by changes in rural land institutions in China is
enormous. According to data from the Chinese Statistics Yearbooks, 768 million people were
living in rural areas in China in 2003; this is 60% of the population. Correspondingly, agriculture
remains an important source of employment, representing 49% of total employment.

3

Model

We outline a simple model to provide intuition for the analysis. Consider a village economy
populated by a fixed number of farmers, producing an undifferentiated agricultural commodity
(crop). The price of the crop, denoted by p, is assumed given (i.e. exogenous to production and
consumption decisions in the village); this is a reasonable assumption given that each village is
for re-adjustment in this scenario at all.
11
Appendix Table A.1 provides the timing of implementation for each province in our data.

7

quite small relative to the market for the crop.12
We assume for simplicity that production depends only on the quantity of land (this assumption will be relaxed in the empirical analysis). Suppose the production function has the
following form:
y = φlα

(1)

where y denotes the farmer’s output, l denotes the land input, and φ denotes the total factor
productivity (TFP) of the farmer. Each farmer has a fixed level of TFP, which is assumed
to be a random draw from a distribution over the interval [φ, φ]. There are no fixed costs of
production.
The total amount of land in the village is denoted by L. The endowment of land is assumed
to be independent of TFP.13 For simplicity, we assume that all farmers in the village are endowed
with the same quantity of land. Each farmer decides whether or not to engage in farming the
crop, and how much of her land endowment she will utilize with the remaining land endowment
supplied to the market at the going land rental rate, denoted by r. The land market is local in
the sense that all land transactions are assumed to occur within the village. The rental rate r
is therefore determined by supply and demand within the village.
To model the effects of land reform, we introduce land market frictions. Assume that farms
that want to rent in land have to pay a transaction cost, which is modeled as a proportional tax,
denoted by t ∈ [0, 1], such that the effective rental price is r(1 + t).14 ,15 The farmer is assumed
to maximize net income (i.e. profit plus rental income).16
12

In addition, in Table 9, we also demonstrate that cash crop prices at the province-level in China are strongly
correlated with U.S. prices, suggesting that farmers respond to global prices in these crops.
13
This assumption is consistent with the findings of Adamopoulos et al (2017) and is also approximately borne
out in our data. This assumption can be relaxed; our results can be explained by simply assuming that the
distribution of land endowments is such that high TFP farmers are not cultivating more land than optimal in
the pre-reform period.
14
In the model presented here, the transaction cost is assumed to be paid by the renter rather than the owner,
but the tax can be shifted with no difference to the final outcome.
15
The assumption of a proportional tax can also be motivated as follows: Consider a farmer who rents out an
acre of land at the price r, to be paid at the end of the farming season. In the absence of secure leasing rights,
there is some probability, say π, that she will not get repaid and will be unable to enforce her claim in the court
system because leasing rights are not legally protected. Alternatively, if the main mechanism of the reform is a
reduction in the fear of government reallocation, π can be thought of as the increased probability of expropriation
associated with renting out land. This is similar to the idea that agricultural households fallow their land for
shorter durations because of the concern that fallow land is more likely to be allocated to another household
(Goldstein and Udry 2008). The farmer’s expected rental income is then proportional to the rental price, and is
given by r(1 − π).
16
We assume that household consumption and production decision are separable, so that each household acts
as a profit-maximizing farm. Because land is not directly consumed by the household, this assumption is valid,
but will fail if there are also imperfections in other markets (see Singh, Squire and Strauss 1986).

8

Figure 1: The relationship between own-cultivated area and TFP for three different values of
the transaction cost

Appendix A derives the equilibrium in the economy. Figure 1 graphs the associated relationship between (own-cultivated) area and farmer TFP. The figure also shows two polar cases:
When there are no frictions to trading land (and t = 0), own-cultivated land area is strictly
increasing in TFP, but when t = ∞ each farmer is constrained to farm his own land endowment.
The equilibrium in the intermediate case (with 0 < t < ∞) lies in between the two polar cases.17
The figure indicates that a reduction in the transaction cost will result in a reallocation of land
from low-TFP farmers to high-TFP farmers. This simple prediction can be taken to the data
to test for productivity-improving reallocations following the reform.18
The essential insight of the misallocation literature is that frictions in factor markets (such
as the land transaction cost in our model) can reduce aggregate productivity by skewing the
allocation of productive inputs away from the most productive individuals. Removing these
frictions will therefore increase aggregate productivity even if no individual firm or producer
becomes more productive (in a TFP sense). To formalize this point in the context of our model,
17

The intuition for the intermediate case is that low-TFP farmers will rent out part of their endowment to
high-TFP farmers who will consequently farm more than their endowment, while there will exist a middle range
of TFP in which farmers will neither rent in nor rent out land.
18
In theory, if pre-reform land endowments had been too highly skewed toward high-TFP farmers, it might
even be the case that the reform would reallocate land towards low-TFP farmers. As we have noted earlier,
however, this does not appear to be the case in the data.

9

Appendix A shows that land shares can be cast in the following general form:
τi θi
si = P
τi θi

(2)
1

1

where si = li /L denotes farmer i’s share of village land and θi = φi1−α . Finally, τi = (r/M Pi ) 1−α
can be interpreted as a wedge between the rental price r and farmer i’s marginal product of
land (M Pi ).19 Note that when the transaction cost is removed (τi = 1), the marginal products
are equalized, so that land shares are simply proportional to θi . This formulation mirrors that
of Hsieh and Klenow (2009), in which producers are assumed to face idiosyncratic taxes on
factor usage that result in a dispersion in marginal products. To see how these wedges affect
aggregate productivity, consider the aggregate output of the economy:

Y

=

X

yi =

i

X

X
φi liα = (
φi sαi )Lα

i

i

(3)

≡ ΦLα

where Φ =

α
i φi si

P

can be interpreted as aggregate TFP. This formulation shows that aggregate

productivity Φ depends not only on the individual TFPs, but also on how land is allocated visa-vis TFP, and as equation (2) above shows, this allocation is in turn influenced by the factor
price wedges. It can now be verified that Φ increases when the transaction cost is removed,
confirming the intuitive expectation that land reform will increase aggregate productivity, and
hence aggregate output, even in the absence of any changes in individual TFPs (see Appendix
A).

4

Data

The analysis combines agricultural outcomes and inputs from a household-level panel data set
with a dataset that we assembled on the timing of provinces’ implementation of the RLCL.
19

An analogous expression can be derived in the case of multiple inputs into production.

10

4.1

National Fixed Point Survey

Our primary data source is the National Fixed Point Survey (NFP), a panel survey collected
by the Research Center of Rural Economy (RCRE) of the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture,
beginning in 1986. We use annual waves of data between 2003 to 2010 for data comparability
as the questions and the structure of the survey changed substantially in 2003. For the period
of 2003-2010, our dataset covers more than 19,000 households in 399 villages from 32 provinces.
NFP villages were selected for representativeness based on region, income, cropping pattern,
population, and non-farm activities. The NFP data contain detailed information on household
agricultural production, employment, and income.
Benjamin, Brandt and Giles (2005) demonstrate that the data are of high quality and provide
a detailed overview of the data. The key advantages of the data for our analysis are the panel
structure and the detailed information on agricultural inputs and outputs at the householdcrop-year level. However, unlike some other data sets of agricultural production, we do not
have any information broken down at the plot level and there are no measures of land quality.
Finally, we do not observe the specific terms of land rental contracts.20
Summary statistics for the main outcome variables are presented in Table 1. The structure
of the household survey is that some questions are asked at the household level regarding the
past year, while questions on agricultural input and output are asked at the household-crop
level. Panel A provides summary statistics on variables available in the NFP at the householdyear level. The average household in the data cultivates 12.4 mu of land (or about 2 acres). The
survey asks about new renting transactions over agricultural land in the past year.21 About
14% of households engage in new land renting transactions, which includes either renting in or
renting out land.22 For the last years of the data, 2009 and 2010, we also have information
about the amount of land rented out to individuals and to firms. In these years, the amount
of land rented out to individuals is much greater (0.33 mu) than to firms (0.03 mu). Total
household income (from all sources) is on average 29,000 RMB.23
20

In other words, we do not see the length of the contract or the payment terms.
Thus, if a household is renting in land but the contract began two years ago, this flow variable would not
pick it up.
22
Land leasing is not spatially concentrated; the NFP data indicate that 81% of village-year observations have
some new household leasing activity in the sample period.
23
This is approximately 3600 USD. We convert income and cost variables into real 2002 RMB using a provincelevel consumer price index from the Regional Economy Database.
21

11

We have a few measures of labor supply decisions of household members. Unlike most
of the other variables that are asked at the household level, these labor supply questions are
asked for each member of the household, where out of the 365 days of the year, they are asked
the number of days that they worked off-farm (not in agriculture) in the same township, as a
migrant worker and on-farm (in agriculture). We aggregate the individual-level measures for
each household and year. Over half of the household in the sample had at least one individual
engage in migration and 42% of households engaged in off-farm labor in the past year.
In order to examine the aggregate effects of the reform, we aggregate some measures from
the household-level to the village-level. Panel B presents aggregate agricultural revenue and
aggregate agricultural revenue divided by land. At the village level, the average revenue per
year in the sample is 427041 RMB and 727 RMB per mu.
In the questions on agricultural production, the survey asks households to report all inputs
and output at the household-crop level.24 In addition to having information on output in terms
of revenue, we also have the physical amount of output (as measured in kilograms). As shown
in Panel C, on average, a household utilizes 4.7 mu of land per crop. This measure includes
both their own land as well as land that they have rented in. They spend 86 RMB per crop
per year on machine costs. Labor inputs, which includes household labor and hired labor,
averages at 68 days per crop. Given the Cobb-Douglas estimation approach, we combine other
agricultural inputs which individually contain many zero values. This includes chemical and
organic fertilizer, pesticides, irrigation, small tools, agricultural covers, animals and other costs.

4.2

Data on the Timing of the Reform Implementation

We collected information on the local province-level implementation of the RLCL that was
passed at the national level in 2003 from several different sources. The main source is PkuLaw,
a database that provides comprehensive coverage of local laws and regulations in China. We use
the following keywords to search in the database: “Tudi Chengbao (land contracting)”, “Tudi
Liuzhuan (land subcontracting)”. For completeness, we also search several other law databases,
including Xihu Law Library (www.law-lib.com), Beijing Zhongtian Nuoshida Technology Company Law Database (www.law-star.com) and Zhengbao Online Education Company’s database
24

These refer to production on land that the household cultivates. If they rent out their land, the inputs and
outputs on land they rent out and do not cultivate are not included.

12

(www.chinalawedu.com). After this initial search, we read through all of the legal documents
found. For consistency across provinces, we discarded the ones that are issued by governments
below the provincial-level since we focus on province-level variation. Next, we dropped documents that are issued by departments rather than by the provincial government directly (e.g.
some documents are issued by lower-level provincial departments such as Jiangsu Department
of Agriculture that discuss the implementation of the policy). Finally, we further filter out
documents that are not about the implementation of the RLCL.25 These multiple stages of
filtering leave us with the final set of legal documents that allow us to codify the timing of local
implementation of the 2003 RLCL for each province, summarized in Appendix Table A.1.
In Appendix Table A.2, we use province-level data from the Chinese Statistical Yearbooks
to examine the question of why some provinces implemented the reform at different times than
others. We estimate an equation where the sample is limited to the periods including the reform
year and the years prior, and the dependent variable is an indicator for the reform year. In
particular, we examine whether variation in urban and rural income and in employment in
different sectors predicts the timing of the reform. The results suggest that increases in urban
income is strongly correlated with the province implementing the reform; a 10% increase in
urban income corresponds with an 8.2% increase in the probability of reform and this estimate
is significant at the 1% level.26 However, with the inclusion of the year and province fixed
effects, the relationship is no longer significant or even positive. Given that we are looking
at the impact of the reform on agricultural outcomes, it is reassuring that rural income and
agricultural employment are not significantly correlated with the timing. These results provide
some reassurance against the idea that agricultural outcomes are directly driving the decision
of the provincial government regarding the reform.

4.3

Crop Price Data

We collected provincial-level agricultural price indices from China Rural Statistics Yearbooks
for the period 2003 to 2010 where the indices are set to 100 for the year 2002. Appendix Figure
A.3 present the average price indices across all provinces for each. Panel A shows the price
25

In other words, the keywords appear in the title or the main body, but the document is not about implementation of the RLCL.
26
One possibility is that provincial leaders were hoping that the implementation of the reform would facilitate
rural-to-urban mobility. While our results in Appendix Table 6 suggest this reform did not increase migration
out of the rural areas, it may still be the case that the timing decisions were driven by this motive.

13

indices (averaged across provinces) for each of the five staple crops and Panel B shows the
corresponding price indices for each of the four cash crops for which we have price data.27 The
figures indicate strong trends in prices over time.28 They also show there is more variation in
the prices of cash crop than staple crops. This is likely because cash crop prices are driven by
global market forces while the Chinese government may intervene to control the prices of staple
crops.

5

Estimating the Impact of the Property Rights Reform

5.1

Effects on Household-level Rental Activity

We begin by examining whether the implementation of the property rights law affected land
renting activity. For this household level outcome, we estimate the following equation for each
household h in province p and in year t:

yhpt = α + β0 P ostRef ormpt + β1 Ref ormY earpt + γp t + γt + γh + hpt

(4)

where P ostRef orm is an indicator variable for the years following the implementation of the
reform (not including the reform year itself) and Ref ormY ear equals one in the year that
the reform was implemented in province p.29 In addition to fixed effects for household and
for calendar year, we allow for province time trends (denoted by γp t). The standard errors
are clustered at the province level. This strategy exploits the panel nature of the data and
examines the same households before and after the leasing reform, using the staggering of the
implementation of the reform across provinces.
In Table 2, the outcome is an indicator for any land renting. The first column includes
the full sample while the second column limits the sample to villages for which we have data
both before and after the implementation of the reform.30 We see a 1.4 to 1.5 percentage point
27
There is no price index for hemp, and we do not assign a single price to categories in the NFP data that refer
to several crops such as the ”other staple crops” category.
28
In the regressions, we will address this by controlling for linear crop-province-specific trends.
29
As shown in Appendix Table A.2, many of the reforms were implemented in October or November of the
calendar year. Given that the reform tended to be implemented late in the year, we separate the effects of the
reform year from the years after the implementation.
30
We may not see households both before and after the reform for a variety of reasons mainly due to the
exclusion of observations from provinces that reformed in 2003 and provinces that had not yet reformed by the
end of the sample period. To a lesser extent, the drop in the both sides sample size is also driven by villages
or households being added to the survey sample after the reform in their province, and villages or households

14

increase in the probability of engaging in land rentals in villages after the implementation of
the reform. Relative to the average rate of land renting, this is a 10% increase. This estimate is
significant at the 5% level in the full sample and at the 10% level when the sample is restricted to
villages for which we have data on both sides of implementation, respectively. This suggests that
the property rights reform allowed households to adjust their land-holdings through renting.
To look at pre-reform and post-reform trends, we can also estimate a specification that uses
the leads and lags around the implementation:

yhpt = α +

3
X

βk Ref ormpt,k + γt + γp t + γh + hpt

(5)

k=−2

where Ref ormpt,k is an indicator variable that indicates the period relative to the reform implementation in the province. Thus, Ref ormpt,−2 refers to two years prior to the year of
implementation and Ref ormpt,2 refers to two years after implementation. The omitted category is k = −1. The sample here is restricted to the six waves around the implementation year
in each province. Equation 5 takes advantage of the panel nature of the data to allow us to
test the identification assumption that the timing of the implementation of the reform in each
province is exogenous to our outcomes of interest.
Figure 2 displays the estimates corresponding to Equation 5.31 We observe a shift in both
the magnitude and significance of the coefficients after the implementation of the reform. Furthermore, there are no significant trends in these outcomes prior to the implementation. This
provides support for the identification assumption that the timing of the implementation of the
reform is not driven by changes in land rental activities in the province.
The estimated impact of the reform on the amount of leasing may be underestimated in
the main variable used so far, which is an indicator for whether the household engaged in new
leasing contracts. Thus, that measure may miss changes in the intensive margin of land leasing.
We exploit the fact that the survey includes a question on the amount of land rented out to
individuals in the 2009 and 2010 waves. Given that there are only two waves, these regressions
exploit provinces that implement their reforms in 2009 or 2010. Table 3 shows that the reform
led to a 7% increase in the amount of land rented to individuals, and this estimate is significant
attriting from the survey.
31
The corresponding table is in Appendix Table A.3.

15

at the 1% level.32

5.2

Estimation Concerns

A common concern with difference-in-difference estimates is that there are other changes happening at the same time that are driving the results. For this concern to be valid, the roll out
of the other change across provinces would need to follow the implementation of the RLCL.
The other important law change for rural households around this period is the reduction and
elimination of the agricultural tax.33 All the provinces in our sample began reducing this tax
in 2004. Any aggregate change before versus after 2004 would be removed with the year fixed
effects in our regressions. As an additional robustness check, we included the tax rate which
declines at different rates across provinces starting in 2004 in the regressions and as shown in
Appendix Table A.4, this inclusion has little effect on the magnitude and significance of the
coefficients on the implementation of the RLCL.
Given that we are interested the reallocation of land within villages, there is a possible
concern with an estimation strategy that uses a representative sample of households in the village
rather than a village-level land census. We might be concerned that land rental transactions
are occurring but that land is being transferred to agricultural firms that are not surveyed in
the household-based survey. A similar concern is that land is being transferred to a very small
number of households, and our sample covering 399 villages includes very few of the households
that are amassing land. Both of these concerns would lead to underestimates in the effects of
the property rights reform on our outcomes of interest.
We do two things to evaluate whether downward bias driven by the random sample is likely
to be substantial. First, we examine the impact of leasing to agricultural firms by using the
survey question on the amount of land rented out to firms in the 2009 and 2010 waves. Column
2 of Table 3 show a small (1.85%) negative effect on the amount of land rented to firms. Second,
we examine whether the total village-level area of land reported under use by households in the
sample declines. Appendix Table A.5 shows there is no significant change in the area of land
under use in the survey sample. Both results provide reassurance that the downward bias in
32

The dependent variable is transformed using the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) function. The IHS function
is similar to a logarithmic transformation but is well defined for values of zero. Thus, we use it for continuous
outcomes whose distribution includes preponderance of zeros and a long right tail. We use the logarithmic
transformation for continuous variables without any zeros.
33
See Wang and Shen (2014) for more background on the agricultural tax.

16

our estimates due to household sampling is unlikely to be substantial.

5.3

Effect on Aggregate Productivity and Output

We now examine the predictions of the model on the effect of the reform on aggregate agricultural output and productivity.34 Aggregate output is defined as village-level aggregate revenue;
in this section, we refer to village-level aggregate revenue per mu as aggregate productivity (this
can be interpreted as aggregate yield). We estimate the following equation, where the unit of
observation is village v in province p and year t:

yvpt = α + β0 P ostRef ormpt + β1 Ref ormY earpt + γt + γp t + γv + vpt

(6)

and where the standard errors continue to be clustered at the province level. Table 4 presents
the estimates where real village-level revenue and revenue per unit of land are in logarithms.
The point estimate in column 1 indicates that land reform has increased aggregate output by
approximately 7 percent (significant at the 5% level). Unsurprisingly, this is also mirrored in
the aggregate productivity of land (column 2). These are significant gains, albeit more modest
than the potential gains hypothesized in the previous literature (see for example, Restuccia and
Santaeulalia-Llopis 2017).35

5.4

Constructing Total Factor Productivity and Marginal Product Measures

To test the model’s predictions in terms of land reallocation, we first construct measures of
total factor productivity (TFP) and the marginal product of land (MPL) using the detailed
survey information on crop-specific inputs and output. We assume a Cobb-Douglas crop-specific
production function that can be written in logs as follows:

yicvt = αc log Licvt + βc log Nicvt + γc log Kicvt + δc log Micvt + φicvt

(7)

where yicvt denotes log (physical) output of farmer i growing crop c in village v in year t; Licvt ,
Nicvt , Kicvt and Micvt denote the area, labor days, machinery cost and all other input costs,
34

See Appendix Table A.6 for the impact of the reform on household-level income (rather than village-level
revenue).
35
However, Gollin and Udry (2017) argue that a significant proportion of the hypothesized gains stem from
measurement errors and unobserved heterogeneity in land quality.

17

respectively.36 The logarithm of total factor productivity (TFP) is given by φicvt . Consistent
estimation of the parameters of the production function depends on what we assume about
unobserved TFP, because this is likely to be correlated with input decisions (Marschak and
Andrews 1944). We assume that TFP can be decomposed into (i) a fixed farmer-crop component
that captures the farmer’s fixed ability to farm a given crop, (ii) a farmer-year component that
captures time-varying shocks to productivity that are common to all crops grown by the farmer,
(iii) a time-varying component that is common to all farmers in the village that are growing
crop c (for example, weather shocks or pest infestations), and (iv) an idiosyncratic shock that
is specific to the farmer and the crop in a given year:

φicvt = φic + φit + φcvt + eicvt .

(8)

Because farmers grow multiple crops in any given year, we can estimate the regression
specification (Equation 7) jointly for all crops (i.e. we are estimating a single regression in
which the coefficients on inputs are allowed to be crop-specific), while absorbing φic , φit and
φcvt by farmer-crop, farmer-year and village-crop-year fixed effects. The farmer-crop effect φic
absorbs all time-invariant productive characteristics such as farmer education and gender, in
addition to capturing the farmer’s crop-specific productive ability; the farmer-year effect φit
absorbs changes in household composition, health shocks, rainfall shocks, etc; the village-cropyear component additionally absorbs shocks such as pest infestations which may be crop- and
location-specific. Additionally, assuming that the idiosyncratic component of TFP, eicvt , is
unobserved by the farmer at the time that input decisions are made, the inclusion of these
fixed effects addresses omitted variable bias arising from the dependence of input choices on the
farmer-observed component of TFP.37
Appendix Table A.8 presents the estimated (crop-specific) production function coefficients.38
On average across all crops (i.e. if we restrict elasticities to be equal across crops), the elasticity
of output with respect to land is 0.47, which is slightly larger than estimates for China obtained
36
Appendix Table A.7 shows that input intensity does not change significantly following the reform. This result
isn’t necessary for consistent estimates of the production function, but it is interesting to note that the reform
doesn’t lead to an increase in mechanization.
37
Note that the inclusion of farmer-year and village-crop-year fixed effects also absorbs any changes in the
village-level average TFP arising from the land reform, thus allowing us to consistently estimate the production
function while using data on the entire sample period.
38
See Appendix Figure A.4 for the distribution of TFP calculated from these production function estimates.

18

from aggregate data that range from 0.35 to 0.38 (Chow 1993, Cao and Birchenall 2013), although it should be noted that our estimates of elasticities exhibit substantial variation between
crops.
In Appendix Table A.9, we assess the importance of selection due to entry and exit, by
estimating the production function using a balanced sample of farmer-crop combinations that
span the period 2003 to 2010. The production function coefficients are largely similar to those
obtained before, indicating that selection driven by unobserved productivity shocks is not a
serious problem.
In Appendix Table A.10, we examine the sensitivity of the estimates to a more stringent
estimation strategy, in which, in addition to the inclusion of the fixed effects described above, the
inputs are also instrumented by their lagged values (Arellano and Bover 1995). This specification
further allows input choices to be correlated with the unobserved eicvt . The coefficient estimates
are generally similar to those obtained under the simpler specification, but are less precisely
estimated and occasionally negative. More importantly for our purposes, the estimated TFP
residuals are highly correlated with the estimated TFPs obtained from the simpler fixed effects
specification, with the correlation coefficient being 0.993. In the analysis that follows, we
therefore work with the TFP estimates derived from the simple fixed effects specification.

5.5

Evidence for Land Reallocation

The model presented in Section 3 leads us to expect that the reform should result in a reallocation of land towards high-TFP farmers. Figure 3 examines this hypothesis descriptively by
graphing total farm area against farm TFP, 2 years prior to and 2 years after reform, where farm
TFP is calculated by averaging TFP over the crops grown by the farmer.39 In the pre-reform
period, farm area correlates weakly with TFP, suggesting that the pre-reform regime may have
been characterized by an inefficient allocation of land. After the reform, as predicted, highTFP farmers (those in the top decile of the TFP distribution) cultivate more land following the
reform with low-TFP farmers cultivating less land.40
We now establish this result more rigorously by testing for within-village land reallocations,
39

To average TFP across crops, we use revenue TFP rather than physical TFP, where the former is obtained
by multiplying physical TFP by the farmer-crop-specific price.
40
The curves cross at approximately the 90th percentile of the TFP distribution.

19

using the following estimating equation:

licvt = α +

5
X
j=1

5
X

βj φjict +

5
X

δj (P ostRef ormpt × φjict ) +

(9)

j=1

θj (Ref ormY earpt × φjict ) + ηv + ηt + ivct

j=1

where φjic is an indicator for whether the TFP of farmer i growing crop c in year t is in quintile
j of the TFP distribution of village v.41 The dependent variable, licvt , is the logarithm of crop
area. The regressions include village fixed effects and year fixed effects. As before, standard
errors are clustered at the province level. In this regression, the δ coefficients capture the
heterogeneous effects of the reform on crop area with respect to TFP.
Panel A of Figure 4 graphs the estimated δ coefficients, along with the associated 95%
confidence intervals. The corresponding regression results are reported in Column 1 of Appendix
Table A.11. The reform significantly reduces cultivated area, by approximately 13%, for those
in the bottom two TFP quintiles. These reductions are matched by an increase in crop area in
the top of the TFP distribution, with the majority of the increase occurring in the top quintile.
These results accord well with the descriptive evidence of land reallocation presented in Figure
3.
A potential concern with the interpretation of these results is that measured TFP has a
time-varying component which could be endogenous to the reform. Thus, the results reported
earlier may be an artefact of compositional changes among the TFP quintiles, instead of reflecting an actual reallocation of land.42 To rule out such compositional effects, we estimate
the specification in equation 9, but this time using only the time-invariant component of TFP,
φic , to construct the TFP quintiles, as this component of TFP should not be affected by the
reform. The results are reported in column 2 of Appendix Table A.11 and presented in Panel
41

In the Chinese context, it is reasonable to assume that land is not traded across village boundaries, so that
the village is the natural level at which the land market is defined. The quintiles are calculated with respect to
the village TFP distribution aggregated across all years.
42
For instance, if the reform increased the TFP of some farmers so as to move them from the fourth to the fifth
quintile, and if these farmers had large amounts of land to begin with, this might increase the average crop area
associated with farmers in the top quintile, even if no actual reallocation were to accompany the increase in TFP.
Changes in measured TFP may also be triggered by increased land transactions: If the land transactions that
occur after the reform systematically transfer either high or low quality plots from low to high TFP farmers, such
transfers would have the effect of changing measured TFP (since land quality is unobserved to the econometrician
and therefore enters into measured TFP).

20

B of Figure 4. The estimated effects retain similar magnitudes as before, suggesting that our
results are not an artefact of compositional effects.
In addition to the total land cultivated, we examine whether the reform had heterogeneous
effects by TFP on leasing behavior. Because the outcome variables, the amount of land rented
out to individuals and firms, are asked at the household level, we return to household-level
regressions. Furthermore, the key regressors are the interactions of the quintiles of the fixed
component of TFP (φi ), aggregated up from the household-crop level to the household level, with
the standard reform indicators. Consistent with expectations on the gradient of the relationship,
the results in column 1 of Table 5 show that households with low TFP are more likely to rent
their land out to individuals after the reform than households with high TFP.43 The difference
between the interaction between the post reform year with the lowest quintile and the top
quintile is statistically significant at the 5% level.44 Overall, the results confirm the idea that
the reform allowed land to move from low-TFP farmers to high-TFP farmers.

5.6

Land Reallocation Using Alternative Measures to TFP

Given that the identification of TFP requires a number of assumptions, we examine whether
the results are robust to two alternative measures of productivity: Agricultural profits (per mu)
and the marginal product of land, both measured at pre-reform levels.
First, we consider whether after the reform, the distribution of land moves towards farmers
who had higher pre-reform agricultural profits per mu. While we have rich information on
agricultural revenue and the cost of inputs at the household-crop level, a key obstacle to this
approach is valuing labor that a household provides on their own land. We take a simple but
standard approach by constructing village-level wage rates using information on the cost and
number of days of hired labor.45 Agricultural profits are then calculated by valuing family labor
inputs at the market wage rate. However, in nearly one-third of villages in our sample, zero
households in the sample hire any labor in the pre-reform years. Thus, we lose a substantial
share of the sample in this approach.
43

While high TFP farmers are ultimately cultivating more land (as shown in Figure 4), they also increase the
amount of land that they are renting out. This is consistent with the idea that they are renting in more land
than they rent out (and may be adjusting other characteristics of the land that they are cultivating).
44
The interaction between post reform year with the lowest quintile and the second and fourth quintiles are
statistically significant at the 10% and the 5% levels, respectively.
45
This ignores the possibility of agency costs in hired labor that are not present in family labor (Eswaran and
Kotwal 1986, Feder 1985).

21

We estimate the equation 9 where we replace φjic with an indicator for whether the average
pre-reform agricultural profits of farmer i growing crop c is in quintile j of the distribution in
village v. The coefficients of δj and the corresponding 95% confidence intervals are presented
in Figure 5.46 There is a gradient in the magnitude of the coefficients across the quintiles
suggesting that farmer-crop units with lower pre-reform agricultural profits cultivated less land
after the reform while those in the higher quintiles gained land. However, it is important to
note that none of the coefficient estimates are significant at the standard levels.
In our second alternative measure, we test whether land is reallocated along the gradient
of marginal productivity (essentially, we would expect that land should be reallocated to those
who are most productive at the margin). We calculate the revenue marginal product of land
(averaged over pre-reform years) for each farmer-crop, and then categorize the latter into quintiles based on the within-village distribution of marginal products.47 We then estimate equation
9 where φjic is now an indicator for whether the pre-reform marginal product of land of farmer
i growing crop c is in quintile j of the distribution in village v.
The coefficient estimates of δj and 95% confidence intervals are graphed in Figure 6.48
Farmers in the highest quintile of pre-reform marginal product of land gain the most land
(12%) after the reform and this estimate is significant at the 90% level. Farmers in the lowest
quintile cultivate 12% less land after the reform and this estimate is significant at the 5% level.
While the construction of the measures of pre-reform agricultural profitability and the prereform marginal product of land require different assumptions than the TFP measures, the main
conclusions remain similar. Overall, we conclude that there is robust evidence of land being
reallocated towards more productive farmers.

5.7

Labor Effects

We now consider the effects of the reform on labor market outcomes. To start with, because
labor is a complementary input to land, we would expect that the reallocation of land from lowTFP farmers to high-TFP farmers would reduce the labor demand of the former and increase
the labor demand of the latter. This is indeed the case, as we show in Table 6, where we examine
46

The corresponding regression table is in Column 1 of Appendix Table A.12.
Under the Cobb-Douglas production function assumption, the marginal product of land equals the average
product of land (i.e. output per unit of land) multiplied by the (crop-specific) elasticity of output with respect
to land.
48
Column 2 of Appendix Table A.12 presents the corresponding estimates.
47

22

heterogeneity in the response to the reform by TFP quintiles with the dependent variables being
the IHS function of hired labor days (column 1) and hired labor costs (column 2). The results
show that farmers with the highest TFP within a village hire in 22% more days of labor after
the reform and spend 48% more on hired labor after the reform. Farmers in the second highest
TFP quintile use 9% more hired labor after the reform, spending 21% more on hired labor. All
four coefficients are significant at the 1% level. In contrast, those in the bottom two quintiles of
TFP hire significantly less labor after the reform. The anecdotal evidence presented in Section
2 suggests the increased demand for labor among high-TFP farmers may be met by in increases
in wage labor supplied by low-TFP farmers.49
It is also interesting to examine whether there is an increase in local off-farm (i.e. nonagricultural) and migrant labor supply on the part of the low-TFP farmers. Table 6 presents
estimates that examine heterogeneity by TFP quintiles with the dependent variables being the
IHS function of off farm labor days (column 3) and the IHS function of migrant labor days in
column 4.50 There are no significant changes in the probability of migration or off-farm labor
activities by TFP after the reform. The lack of evidence of any increases in migration following
the property rights reform may be explained at least in part by the institutional barriers to
migration in China.51

5.8

Decomposing the Productivity Gains from the Reform

The previous evidence suggests that land reallocation may be an important source of aggregate
productivity gains following the reform. We now attempt to quantify the contribution of the
reallocation channel to the observed increase in aggregate productivity. To do so, we consider
the following decomposition of aggregate productivity suggested by Olley and Pakes (1996):

Ivt =

X

wict φict = E(φict |v, t) +

X

(wict − E(wict |v, t))(φict − E(φict |v, t))

(10)

where the index Ivt denotes village-level aggregate TFP at time t, and is defined as the outputshare weighted average of log TFPs, with wict denoting the real output-share of the i-th farmer49

There are no survey questions on labor supplied for agricultural wage work so we cannot test this directly.
Note that unlike hiring labor inputs which are reported at the household-crop level, these are household-level
regressions because migration is measured at the household level.
51
See Kinnan, Wang and Wang (forthcoming) for an overview of the household registration (hukou) system in
China.
50

23

crop.52 The aggregate index is decomposed into two components: A component that measures
the productivity of the average farmer-crop, E(φict |v, t), and a covariance term that measures
the extent to which size (measured here by output) is correlated with TFP.53 As Bartelsman,
Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2013) show, the Olley-Pakes covariance term is a reliable measure
of the efficiency of resource allocation that varies systematically with changes in the economic
regime. Our expectation is that land reform should result in an increase in the Olley-Pakes
covariance, as land gets reallocated from low- to high-productivity farmers.
We can now estimate reform effects on the separate terms of the decomposition to understand
the source of aggregate productivity growth. Table 7 reports the regression results. The point
estimates indicate an aggregate TFP increase of approximately 9.3% (significant at the 1%
level), which is consistent in magnitude with the observed increase in total output. There is a
significant increase in the covariance term, which accounts for approximately 84% of the increase
in aggregate TFP. The remaining increase in aggregate TFP is attributed to an increase in
average productivity, although this effect is not statistically distinguishable from zero.54 These
results strongly suggest that the effects of land reform on aggregate productivity arise from input
reallocations, in line with the predictions from the theoretical framework outlined in Section 3.
To shed more light on the reallocational flows, we apply a decomposition of covariance term:

cov OP

≡

X

(wict − E(wict |v, t))(φict − E(φict |v, t))

= N ∗ cov(wict , φict )
= N ∗ E[cov(wict , φict |c)] + N ∗ cov[E(wict |c), E(φict |c)]

(11)

where, to avoid notational clutter, we have now suppressed the conditioning on v and t. The
number of household-crops is denoted by N . The equation above shows that the Olley-Pakes
covariance term can be decomposed into within-crop and across-crop components.55
Table 8 reports the results from regressing these components on the reform indicators.
The average values of the covariance components are reported at the bottom of the table.
52

In order to aggregate TFP across crops, we convert physical TFPs by multiplying by the crop-specific price.
The “covariance” term in this decomposition is really N times the covariance between output shares and
TFP, where N is the number of household-crops. That is, the decomposition can be seen to be a simple rewriting
of the expression for the covariance between output shares and TFP.
54
This shift can also be seen in Appendix Figure A.4.
55
This decomposition is sometimes referred to as the law of total covariance.
53

24

Column 1 reiterates the results for the full covariance term from the prior table, and columns 2
and 3 display results for the within-crop and across-crop components, respectively. The point
estimates suggest that across-crop reallocation is almost twice as important as within-crop
reallocation.56 This may not be surprising given that in our sample, across-crop covariance is
on average much smaller than within-crop covariance (shown in the bottom row), signaling a
distortion in the (aggregate) mix of crops. It appears therefore that an important source of
productivity gain from the reform arises from a correction of this distortion.

6

Responses to Price Changes

Land reform may not only correct the allocation of land in a static sense, but may also increase
the responsiveness of land allocation to productivity shocks. In this section, we consider relative
price changes (across different crops) as a particular type of shock. The idea that the land reform
may have increased farmers’ ability to respond to such shocks is also suggested by our finding
that there is more across-crop reallocation following the reform. We examine this hypothesis
by examining the effect of crop price changes on the allocation of land across crops before and
after the reform.
Specifically, we estimate the following equation for a crop c in household h, village v, province
p and year t:

Yhcvpt = α + β0 P ricecp,t−1 ∗ P ostRef ormpt + β1 P ricecp,t−1 ∗ Ref ormY earpt +
β2 P ostRef ormpt + β3 Ref ormY earpt + β4 P ricecp,t−1 + β5 OtherP ricecp,t−1 ∗ P ostRef ormpt +
β6 OtherP ricecp,t−1 ∗ Ref ormY earpt + β7 OtherP ricecp,t−1 + νcp t + γt + γvc + hcvpt (12)

The lagged province-level crop price index is given by P ricecp,t−1 . This variable is a provincial
level crop-specific price index where each crop price in 2002 is set as 1. We use a one-year lag
for multiple reasons. Agricultural decisions are often months in advance of harvest in which
case the relevant price on which farmers can make planting decisions is from the prior year.
56

This result stands in contrast with findings from the firm literature, where within-industry reallocation tends
to dominate (e.g. Davis and Haltiwanger 1999, Foster, Haltiwanger and Krizan 2001), but the present setting
differs not only in that we are studying the agricultural sector which may exhibit fundamentally different patterns
of reallocation from the manufacturing sector, but also in that we are arguably studying a transition between
steady states.

25

This also sidesteps the issue that contemporaneous prices may reflect endogenous agricultural
production decisions. We also include an aggregate index of prices in all of the other crops
(excluding crop c), OtherP ricec,t−1 , and its interactions with the timing of the reform. The
regressions also include year fixed effects, province-crop time trends and household fixed effects.
All of the regressions are clustered at the province level. The outcomes here are those that are
measured at the household-crop-year level by the survey.
We also estimate the equation with the leads and lags around the implementation of the
reform:

Yvcpt = α +

3
X

(βk P ricecp,t−1 ∗ Ref ormpt,k + ηk Ref ormpt,k ) + δ1 P ricecp,t−1 +

k=−2
3
X

(θk OtherP ricecp,t−1 ∗ Ref ormpt,k + µk OtherP ricecp,t−1 ) + δ2 P ricecp,t−1 +

k=−2

νcp t + γt + γh + hcpt

(13)

where Ref ormp,t+k is an indicator variable that indicates the period relative to the reform
implementation in the province. In these regressions, the sample is restricted to the six waves
around the implementation of the reform. The reference year is the one prior to the reform
implementation (t = −1).
A key concern with these regressions is whether local agricultural prices are exogenous to the
reform. To address this, we present all of our crop-level estimates for both the full sample and
the cash crop only sample. The all crop sample offers the advantage of presenting a full picture
of the agricultural portfolio and decision-making of agricultural households. However, there
may be some concerns about staple crops in this analysis. First, if the Chinese government
sometimes intervenes in these markets, agricultural production decisions in these crops may
be less likely to be driven by market dynamics and market prices (Deng 2009). Second, we
may have some concerns that the timing of the reform at the provincial level responds to local
economic conditions, which are largely defined by output in staple crops. Third, we may be
concerned about the reverse, that crop prices are driven by the reform. Given that we are
exploiting variation in prices of nine different crops that are not that highly correlated with
each other, it seems unlikely that the results are driven by the endogeneity of prices to the
reform.
26

However, we address this concern by demonstrating that cash crop prices are likely to be
exogenous to the timing of the reform by estimating the relationship between crop prices in
Chinese provinces and in the United States. In Table 9, the dependent variable in column 1
is the price of the four cash crops in Chinese provinces for which we have price data (oilseed,
sugar, cotton, and tobacco). The dependent variable in column 2 is the price of the five staple
crops. The results in column 1 indicate that price movements for cash crops in China move
closely with changes in U.S. prices, suggesting that much of the variation in these prices is driven
by global markets rather than by agricultural investment decisions of households in China. In
contrast, the Chinese prices for staple crops do not move that closely with U.S. prices. Thus,
we look at the estimates of Equations 12 and 13 for a sub-sample of only cash crops, which are
more plausibly exogenous, in addition to the full sample of all crops.
The all crops sample includes both staple crops, which are corn, potato, rice, soybean and
wheat, and cash crops.57 For cash crops, we focus on four available in the data, cotton, sugar,
oilseed, and tobacco. We exclude fruits and vegetables products, which are also cash crops,
from the analysis because the NFP data lumps production questions on all fruits into one single
category and all vegetables together so we are unable to match these broad categories to a
single agricultural price. We also do not have price data for hemp, so we exclude this from the
crop-level analysis.58

6.1

Results on Price Changes

In Table 10, we estimate equation 12 where the outcomes are different measures of land used for
cultivation of cash crops. The dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the inverse hyperbolic
sine function of the land cultivated for each crop, while it is an indicator for any land cultivated
for each crop in columns 3 and 4. In both the all crops sample (column 1) and the cash
crops sample (column 2), we see that the reform leads to more land under cultivation of a
specific crop in areas with positive changes in prices of that crop in the years after the reform is
implemented.59 In the sample including all crops, a standard deviation increase in the price of
a crop (0.45) corresponds with a 1.7 percent increase in the area in the village allocated to that
57
We follow the Chinese Ministry of Agriculture’s definition of what constitutes a staple crop versus a cash
crop.
58
As shown by the number of observations in Appendix Table A.8, there is much less activity in hemp relative
to all the other crops.
59
This is given by the coefficient β0 in Equation 12.

27

crop after the reform relative to before the reform. The estimate is significant at the 5% level.
In columns 3, we also see a 1.2 percent increase in the probability that any land in the village
is used for production in that crop corresponding to a standard deviation change in crop price,
and these estimates are significant at the 5% level. Column 2 and 4 show that the magnitude
of responses to prices is similar for the sample of cash crops as for all crops and these estimates
are significant at the 10% level.
In all of the specifications, the impact of price changes in the year of implementation (β1 )
is positive but not significantly different than in the years prior. Furthermore, the magnitudes
of the estimates are much smaller as compared with the estimates for the following years.
Finally, the coefficients on lagged price are positive, indicating that there was reallocation of
land towards crops experiencing price increases prior to the reform.60 However, the interactions
discussed above show that the price response increased following the protection of property
rights.
In the estimates of equation 13 presented in Appendix Table A.13, we see the sign and the
significance of the coefficients shift immediately following the implementation of the reform for
both the all crops sample and the cash crops sample. These results suggest that by allowing
land to be legally rented across villagers, households are better able to optimize the amount of
land devoted to the production of different crops in response to price changes. Furthermore,
the similarity of the estimates and significance of the coefficients between the full sample and
the cash crop sample in Table 10 and Appendix Table A.13 suggest that it is unlikely that an
endogenous relationship between crop prices and the timing of the reform is driving the results.

7

Conclusion

Despite a unique history and set of land institutions, agricultural production in China is typical
of a number of developing countries in many important aspects. The median farm is small
(approximately 1.3 acres), and is largely operated using household labor. Therefore, this is an
instructive setting in which to study the effects of easing land market frictions.
Our paper emphasizes the importance of property rights institutions for the efficient allocation of land across farmers and of labor across sectors and space. By exploiting provincial-level
60
These estimates are significant at the 10% level or less for the all crop sample, and not significant at the
standard levels in the cash crop sample.

28

variation in the implementation of a central reform in China that formalized leasing rights, we
are able to evaluate the impact of the rural land reform. We find that the reform increases
leasing transactions and led to increases in agricultural output of over 7%. We argue that these
gains can be attributed to a better allocation of land resources. While this is in line with theoretical predictions, empirical evidence has been scant. For example, Besley (1995) finds that
rental and sale rights have no significant effect on agricultural investments in Ghana.
While our estimates of the effect of the reform on output and aggregate productivity are
economically significant, they are considerably more modest than those implied by other studies. Adamopoulos, Brandt, Leight and Restuccia’s (2017) study of misallocation in Chinese
agriculture suggests that moving to an efficient allocation of land and capital would increase
village-level productivity by 50%, while Restuccia and Santaeulalia-Llopis’ (2017) study of misallocation in Malawi implies potential efficiency gains of more than 300%. One potential explanation for this discrepancy is that the RLCL has not succeeded in entirely removing all frictions
in the land market in China, so that substantial gains remain yet to be realized. At the same
time, it is also possible that the diagnostic measures of misallocation used in the literature
tend to overstate the extent of misallocation, at least when they are applied to the agricultural
sector, a point that is emphasized by Gollin and Udry (2017).61
In many developing countries, much emphasis continues to be placed on land structures
with communal ownership or on policies that aim for equality in the distribution of land across
farmers rather than on allowing free exchange in land markets. Indeed, households still do not
have the right to sell property in China.62 Our research demonstrates that households cannot
fully solve the contracting problem in informal ways and that legal protections for exchange
rights are important for the efficient allocation of resources, including land and labor. An
important related question, that we leave for future research, is the potential trade-off between
efficiency and equity accompanying such changes in institutions.

61

See also Bils, Klenow and Ruane (2017) and Rotemberg and White (2017) who show, in the context of manufacturing data, that measurement error and data inconsistencies tend to inflate the importance of misallocation.
62
Similarly, the law does not allow for leasing or sales rights over grazing land in Mongolia.

29

References
Adamopoulos, Tasso and Diego Restuccia, “The size distribution of farms and international productivity differences,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (6), 1667–1697.
, Loren Brandt, Jessica Leight, and Diego Restuccia, “Misallocation, selection and
productivity: A quantitative analysis with panel data from China,” Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.
Arellano, Manuel and Olympia Bover, “Another look at the instrumental variable estimation of error-components models,” Journal of econometrics, 1995, 68 (1), 29–51.
Banerjee, Abhijit V, Paul J Gertler, and Maitreesh Ghatak, “Empowerment and
efficiency: Tenancy reform in West Bengal,” Journal of Political Economy, 2002, 110 (2),
239–280.
Bartelsman, Eric, John Haltiwanger, and Stefano Scarpetta, “Cross-country differences
in productivity: The role of allocation and selection,” The American Economic Review, 2013,
103 (1), 305–334.
Benjamin, Dwayne, Loren Brandt, and John Giles, “The evolution of income inequality
in rural China,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 2005, 53 (4), 769–824.
Besley, Timothy, “Property rights and investment incentives: Theory and evidence from
Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 1995, pp. 903–937.
Bils, Mark, “Misallocation or Mismeasurement?,” Technical Report 2017.
Binswanger, Hans P., Klaus Deininger, and Gershon Feder, “Power, distortions, revolt
and reform in agricultural land relations,” Handbook of Development Economics, 1995, 3,
2659–2772.
Brasselle, Anne-Sophie, Frederic Gaspart, and Jean-Philippe Platteau, “Land tenure
security and investment incentives: Puzzling evidence from Burkina Faso,” Journal of Development Economics, 2002, 67 (2), 373–418.

30

Cao, Kang Hua and Javier A Birchenall, “Agricultural productivity, structural change,
and economic growth in post-reform China,” Journal of Development Economics, 2013, 104,
165–180.
Carter, Michael R, Keith D Wiebe, and Benoit Blarel, “Tenure security for whom?
Differential effects of land policy in Kenya,” 1994.
Caselli, Francesco, “Accounting for cross-country income differences,” Handbook of economic
growth, 2005, 1, 679–741.
Chanda, Areendam and Carl-Johan Dalgaard, “Dual Economies and International Total Factor Productivity Differences: Channelling the Impact from Institutions, Trade, and
Geography,” Economica, 2008, 75 (300), 629–661.
Chari, Amalavoyal V, “Identifying the aggregate productivity effects of entry and size restrictions: An empirical analysis of license reform in India,” American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 2011, 3 (2), 66–96.
Chen, Chaoran, Diego Restuccia, Raül Santaeulalia-Llopis et al., “The Effects of Land
Markets on Resource Allocation and Agricultural Productivity,” Technical Report 2017.
Choi, Jung-Sup and Peter G. Helmberger, “How sensitive are crop yields to price changes
and farm programs?,” Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 1993, 25 (01), 237–244.
Chow, Gregory C, “Capital formation and economic growth in China,” The Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 1993, 108 (3), 809–842.
Davis, Steven J and John Haltiwanger, “Gross job flows,” Handbook of labor economics,
1999, 3, 2711–2805.
Deininger, Klaus and Songqing Jin, “Securing property rights in transition: Lessons from
implementation of China’s rural land contracting law,” Journal of Economic Behavior &
Organization, 2009, 70 (1), 22–38.
Deng, Dacai, “The dynamics of government policies in Chinese Agricultural product markets
(Zhongguo Liangshi Zhengzhi De Yanbian),” 21th Century Bimonthly, 2009, 116 (12), 48–57.

31

Eswaran, Mukesh and Ashok Kotwal, “A theory of contractual structure in agriculture,”
The American Economic Review, 1985, 75 (3), 352–367.
and

, “Access to capital and agrarian production organisation,” The Economic Journal,

1986, 96 (382), 482–498.
Feder, Gershon, “The relation between farm size and farm productivity: The role of family
labor, supervision and credit constraints,” Journal of Development Economics, 1985, 18 (2),
297–313.
Field, Erica, “Entitled to work: Urban property rights and labor supply in Peru,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2007, 122 (4), 1561–1602.
Foster, Andrew and Mark Rosenzweig, “Are Indian farms too small? mechanization,
agency costs, and farm efficiency,” 2012.
Foster, Lucia, John C Haltiwanger, and Cornell John Krizan, “Aggregate productivity growth: lessons from microeconomic evidence,” in “New developments in productivity
analysis,” University of Chicago Press, 2001, pp. 303–372.
Goldstein, Markus and Christopher Udry, “The profits of power: Land rights and agricultural investment in Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 2008, 116 (6), 981–1022.
Gollin, Douglas and Christopher Udry, “Heterogeneity, Measurement Error, and Misallocation: Evidence from African Agriculture,” 2017.
, Stephen Parente, and Richard Rogerson, “The role of agriculture in development,”
The American Economic Review, 2002, 92 (2), 160–164.
Houck, James P. and Paul W. Gallagher, “The price responsiveness of US corn yields,”
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1976, 58 (4 Part 1), 731–734.
Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Pete Klenow, “Misallocation and manufacturing TFP in China and
India,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2009, 124 (4), 1403–1448.
Kinnan, Cynthia, Shing-Yi Wang, and Yongxiang Wang, “Access to migration for rural
households,” American Economic Journal: Applied Micro, forthcoming.

32

Lagakos, David and Michael E. Waugh, “Selection, Agriculture, and Cross-Country Productivity Differences,” The American Economic Review, 2013, 103 (2), 948–980.
Lamb, Russell L., “Fertilizer use, risk, and off-farm labor markets in the semi-arid tropics of
India,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2003, 85 (2), 359–371.
Li, Ping, “Rural land tenure reforms in China: Issues, regulations and prospects for additional
reform,” Land Reform, Land Settlement, and Cooperatives, 2003, 11 (3), 59–72.
Marschak, Jacob and William H Andrews, “Random simultaneous equations and the
theory of production,” Econometrica, Journal of the Econometric Society, 1944, pp. 143–205.
Menz, Kenneth M. and Philip Pardey, “Technology and US corn yields: plateaus and
price responsiveness,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1983, 65 (3), 558–562.
Midrigan, Virgiliu and Daniel Yi Xu, “Finance and misallocation: Evidence from plantlevel data,” The American Economic Review, 2014, 104 (2), 422–458.
Nishida, Mitsukuni, Amil Petrin, Martin Rotemberg, and T. Kirk White, “Measuring
Cross-Country Differences in Misallocation,” SSRN Electronic Journal, 2016, pp. 1–27.
Olley, G. Steven. and Ariel. Pakes, “The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications equipment industry,” Econometrica, 1996, 64 (6), 1263–1297.
Ranis, Gustav and John CH Fei, “A theory of economic development,” The american
economic review, 1961, pp. 533–565.
Ravallion, Martin and Dominique Van de Walle, Land allocation in Vietnam’s agrarian
transition, Vol. 2951, World Bank Publications, 2003.
Release the bonus of land capital: experience of rural land reform from Pinluo county
Release the bonus of land capital: experience of rural land reform from Pinluo
county, Ningxia Daily, 2015.
Restuccia, Diego and Raul Santaeulalia-Llopis, “Land misallocation and productivity,”
Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

33

and Richard Rogerson, “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogeneous
establishments,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 2008, 11 (4), 707–720.
, Dennis Tao Yang, and Xiaodong Zhu, “Agriculture and aggregate productivity: A
quantitative cross-country analysis,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 2008, 55 (2), 234–
250.
Singh, Inderjit, Lyn Squire, and John Strauss, “A survey of agricultural household models: Recent findings and policy implications,” The World Bank Economic Review, 1986, 1
(1), 149–179.
Udry, Christopher, “Gender, agricultural production, and the theory of the household,” Journal of Political Economy, 1996, pp. 1010–1046.
Vollrath, Dietrich, “How important are dual economy effects for aggregate productivity?,”
Journal of Development Economics, 2009, 88 (2), 325 – 334.
Wang, Shing-Yi, “Credit constraints, job mobility, and entrepreneurship: evidence from a
property reform in china,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 2012, 94 (2), 532–551.
Wang, Xiaxin and Yan Shen, “The effect of China’s agricultural tax abolition on rural
families’ incomes and production,” China Economic Review, 2014, 29, 185–199.
World bank institutional development fund rural land tenure in China project, final report
World bank institutional development fund rural land tenure in China project, final
report, Technical Report, World Bank 2002.
Xu, Chenggang, “The fundamental institutions of China’s reforms and development,” Journal
of Economic Literature, 2011, pp. 1076–1151.
Zhao, Xiaoxue, “To Reallocate or Not? Optimal Land Institutions under Communal Tenure:
Evi-dence from China,” 2014.

34

Figure 2: Coefficients of Impact of Reform Implementation on Land Renting

Notes: The dots give the coefficients from the regression specified in equation 5. The lines around the dots give
the 95% confidence interval. The omitted category is the year prior to the reform (t = −1).

Figure 3: Distribution of Area by TFP Before and After the Reform

35

Figure 4: Coefficients on TFP Quintiles × Post Reform
(a) Full TFP

(b) Fixed TFP

Notes: The dots give the coefficients from the regression specified in equation 9. The lines around the dots give
the 95% confidence interval.

36

Figure 5: Coefficients on Agricultural Profit Quintiles × Post Reform

Notes: The dots give the coefficients from the regression specified in equation 9. The lines around the dots give
the 95% confidence interval.

Figure 6: Coefficients on MPL Quintiles × Post Reform

Notes: The dots give the coefficients from the regression specified in equation 9. The lines around the dots give
the 95% confidence interval.

37

Table 1: Summary Statistics
Mean
Panel A: Variables by Household-Year
Area (mu)
12.37
Any New Land Renting
0.142
Rental Transactions to Individuals (mu)
0.329
Rental Transactions to Firms (mu)
0.0280
Total Income
28821.2
Any Migration
0.552
Number of Migrant Work Days
233.7
Any Off Farm Work
0.420
Number of Off Farm Work Days
126.3
Panel B: Variables by Village-Year
Aggregate Revenue
427041.4
Aggregate Revenue per mu
727.3
Panel C: Variables by Household-Crop-Year
Output
6242.9
Area (mu)
4.717
Machine Inputs (RMB)
85.74
Labor Inputs (days)
68.10
Other Inputs (RMB)
672.0

Std Dev

Observations

330.5
0.349
2.433
0.347
82331.1
0.497
295.5
0.493
225.9

157315
157315
41577
41577
156395
156441
156441
156441
156441

407526.1
596.9

2235
2235

1558191.8
203.9
529.1
4790.3
74541.3

412603
412603
412603
412603
412603

Notes: Income and expenditures are in real 2002 renminbi. Renting transaction is referring to changes in
renting out area (mu) in a given village-year. Panel B presents variables that we aggregate to the village
level. Panel C presents information that is collected at the crop level.

Table 2: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Renting

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

Full Sample
(1)
0.0151∗∗
(0.00715)

Both Sides
(2)
0.0144∗
(0.00813)

0.00657
(0.00561)
157315

0.00195
(0.00480)
100588

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is an indicator for any land renting.
The regressions include indicators for calendar year, household fixed effects, province time trends and a
constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

38

Table 3: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Rentals to Individuals and Firms

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

New Rentals to Individuals
(1)
0.0680∗∗∗
(0.0186)

New Rentals to Firms
(2)
-0.0108
(0.00657)

0.0392∗∗∗
(0.00929)
41577

-0.00831∗∗
(0.00328)
41577

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is the IHS function of land rented
out (in mu) to an individual in column 1 and to a firm in column 2. The sample includes only the 2009 and
2010 waves. The regressions include an indicator for calendar year, household fixed effects and a constant
term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 4: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Aggregate Revenue

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

Aggregate Revenue
(1)
0.0723∗∗
(0.0350)

Aggregate Revenue per Mu
(2)
0.0698∗
(0.0349)

0.00724
(0.0336)
2233

0.0543∗
(0.0302)
2233

Notes: The dependent variables are in logarithms. The unit of observation is a village-year. All regressions
include village fixed effects, year fixed effects, province time trends and a constant term. Standard errors
clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% levels, respectively.

39

Table 5: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Rentals to Individuals and Firms by TFP
New Rentals to Individuals
(1)
0.161∗∗∗
(0.0397)

New Rentals to Firms
(2)
-0.0238∗∗∗
(0.00856)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 2

0.0740∗∗
(0.0340)

-0.00915
(0.00664)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 3

0.0999∗∗∗
(0.0273)

-0.00264
(0.00645)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 4

0.0918∗∗∗
(0.0223)

-0.00570
(0.00851)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 5

0.0764∗∗∗
(0.0211)
41577

-0.00473
(0.00693)
41577

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 1

Observations

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is the IHS function of land rented
out (in mu) to an individual in column 1 and to a firm in column 2. The sample includes only the 2009
and 2010 waves. The regressions include an indicator for calendar year, household fixed effects, reform year
interacted with the TFP quintiles and a constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are
reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

40

Table 6: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Hiring Labor and Labor Supplied to Migration
and Off-Farm Activities by TFP
Hired Labor
Days
(1)
-0.103∗∗∗
(0.0263)

Hired Labor
Costs
(2)
-0.253∗∗∗
(0.0571)

Migration
Labor Days
(3)
-0.0152
(0.0730)

Off-Farm
Labor Days
(4)
-0.0722
(0.129)

Post Reform Year × Quintile 2

-0.0789∗∗∗
(0.0244)

-0.198∗∗∗
(0.0568)

-0.00742
(0.0898)

-0.0968
(0.123)

Post Reform Year × Quintile 3

-0.0000260
(0.0197)

0.00434
(0.0470)

-0.103
(0.0845)

-0.0800
(0.104)

Post Reform Year × Quintile 4

0.0902∗∗∗
(0.0185)

0.214∗∗∗
(0.0460)

-0.0789
(0.0671)

-0.0239
(0.129)

Post Reform Year × Quintile 5

0.216∗∗∗
(0.0249)
251190
0.178

0.476∗∗∗
(0.0630)
251190
0.390

-0.0293
(0.103)
156441
3.585

0.0908
(0.163)
156441
2.494

Post Reform Year × Quintile 1

Observations
Mean Dep. Var.

Notes: In columns 1 and 2, each observation is a household-crop-year. In columns 3 and 4, each observation
is a household-year. The dependent variable is the IHS function of the number of days of hired labor in
column 1, the IHS of the expenditures on hired labor in column 2, the IHS of household days spent working
in migration in column 3 and the IHS of the household days spent working in local off-farm activities in
column 4. The quintiles refer to the fixed TFP quintiles. The regressions include indicators for calendar
year, household fixed effects, reform year interacted with the fixed TFP quintiles and a constant term.
Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 7: Decomposition of the Impact of Property Rights Reform on TFP

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations
Mean Dep. Var.

Aggregate TFP
(1)
0.0934∗∗∗
(0.0242)

Covariance
(2)
0.0776∗∗∗
(0.0254)

Average TFP
(3)
0.0157
(0.0216)

0.0389∗
(0.0225)
2233
0.644

0.0287
(0.0205)
2233
0.160

0.0102
(0.0195)
2233
0.484

Notes: The unit of observation is a village-year. All regressions include village fixed effects, year fixed
effects, province time trends and a constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported
in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

41

Table 8: Decomposition of the Covariance Term into Within Crop and Across Crop Components

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations
Mean Dep. Var.

Overall
(1)
0.0776∗∗∗
(0.0254)

Within Crop
(2)
0.0275∗
(0.0158)

Across Crop
(3)
0.0501∗
(0.0250)

0.0287
(0.0205)
2233
0.160

0.00724
(0.00984)
2233
0.131

0.0215
(0.0185)
2233
0.0290

Notes: The dependent variables are measures of the covariance between output and TFP. The unit of
observation is a village-year. All regressions include village fixed effects, year fixed effects, province time
trends and a constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 9: Relationship between Chinese Provincial and U.S. Crop Prices

U.S. Price
Observations

Cash Crops
(1)
0.504∗∗∗
(0.0579)
592

Staple Crops
(2)
-0.00324
(0.0180)
749

Notes: Each observation is a province-crop-year. The dependent variable is the crop price in a Chinese
province. The regressions include crop fixed effects and time trends, province fixed effects and time trends,
indicators for calendar year and a constant term. Standard errors clustered at the province level are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table 10: Impact of Prices and Property Rights Reform on Land Allocation
IHS Area

I(Any Area)

All Crops
(1)
0.0386∗∗
(0.0160)

Cash Crops
(2)
0.0392∗
(0.0222)

All Crops
(3)
0.0275∗∗
(0.0105)

Cash Crops
(4)
0.0263∗
(0.0138)

Lagged Price X Reform Year

0.0128
(0.00935)

0.0121
(0.0110)

0.00984
(0.00623)

0.00848
(0.00737)

Lagged Price

0.0357∗
(0.0193)

0.0292
(0.0257)

0.0186∗∗
(0.00700)

0.0174
(0.0105)

Post Reform

0.0311
(0.0299)

0.0138
(0.0434)

-0.00971
(0.0225)

0.000767
(0.0241)

Reform Year

0.0231
(0.0302)
741498

-0.0410
(0.0277)
299443

-0.00238
(0.0210)
741498

-0.0120
(0.0200)
299443

Lagged Price X Post Reform

Observations

Notes: Each observation is a household-crop-year. The regressions include indicators for reform time and
for calendar year, province-crop time trends, village-crop fixed effects and a constant term. Standard errors
clustered at the province level are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1%
levels, respectively.

42

8

Appendix for Online Publication
Figure A.1: Major Government Land Reallocations over Time

Note: Reprinted from Figure 1 of Zhao (2013).

43

44

Year
2003
2004
2004
2005
2005
2004
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2006
2006
2006
2008
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2009
2010

Document Name
Hu Fu Fa (2003) No. 29
Hunan Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2004) No. 35
Shandong Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2004) No. 37
Anhui Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2005) No. 57
Fujian Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (Min Chang (2005) No. 18)
Jiangsu Province Government Order (2003) No. 21
Jilin Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2005) No. 29
Liaoning Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2005) No. 28
Shanxi Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2004) No. 117
Jin Zheng Fa (2005) No. 009
Xinjiang People’s Congress Standing Committee (2005) No.24
Gansu Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (Ganzheng Ban Fa (2006) No. 92)
Gui Zheng Ban Fa (2006) No. 141
Hainan Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2006) No.44
Sichuan Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2007) No.110
Yunnan Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2006) No. 41
Chongqing Municipality People’s Congress Standing Committee (2007) No. 6
Jiangxi Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2007 No. 102
Shaanxi Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2006) No. 59
Zhejiang Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2006) No. 59
Inner Mongolia People’s Congress Standing Committee (2009) No. 10
Qinghai Province People’s Congress Standing Committee (2009) No. 15

Issue Date
04/25/2003
07/30/2004
07/30/2004
06/17/2005
09/30/2005
12/18/2003
01/20/2005
01/28/2005
09/25/2004
02/05/2005
07/29/2005
08/03/2006
11/14/2006
07/28/2006
11/29/2007
07/28/2006
04/02/2007
07/27/2007
09/28/2006
09/30/2006
07/30/2009
11/10/2009

Effective Date
04/25/2003
10/01/2004
10/01/2004
10/01/2005
11/01/2005
02/01/2004
03/01/2005
04/01/2005
01/01/2005
02/05/2005
10/01/2005
08/03/2006
11/14/2006
10/01/2006
03/01/2008
09/01/2006
07/01/2007
10/01/2007
01/01/2007
01/01/2007
10/01/2009
03/01/2010

Notes: Provinces not listed here (Beijing, Guangdong, Guangzhou, Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Ningxia and Tibet) either made their announcements after
our sample period or have not made them at the time we collected these data.

Province
Shanghai
Hunan
Shandong
Anhui
Fujian
Jiangsu
Jilin
Liaoning
Shanxi
Tianjin
Xinjiang
Gansu
Guangxi
Hainan
Sichuan
Yunnan
Chongqing
Jiangxi
Shaanxi
Zhejiang
Inner Mongolia
Qinghai

Table A.1: Rural Land Contracting Law Announcement by Province

Figure A.2: Distribution of Household Land Area

Note: Kernel density function using epanechnikov.

Table A.2: Determinants of Provincial Reform Timing
(1)
-0.0227
(0.233)

(2)
1.125
(2.565)

Log Urban Income

0.816∗∗∗
(0.193)

-0.329
(1.589)

Log Agricultural Employment

-0.0113
(0.117)

0.264
(0.400)

Log Industrial Employment

-0.234
(0.186)

-0.246
(0.521)

Log Service Employment

0.275
(0.312)
145
No

0.304
(0.681)
145
Yes

Log Rural Income

Observations
Year and Province FE

Notes: Each observation is a province-year. The dependent variable equals one in the reform year. The
sample is limited to pre-reform years and the year of reform implementation. The regressions include a
constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

45

Figure A.3: Average Price Indices of Crops
(a) Staple Crops

(b) Cash Crops

Note: The figure presents the average prices across provinces by year and by crop.

46

Figure A.4: Distribution of TFP

Note: Kernel density function using epanechnikov.

Table A.3: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Renting with Leads and Lags
Full Sample
(1)
-0.00335
(0.0127)

Both Sides
(2)
-0.00287
(0.0131)

Leasing Reformt−2

0.00103
(0.00562)

-0.000882
(0.00597)

Leasing Reformt

0.00817
(0.00684)

0.00738
(0.00700)

Leasing Reformt+1

0.0210∗∗∗
(0.00607)

0.0186∗∗∗
(0.00645)

Leasing Reformt+2

0.0293∗∗∗
(0.00743)
73585

0.0293∗∗∗
(0.00753)
66148

Leasing Reformt−3

Observations

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is an indicator for any land renting.
The regressions include indicators for calendar year, household fixed effects, province time trends and a
constant term. The sample is restricted to the six years around the reform. *, **, *** denote significance
at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

47

Table A.4: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Renting Controlling for Agricultural Tax
Changes

Post Reform Year

Reform Year

Agricultural Tax
Observations

Full Sample
(1)
0.0153∗∗
(0.00709)

Both Sides
(2)
0.0150∗
(0.00807)

0.00672
(0.00555)

0.00213
(0.00483)

-0.162
(0.232)
157315

-0.311
(0.268)
100588

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is an indicator for any land renting.
The regressions include indicators for calendar year, household fixed effects, province time trends and a
constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote
significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A.5: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Village-Level Land Area

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

Full Sample
(1)
0.00504
(0.0563)

Both Sides
(2)
-0.0217
(0.0446)

0.00599
(0.0501)
2572

-0.0327
(0.0392)
1819

Notes: Each observation is a village-year. The outcomes are transformed by the IHS function. The
regressions include indicators for calendar year, province time trends, village fixed effects and a constant
term. Income is in real 2002 RMB. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses.
*, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

Table A.6: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Household Income

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

Full Sample
(1)
0.0382∗
(0.0216)

Both Sides
(2)
0.0396
(0.0233)

0.0157
(0.0153)
156395

0.0275∗
(0.0158)
100306

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The outcomes are transformed by the IHS function. The
regressions include indicators for calendar year, province time trends, household fixed effects and a constant
term. Income is in real 2002 RMB. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses.
*, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

48

Table A.7: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Agricultural Inputs (per mu)

Post Reform Year

Reform Year
Observations

Labor Inputs
(1)
0.0587
(0.0366)

Machine Inputs
(2)
0.00866
(0.0852)

Other Inputs
(3)
0.0397
(0.0654)

0.0119
(0.0321)
157315

-0.0332
(0.0474)
157315

0.00676
(0.0422)
157315

Notes: Each observation is a household-year. The dependent variable is the IHS function of the input
divided by area. The regressions include indicators for calendar year, province time trends, household fixed
effects and a constant term. Standard errors clustered at the province level are in parentheses. *, **, ***
denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

49

Table A.8: Production Function Estimates by Crop

Wheat
Rice
Corn
Soybean
Potato
Other grains
Cotton
Oilseed
Sugar
Hemp
Tobacco Leaf
Other cash
Vegetables
Other farm
Fruit
Other orchard

Total

Area

Labor

Machinery

Other

Obs

0.631***
(0.021)
0.644***
(0.016)
0.657***
(0.017)
0.569***
(0.013)
0.520***
(0.018)
0.597***
(0.023)
0.835***
(0.024)
0.598***
(0.014)
0.743***
(0.074)
0.578***
(0.118)
0.516***
(0.092)
0.254***
(0.045)
0.243***
(0.021)
0.385***
(0.023)
0.241***
(0.025)
0.368***
(0.068)

0.122***
(0.010)
0.119***
(0.009)
0.148***
(0.010)
0.226***
(0.011)
0.184***
(0.011)
0.198***
(0.019)
0.083***
(0.019)
0.186***
(0.010)
0.141***
(0.059)
0.141
(0.122)
0.146***
(0.046)
0.414***
(0.036)
0.281***
(0.010)
0.276***
(0.021)
0.370***
(0.018)
0.436***
(0.044)

0.020***
(0.003)
0.011***
(0.002)
0.012***
(0.002)
0.014***
(0.004)
0.027***
(0.006)
0.026***
(0.007)
-0.006
(0.005)
0.012***
(0.003)
0.020**
(0.009)
-0.244
(0.153)
0.022*
(0.012)
-0.026
(0.026)
0.052***
(0.005)
0.042***
(0.012)
0.013**
(0.006)
0.037
(0.072)

0.097***
(0.009)
0.086***
(0.009)
0.079***
(0.006)
0.046***
(0.004)
0.048***
(0.006)
0.094***
(0.011)
0.034***
(0.013)
0.051***
(0.004)
0.128***
(0.037)
-0.075*
(0.045)
0.295***
(0.057)
0.054**
(0.018)
0.076***
(0.004)
0.054***
(0.009)
0.135
(0.009)
0.107***
(0.017)

46,010

0.475***
(0.009)

0.239***
(0.005)

0.019***
(0.001)

0.075***
(0.002)

62,161
75,709
31,823
30,804
40,804
10,363
40,897
2,897
468
1906
5248
72,984
11,865
18,259
5517

457,715

Notes: Each row presents the production function coefficient estimates for a particular crop. Standard
errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

50

Table A.9: Production Function Estimates by Crop (Balanced Panel)

Wheat
Rice
Corn
Soybean
Potato
Other grains
Cotton
Oilseed
Sugar
Tobacco leaf
Other cash
Vegetables
Other Farm
Fruit
Other orchard

Total

Area
0.582***
(0.037)
0.641***
(0.030)
0.594***
(0.048)
0.581***
(0.029)
0.410***
(0.064)
0.607***
(0.088)
0.922***
(0.060)
0.613***
(0.023)
0.817***
(0.136)
0.848***
(0.233)
0.194*
(0.102)
0.204***
(0.043)
0.309***
(0.067)
0.153***
(0.059)
0.233
(0.155)

Labor
0.150***
(0.017)
0.118***
(0.016)
0.175***
(0.023)
0.224***
(0.026)
0.217***
(0.032)
0.178**
(0.078)
0.076
(0.048)
0.147***
(0.020)
-0.071
(0.098)
0.010
(0.149)
0.420***
(0.072)
0.292***
(0.020)
0.059
(0.051)
0.371***
(0.044)
0.383***
(0.075)

Machinery
0.020***
(0.004)
0.015***
(0.003)
0.008**
(0.004)
0.009
(0.008)
0.003
(0.015)
0.034**
(0.016)
-0.012
(0.011)
0.015***
(0.005)
0.024*
(0.014)
0.031
(0.024)
-0.028
(0.038)
0.072***
(0.014)
0.071
(0.056)
0.008
(0.012)
-0.050
(0.087)

Other Inputs
0.068***
(0.020)
0.083***
(0.016)
0.084***
(0.014)
0.034***
(0.010)
0.054***
(0.017)
0.064*
(0.037)
-0.040
(0.029)
0.068***
(0.009)
0.207**
(0.098)
0.161
(0.195)
0.050*
(0.026)
0.066***
(0.006)
0.031
(0.027)
0.168***
(0.025)
0.075***
(0.021)

Observations
10,991

0.417***
(0.025)

0.243***
(0.013)

0.018***
(0.002)

0.070***
(0.005)

75,706

12,759
15,781
4,262
3,759
529
1,454
7,905
405
169
499
13,622
795
1,743
1,033

Notes: Each row presents the production function coefficient estimates for a particular crop. The sample
is limited to observations in which the household farms the crop in every year. Standard errors are in
parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

51

Table A.10: Production Function Estimates by Crop Instrumented with Lagged Values

Wheat
Rice
Corn
Soybean
Potato
Other grains
Cotton
Oilseed
Sugar
Hemp
Tobacco Leaf
Other cash
Vegetables
Other farm
Fruit
Other orchard

Total

Area

Labor

Machinery

Other Inputs

Observations

0.587***
(0.033)
0.641***
(0.027)
0.670***
(0.022)
0.604***
(0.028)
0.459***
(0.026)
0.536***
(0.068)
0.772***
(0.060)
0.655***
(0.025)
1.034***
(0.184)
2.726
(1.707)
0.493***
(0.110)
-0.041
(0.145)
0.192***
(0.015)
0.447***
(0.052)
0.229***
(0.063)
0.452***
(0.088)

0.113***
(0.022)
0.095***
(0.021)
0.117***
(0.018)
0.270***
(0.027)
0.205***
(0.024)
0.128**
(0.055)
0.001
(0.047)
0.180***
(0.022)
-0.315**
(0.129)
0.845*
(0.502)
0.030
(0.171)
0.499***
(0.082)
0.249***
(0.017)
0.253***
(0.042)
0.309***
(0.036)
0.569***
(0.062)

0.017**
(0.007)
0.008
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.005)
0.015
(0.010)
0.014
(0.015)
0.051***
(0.018)
0.016
(0.013)
0.014*
(0.008)
-0.009
(0.019)
-0.033
(0.028)
0.179***
(0.068)
0.009
(0.009)
0.070***
(0.022)
0.020*
(0.012)
-0.005
(0.046)

0.129***
(0.018)
0.116***
(0.018)
0.081***
(0.010)
0.059***
(0.011)
0.039***
(0.012)
0.167***
(0.034)
-0.006
(0.026)
0.055***
(0.010)
0.611***
(0.086)
-1.084
(0.942)
0.470*
(0.252)
-0.020
(0.036)
0.064***
(0.008)
0.044*
(0.025)
0.173***
(0.018)
0.005
(0.023)

46,010

0.477***
(0.007)

0.207***
(0.008)

0.012***
(0.003)

0.077***
(0.004)

185989

62,161
75,709
31,823
30,804
40,804
10,363
40,897
2,897
468
1906
5248
72,984
11,865
18,259
5517

Notes: Each row presents the production function coefficient estimates for a particular crop. Each input is
instrumented with its lagged value. Standard errors are in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

52

Table A.11: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Log Area by TFP

Post Reform Year × Full TFP Quintile 1

Full TFP
(1)
-0.135∗
(0.0783)

Post Reform Year × Full TFP Quintile 2

-0.136∗∗
(0.0572)

Post Reform Year × Full TFP Quintile 3

-0.0271
(0.0465)

Post Reform Year × Full TFP Quintile 4

0.0555
(0.0437)

Post Reform Year × Full TFP Quintile 5

0.168∗∗∗
(0.0594)

Fixed TFP
(2)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 1

-0.0791
(0.0767)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 2

-0.0876
(0.0582)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 3

-0.0399
(0.0520)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 4

0.0740
(0.0479)

Post Reform Year × Fixed TFP Quintile 5

0.133∗∗
(0.0621)
251406

Observations

251406

Notes: The dependent variable is log area. The unit of observation is a household-crop-year.
All regressions include the TFP quintiles, a Reform Year indicator interacted with the TFP
quintiles, village fixed effects, year fixed effects, and a constant term. Standard errors clustered
at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **, *** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and
1% levels, respectively.

53

Table A.12: Impact of Property Rights Reform on Log Area by Alternative Measures

Post Reform Year × MPL Quintile 1

MPL
(1)
-0.119∗∗
(0.0533)

Post Reform Year × MPL Quintile 2

-0.0525
(0.0512)

Post Reform Year × MPL Quintile 3

0.0704
(0.0506)

Post Reform Year × MPL Quintile 4

0.109∗∗
(0.0488)

Post Reform Year × MPL Quintile 5

0.125∗
(0.0618)

Profits/Area
(2)

Post Reform Year × Profits Quintile 1

-0.0186
(0.0690)

Post Reform Year × Profits Quintile 2

-0.00670
(0.0358)

Post Reform Year × Profits Quintile 3

0.0345
(0.0279)

Post Reform Year × Profits Quintile 4

0.0480
(0.0566)

Post Reform Year × Profits Quintile 5

0.0642
(0.0594)
274174

Observations

235817

Notes: The dependent variable is log area. The unit of observation is a household-crop-year.
The quintiles in Column 1 refer to pre-reform average MPL. The quintiles in Column 2 refer to
pre-reform average agricultural profits per mu. The regressions include the quintile fixed effects,
a Reform Year indicator interacted with the quintiles, village fixed effects, year fixed effects, and
a constant term. Standard errors clustered at province level are reported in parentheses. *, **,
*** denote significance at the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

54

Table A.13: Impact of Price Changes and Property Rights Reform on Land Allocation with
Leads and Lags
IHS Area

I(Any Area)

All Crops
(1)
-0.0319
(0.0223)

Cash Crops Only
(2)
-0.0555∗
(0.0276)

All Crops
(3)
-0.0150
(0.0162)

Cash Crops Only
(4)
-0.0282
(0.0203)

Lagged Price X Reformt−2

-0.00722
(0.0143)

0.00138
(0.0169)

-0.00440
(0.00984)

-0.0121
(0.0116)

Lagged Price X Reformt

0.0428∗∗∗
(0.00979)

0.0362∗∗∗
(0.00951)

0.0247∗∗∗
(0.00748)

0.0197∗∗
(0.00703)

Lagged Price X Reformt+1

0.0515∗∗∗
(0.0108)

0.0367∗∗
(0.0145)

0.0353∗∗∗
(0.00801)

0.0260∗∗
(0.00952)

Lagged Price X Reformt+2

0.0710∗∗∗
(0.0215)
488326

0.0701∗∗∗
(0.0179)
195151

0.0430∗∗∗
(0.0140)
488326

0.0392∗∗∗
(0.0118)
195151

Lagged Price X Reformt−3

Observations

Notes: Each observation is a household-crop-year. The regressions include indicators for reform time and
for calendar year, province-crop time trends, village-crop fixed effects, an index of other crop prices and its
interactions with the leads and lags of the reform, and a constant term. *, **, *** denote significance at
the 10%, 5% and 1% levels, respectively.

55

A

Extended Model

We first describe the equilibrium in the intermediate case (0 < t < ∞) of the village economy.
It is intuitive that the size of each farm (i.e. cultivated land area) will depend on the farmer’s
TFP. Figure A.5 graphs the marginal cost and marginal product of land, for low-, medium- and
high-TFP farmers, denoted by φ1 , φ2 and φ3 respectively. The kink in the marginal cost occurs
when farmers need more land than their own endowment (and thus need to rent in land from
others).
Figure A.5: Marginal Cost and Product of Land for Farmers with Varying TFP

As the figure implies, an equilibrium will feature three categories of farmers, based on their
level of TFP, as depicted in Figure A.6: More specifically, we have farmers in category A for
whom φ ∈ (φ, a). These farmers will supply some of their land to the market and use the rest in
their own farm (but will not rent in any land). These farmers are not land-constrained: Their
optimal farm size is small enough that they can meet its land needs with their endowment.
Thus, these farms are using only household land up to the point that its marginal product
(denoted by M PL in the figure above) equals its opportunity cost, r.
Category B farmers are defined by φ ∈ (a, b), those with TFP above the level a would ideally
like to operate larger farms that utilize more land than they are endowed with. Once the land
endowment has been exhausted, however, the opportunity cost of land increases discontinuously

56

Figure A.6: Thresholds Defining Three Types

because of the transaction cost. Because of this jump, some farmers will not find it profitable to
rent in land. For these farms, the marginal product is greater than r, but is less than r(1 + t),
implying that they would have rented in land in the absence of a transaction cost.
Finally, in category C, we have the farmers who are productive enough that they find it
worthwhile to rent in land in spite of the transaction cost. Their TFP lies in the interval (b, φ).
Farmers in this category rent in land until its marginal product equals its marginal cost r(1 + t).
We now derive aggregate (village-level) TFP. Recall that aggregate output is given by:

Y =

X
i

yi =

X

φi sαi Lα = ΦLα

(14)

i

where L denotes the total quantity of land in the village (which is assumed fixed), and si denotes
the land share cultivated by farmer i, i.e. li /L. Equilibrium land shares can be derived from
the first-order conditions for profit maximization:

αφi liα−1 = ri

(15)

where ri denotes the equilibrium marginal value of land for farmer i. For farmers who are at a
corner solution, ri is defined to equal the marginal product of land. The first-order condition
can be rewritten to solve for li :
α 1
li = ( ) 1−α τi θi
r

(16)
1

1

where τi is defined as ( rri ) 1−α and we have defined θi = φi1−α . Adding over all farmers in the
village, we have:
α 1 X
L = ( ) 1−α
τi θi
r

(17)

i

57

Farmer i0 s land share is therefore given by:
τi θi
si = P
τi θi

(18)

i

Thus, aggregate TFP simplifies to:

Φ=

X
i

τ αθ
Pi i α
( τi θi )

(19)

i

Finally, note that because τi ≤ 1 for all i and α < 1, it follows that
X
X
τ αθ
τθ
Pi i α ≤
P i αi α = [
τi θi ]1−α
( τi θi )
( τi θi )
i
i
i
i
i
X
≤ [
θi ]1−α = Φ(t = 0)

Φ =

X

(20)
(21)

i

which confirms the intuitive expectation that land reform will increase aggregate productivity,
and hence aggregate output.

58

