NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERSONALITY TRAITS OF ENTREPRENEURS:
A REVIEW OF RECENT LITERATURE
Sari Pekkala Kerr
William R. Kerr
Tina Xu
Working Paper 24097
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24097

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

Comments are appreciated and can be sent to skerr3@wellesley.edu. This research is generously
supported by the Kauffman Foundation, the National Science Foundation, the Smith Richardson
Foundation, and Harvard Business School. William Kerr is a Research Associate of the Bank of
Finland and thanks the Bank for hosting him during a portion of this project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Sari Pekkala Kerr, William R. Kerr, and Tina Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Personality Traits of Entrepreneurs: A Review of Recent Literature
Sari Pekkala Kerr, William R. Kerr, and Tina Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 24097
December 2017
JEL No. D03,D81,D86,L26,M13,O3
ABSTRACT
We review the extensive literature since 2000 on the personality traits of entrepreneurs. We first
consider baseline personality traits like the Big-5 model, self-efficacy and innovativeness, locus
of control, and the need for achievement. We then consider risk attitudes and goals and
aspirations of entrepreneurs. Within each area, we separate studies by the type of entrepreneurial
behavior considered: entry into entrepreneurship, performance outcomes, and exit from
entrepreneurship. This literature shows common results and many points of disagreement,
reflective of the heterogeneous nature of entrepreneurship. We label studies by the type of
entrepreneurial population studied (e.g., Main Street vs. those backed by venture capital) to
identify interesting and irreducible parts of this heterogeneity, while also identifying places where
we anticipate future large-scale research and the growing depth of the field are likely to clarify
matters. There are many areas, like how firm performance connects to entrepreneurial
personality, that are woefully understudied and ripe for major advances if the appropriate crossdisciplinary ingredients are assembled.
Sari Pekkala Kerr
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
skerr3@wellesley.edu
William R. Kerr
Harvard Business School
Rock Center 212
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
wkerr@hbs.edu

Tina Xu
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
txu2@wellesley.edu

Table of Contents
Introduction
1. Personality traits
1.1 Prevalence of characteristics in entrepreneurs vs. other populations
1.1.1 Big-5 model
1.1.2 Self-efficacy and innovativeness
1.1.3 Locus of control
1.1.4 Need for achievement
1.2 Correlation of personality traits with venture phases
1.2.1 Probability of entry into entrepreneurship
1.2.2 Growth and success as an entrepreneur
1.2.3 Probability of exiting entrepreneurship
1.3 Moderating traits and environmental factors
2. Risk attitudes
2.1 Methods of measuring risk attitudes
2.2 Risk attitudes of entrepreneurs vs. other populations
2.3 Effect of risk attitudes in the startup process
2.3.1 Probability of entry into entrepreneurship
2.3.2 Growth and success as an entrepreneur
2.3.3 Probability of exiting entrepreneurship
2.4 Entrepreneurial self-efficacy, risk attitudes, and optimism
3. Goals and aspirations
3.1 Reasons for deciding to start a business
3.2 Entrepreneurial goals
4. Conclusions
Appendix. Other characteristics of entrepreneurs
A1.1 Demographics
A1.2 Financial assets and wealth
A1.3 Industry experience and education
A1.4 Entrepreneurial regions
Online Appendix. Detailed survey methodologies and study notes
A: Summary tables of studies by topic
B: Typical Big-5 inventory utilized in entrepreneurship studies
C: Representative examples of survey questions and measures related to risk attitudes
2

Introduction
Entrepreneurial firms and the founders behind these ventures are in vogue everywhere.
Cities across the United States are sprouting new incubators and accelerators and introducing
programs to attract innovative talent. Foreign countries are also quite active, with nations ranging
from China to Chile experimenting in new ways to foster new firm formation. The fascination with
entrepreneurs is not brand new, of course, and a literature dating to the 18th century explores what
drives entrepreneurs and whether their traits matter for the outcomes of their ventures. This
literature now spans many fields and has introduced multiple concepts and methods related to the
analysis of entrepreneurial characteristics. In this review, we collect and organize the latest
findings on the prevalence of various personality traits among the entrepreneurial population and
their impact on venture performance. We cover academic work ranging from economics to
psychology to management studies, with a focus on studies published after 2000.
Many studies consider the “traits of entrepreneurs” or the “traits that make entrepreneurs
successful.” As Åstebro et al. (2014) highlight, the publication in 1921 of Frank Knight’s book
Risk, Uncertainty and Profit marked a key launching point into rigorous and careful research on
the personalities of entrepreneurs that set them apart from general business managers. In the
decades that followed, research has continued to investigate specific individual traits that prompt
people to become entrepreneurs, as well as personal motivations and preferences that keep
entrepreneurs on their chosen path. These studies have often focused on high-growth settings or
firms financed by venture capital (VC), where entrepreneurs face a high probability of their
business failing, a very small probability of extremely positive outcomes, and a possibly low
average return to the monetary and time investments made into their businesses. Standard
economic theory must be augmented to explain such a pursuit, and many scholars have tried to
understand the “homo entreprenaurus” (a moniker introduced by Uusitalo, 2001).
Yet, the term “entrepreneur” is also applied in academic research to many groups beyond
the founders of Silicon Valley startups. The studies that we document in this review range in terms
of their definitions of entrepreneurship to also include creators of “Main Street” small businesses
or even young college students attending an entrepreneurship class. While these groups are all
connected to entrepreneurial activity, recent work shows the remarkable degree to which these
subpopulations behave differently (e.g., Hurst and Pugsley, 2011, Levine and Rubenstein, 2017),
and the typical personality traits of individuals will vary greatly by form of entrepreneurial activity.
In our review, we attempt to pay close attention to the group under the microscope of each study
and note where subpopulations are generating different results.
We conduct this survey with an applied empirical researcher in mind, although we hope
this review is useful for many others too. Applied researchers today have access to data for
measuring entrepreneurship that was unthinkable a decade ago. Most noticeably, researchers can
now utilize large-scale administrative datasets built on employer-employee data to model
3

entrepreneurial transitions. Taking the United States as one example, while cutting-edge work in
the 2000s often used firm-level entry rates measured in datasets like the Census of Manufactures
or Venture Xpert, we increasingly have researchers accessing comprehensive panel data on
individuals like the Linked Employer-Household Database to model entrepreneurial transitions.
Other countries further hold frontier administrative datasets that combine founding behavior with
anything from the prescription drug histories of individuals to their stock portfolios. Beyond
administrative datasets, researchers now build their own specialized datasets: tracking cohorts
from entrepreneurial training programs; accessing gig economy transactions from a leading online
platform; crafting from LinkedIn profiles of entrepreneurs receiving venture financing; conducting
customized surveys of entrepreneurs in co-working spaces; and much more. This wealth of
opportunity has led to a flowering of research that measures career histories and individual-level
traits that predict entrepreneurship.
While these frontier datasets afford opportunities to ask exciting new questions, researchers
must also confront new challenges. As one considers individual-level factors that promote entry,
questions arise as to when and how the personalities of founders should be considered. Some are
directly interested in the phenomenon, wanting to study for example the risk tolerance of founders
of high-growth startups. For others, the research question lies elsewhere, but there is a worry about
personality being an important omitted factor that biases empirical results. For yet others,
personality could be the channel or mechanism through which some studied events produce shortand long-run effects. While some classic studies have looked at how personality traits impact
transitions into self-employment, this new work covers a much broader and more heterogeneous
terrain, ranging from the opening of small-scale service businesses to high-growth
entrepreneurship. As the options continue to proliferate for modeling individual- and team-level
entrepreneurship, it becomes more important to have a perspective of the personality traits
associated with entrepreneurship and how they influence the research being conducted.
Three decades ago, in a very influential article, Gartner (1988) criticized the study of
entrepreneurial personality traits, arguing instead for a focus on how organizations emerge.
Gartner disapproved of the varying definitions being used for entrepreneurship, preferring to focus
on a definition that emphasized the functional creation of new organizations. Gartner also
questioned collecting traits of entrepreneurs using survey methodologies to discern an “ideal”
personality for entrepreneurial performance. The shadow of this critique has been on the literature
for a long time, and it is far from clear that these new efforts will overcome the challenges that
Gartner (1988) outlined, as we re-surface many of these same challenges throughout this review.
Yet, the better recognition of heterogeneity among entrepreneurs and powerful new data sources
suggest it might be fruitful to reexamine some of these areas again, some 30 years later. After all,
the focus for many is now on describing how personality may influence the creation of new
organizations, addressing at least some of Gartner’s concern.

4

We focus our survey on three core themes: (1) the personality traits of entrepreneurs and
how they compare to other groups; (2) the attitudes towards risk that entrepreneurs display; and
(3) the overall goals and aspirations that entrepreneurs bring to their pursuits. These themes
cover most of the main theoretical contributions to the entrepreneurial traits literature, which are
quite diverse, while at the same time enabling the identification of common concerns across
apparently separate research streams. There are some personality traits and cognitive biases that
we spend less time on, such as over-confidence and how it differs from risk attitudes. This was
not due to a prejudice against these traits, but mainly the literature-driven foundation of our
inquiry that we describe in the next section. With a few exceptions, we concentrate on empirical
studies and meta reviews of them to give a flavor of the recent applied work in this field,
spending limited time on lab or experimental studies.
An appendix to our survey provides a short discussion of some major factors influencing
entrepreneurial decisions beyond personality: demographics, household assets and financing
constraints, measurable skills like work experience and education, and local environment. This
auxiliary discussion is short and far from comprehensive, meant only to provide some background
helpful for understanding the “soft data” covered in this review and how they interact. For those
interested in measuring entrepreneurial risk attitudes and personality traits in their own work, an
additional online appendix documents some of the survey instruments commonly utilized. This
appendix also provides more detailed notes on the research papers that we review.
We do not pretend to uncover a once-and-for-all synthesis with this review, and nor do we
pretend to resolve longstanding debates like whether entrepreneurs are “born or made.” The
heterogeneity across entrepreneurs within just Cambridge, Massachusetts suggests that a unique
set of factors does not exist, much less the vast differences in entrepreneurial pursuits across
countries, industries, and similar. Few applied researchers when confronted with massive
empirical datasets would even contemplate such grandiose aims. Instead, we provide a unified
discussion of the vast body of research related to these three key topics and embrace the
heterogeneity where it exists. An accurate and unvarnished depiction of the variance in studies is
important for contemplating how academic work can provide better empirical insights that inform
entrepreneurship training programs, policy initiatives designed to bolster startup activity, and so
on.
In our opinion, the state-of-the art study on entrepreneurial characteristics is one that (1)
utilizes longitudinal data on a large and representative sample of individuals, (2) measures
personality traits before entry decisions are made, and (3) carefully measures individual traits such
as risk aversion and entrepreneurial self-efficacy. These conditions are necessary for statistically
precise comparisons of entrepreneurs to other employee and managerial groups, better insight into
differences across types of entrepreneurs (e.g., self-employed vs. growth-oriented employers), and
in-depth analysis of subsequent startup performance. The literature is especially weak on this
5

performance dimension. These conditions are not sufficient for assigning causal roles for
personality traits—a very daunting task—but they are probably necessary ingredients. Ahn (2010)
and Levine and Rubenstein (2017) are examples of innovative and impressive studies that utilize
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), although the NLSY’s small sample generates
constraints. Hvide and Panos (2014) and Caliendo et al. (2014) also show frontier examples that
build upon longitudinal administrative records and national surveys. Even with this gold standard
in mind, the practical limits of building such platforms—especially the off-the-shelf tradeoff of
using administrative records that provide universal employment histories but limited collection of
personality traits—suggest that there is still much to gain from carefully conducted surveys that
focus on narrow and clearly specified groups of interest and define a relevant comparison group
that entrepreneurs are contrasted with.
We hope this survey provides a useful input into several complementary streams of work.
There are often four-fold or larger differences in entrepreneurship rates across U.S. cities (e.g.,
Glaeser et al., 2015), and those for venture capital are even sharper (e.g., Samila and Sorenson,
2011). Moreover, the rate of new business formation is declining in the United States (e.g., Decker
et al., 2014). Many business leaders and policy makers are looking to build better environments to
support entrepreneurship, and this review highlights softer personality traits and risk attitudes that
can be considered along with more typical factors like financing conditions. As Chatterji et al.
(2014) describe, successful interventions to build the entrepreneurial base need to activate the local
population, versus just relying on attracting entrepreneurs from afar, and research on these softer
elements is of first-order importance in designing quality initiatives and policy experiments.
The findings related to personality characteristics and other attributes of entrepreneurs, as
well as the correlation of those characteristics with business performance, also imply that there
may be scope for including some personality development modules in entrepreneurship education.
Many academic institutes have introduced entrepreneurship training, ranging from high schools to
executive programs, but these programs have to date focused more on hard skills rather than
personality mapping and softer preparations. While some personality traits are fixed, Rauch (2014)
provides some examples of how, for example, self-efficacy and achievement motivation can be
influenced with relatively simple interventions. A clearer understanding of the specific traits of
entrepreneurs and their heterogeneity may help to better match potential entrepreneurs to settings
that are most closely aligned with their strengths.
Finally, we hope to connect to future academic work. There are very few scholars in the
diverse entrepreneurial literature that regularly read the full range of academic output described
below, much less utilize it in shaping their own research (including ourselves). Yet, these interfaces
are precisely where we need the most urgent attention. To give an example, the very sparse number
of studies that connect firm performance outcomes to the personality traits of entrepreneurs are a
significant limitation to our capacity to describe the quality margin of entrepreneurial ideas.
6

Applied microeconomics researchers that utilize administrative and longitudinal data have an
excellent toolkit to model these startup outcomes, but they are among the least exposed to the latest
perspectives on personality traits. A goal of this survey is to help close these information gaps and
encourage more cross-disciplinary work in this area.

1. Personality traits
Research on the personality traits of entrepreneurs took off in the mid-20th century,
unifying approaches from economics, psychology, sociology, and business management to answer
the questions: Who is an entrepreneur? What drives them? What traits define them? The first few
decades faced many conceptual challenges as researchers struggled to develop a solid theoretical
framework and appropriate measurement tools. In 1971, economist Peter Kilby famously
compared the entrepreneur to A.A. Milne’s Heffalump, a fictional elephant that all investigators
approached with improvised proxies from their disciplines, each asserting that they had discovered
the ever-elusive creature’s behavior. 1 In the 1980s, this discordance in the literature led some
researchers to conclude that there was no correlation between personality and entrepreneurship
(e.g., Brockhaus and Horwitz, 1986; Gartner, 1988).
0F

However, since the start of the 21st century and with the notable rise of public and
intellectual fascination with startup culture, the entrepreneurial personality literature has enjoyed
a resurgence and convergence toward an increasingly consistent set of theoretical frameworks,
with meaningful insights toward innovation policy and business education. The bulk of recent
literature seeks to answer two main questions: (1) Do certain traits predict an individual’s
likelihood of becoming an entrepreneur, and (2) Do certain traits predict an entrepreneur’s
likelihood of achieving “successful” outcomes? These answers are pursued by investigating the
prevalence of personality characteristics in entrepreneurs versus other populations, as well as by
analyzing the correlation of these characteristics with entrepreneurial performance factors such as
business survival and growth (e.g., Baron, 2004).
While personality theory remains rife with its own set of contentions, researchers have
primarily gravitated over the last few decades to the Big-5 factor personality model. Several
additional traits have been fused into the Big-5 for entrepreneurial work, including self-efficacy,
innovativeness, locus of control, and risk attitudes (which we reserve for individual discussion in
the second part of this literature review). Researchers often mix and match these traits to describe
a multidimensional “entrepreneurial orientation.” In this literature review, we mostly focus our
discussion on literature published after 2000 to detail the newest wave of personality research and
the cutting-edge questions. Rauch et al. (2009), Rauch (2014) and Patterson and Kerrin (2014)
provide reviews of some of the seminal contributions that came earlier.
1

Kilby (1971) and A.A. Milne, Winnie the Pooh (1926) and The House at Pooh Corner (1928).
7

1.1 Prevalence of personality traits in entrepreneurs vs. other populations
Many researchers compare the traits of entrepreneurs to employed workers or the general
population to identify characteristics that define entrepreneurs as a group. It may seem a foolish or
unnecessary task to compare Steve Jobs or Elon Musk to the average person, and many books
describe the special biographies and personalities of these great entrepreneurs. Here, however, the
literature has a very different focus. For every Jobs or Musk, we have thousands of entrepreneurs
seeking growth-oriented businesses and many more seeking to build a business for themselves as
self-employed proprietors. The collective impact of these individuals on our economy is enormous,
even if they don’t start Apple or SpaceX. This literature is concerned with investigating and
defining the regularities and differences in the personalities of these entrepreneurs.
For this review, we combed through hundreds of studies on J-Stor, Econstor, and the online journal databases available at Harvard Business School and Wellesley College, covering
journal articles and dissertations spanning economics, psychology, and management studies. We
restricted our focus to articles published after 2000, as a resurgence of interest into entrepreneurial
behavior generated a new crop of studies that had not been meaningfully summarized. Data used
in the studies came from the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Germany, France,
Italy and other European economies. We considered articles with various definitions of
entrepreneurs, most commonly self-employed individuals or business owner-managers. We
excluded studies looking solely at subsistence entrepreneurship, partially because these studies are
so sparse. Many of the personality questionnaires were conducted with business-track university
students, while other studies used national data sets including all fields and industries of
employment. While Frese (2009) highlights how entrepreneurial action extends to efforts beyond
for-profit firm creation (e.g., social activism), we focus this survey on the venture creation process
in the private sector. We purposefully spend less time on the variations of overconfidence,
optimism, and risk taking given the detailed recent review of Åstebro et al. (2014) on these issues.
Studies on risk attitudes were searched using the keywords “risk preference,” “risk
propensity,” “risk aversion,” and “risk tolerance.” We included risk measures of various kinds,
including self-reported answers in longitudinal surveys, hypothetical gambling situations, and
investment history metrics. Studies on personality traits were searched using keywords such as
“personality,” “traits,” and “orientation,” as well as the specific trait names covered in this survey.
We included the most commonly used personality concepts (Big-5, need for achievement, internal
locus of control, innovativeness, and self-efficacy). In a few studies that used composite measures
of “entrepreneurial orientation,” we turned to the reported underlying data for disaggregation of
individual variables. We excluded personality traits for which there was too little literature to
summarize meaningfully: need for autonomy, stress/uncertainty tolerance, tenacity, self-esteem,
discipline, delay of gratification, and so on.

8

After combing through research databases for the relevant and academically rigorous
articles, we compiled them into a set of tables (contained in the online appendix). The first series
of tables list studies by risk attitudes (28 studies). The second series list studies by personality
traits: Big-5 (10), need for achievement (12), locus of control (13), self-efficacy/proactivity (11),
innovativeness (12), stress/uncertainty tolerance (4) and need for autonomy (4). The third series
list studies by the stage of business they apply to: career choice/business creation (14),
survival/success (14), and exit (1). The final series list studies by other types of comparisons:
comparing demographics (11) and comparing with environmental factors (6). These tables form
the starting point of our summary of each subset of literature, as well as comparisons on the
methodologies, conceptual tools, findings, and efficacy of each approach.
Before reviewing these studies, it is important to identify broad caveats and limitations to
this literature stream. First, many studies lack the preferred structure outlined in the Introduction,
with the unfortunate result that it is often unclear as to whether individuals with a given set of
personality traits selected into entrepreneurship, or whether the traits were developed
endogenously by individuals after becoming entrepreneurs. This reverse causality concern is
especially prominent for cross-sectional surveys and data tabulations. Additionally, even when the
measurement of personality traits does precede entrepreneurial choices, this does not guarantee
that this trait was the causal factor. For example, individuals from wealthy families may score high
on risk tolerance levels because they have the security of their family’s money, and perhaps
availability of financial resources is the true factor that prompts entrepreneurship, independent of
risk tolerance. Without observing and measuring the wealth of individuals, we are liable to
mismeasure the role of risk tolerance for decisions. This concern over omitted variable bias is true
for individual studies, and it is compounded when comparing studies drawn from countries and
settings that have differing cultural factors that are also known to influence personality traits, such
as entrepreneurial motivation and achievement orientation (Stewart and Roth, 2007). Finally,
survey-based analyses often have small sample sizes, which may explain some of the variation in
results seen across studies.
Understanding these caveats, we proceed with a summary of the main personality-related
results. The online appendix to this review contains additional details for most of the papers
mentioned. The collected information includes country of coverage, personality traits and
demographics considered, measurement approach, data sources and sample size, outcomes and
findings (including reference group), and the population of entrepreneurs considered. While first
developed for our own use, we hope this is a useful resource for those wishing to dig deeper on
these diffuse literatures.

9

1.1.1 Big-5 model
The Big-5 model is a multidimensional approach towards defining personality, through
measuring openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. It has been
the predominant model for personality traits since the 1980s, and the Big-5 traits have been found
to influence career choice and work performance (e.g., Costa and McCrae, 1992; Digman, 1990;
Goldberg, 1990; John et al., 2008; Rauch, 2014). The five “macro traits” cover a distinct set of
characteristics, as described in John et al. (2008, p. 138):
• Openness to experience: describes the breadth, depth, originality, and complexity
of an individual’s mental and experimental life
• Conscientiousness: describes socially prescribed impulse control that facilitates
task- and goal-orientated behavior
• Extraversion: implies an energetic approach toward the social and material world
and includes traits such as sociability, activity, assertiveness, and positive
emotionality
• Agreeableness: contrasts a prosocial and communal orientation toward others with
antagonism and includes traits such as altruism, tender-mindedness, trust, and
modesty
• Neuroticism: contrasts emotional stability and even-temperedness with negative
emotionality, such as feeling anxious, nervous, sad, and tense
Differences between entrepreneurs and managers
The bulk of the existing studies comparing the prevalence of Big-5 traits between
populations of entrepreneurs and managers occurred between 1960 and 2000. Managers are
frequently used as a comparison point for entrepreneurs given the potential need of both groups to
direct workers and manage multiple tasks. In a meta-analysis of 23 studies conducted from 1970
to 2002 in a variety of countries and reported in English-language journals, Zhao and Seibert
(2006) find entrepreneurs to be more open to experience, more conscientious, similar for
extraversion, less agreeable, and less neurotic (or in the Big-5 lingo, O+, C+, E, A-, N-). Many
individual studies, of course, show deviations from this pattern. For example, in a survey by Envick
and Langford (2000) of 218 entrepreneurs and managers in a large Canadian city, the authors find
entrepreneurs to be significantly less conscientious and agreeable than managers and less
extraverted (O+, C-, E-, A-, N-), while confirming the other patterns observed in the meta study.
These characteristic differences between entrepreneurs and the average employed person
are often theoretically ascribed to the “attraction-selection-attrition model” (Schneider, 1987).
According to this model, workers are attracted to jobs whose demands and opportunities match
their talents, motives, and personality traits; employers or financiers then select applicants whose
aptitudes and motives fit their criteria; and workers then stay in their occupational group when

10

they find their professional situation more rewarding than alternative positions. We review next
each of these five traits as they would be presented in this model.
Entrepreneurs are consistently found to be more open to experience than managers (O+).
Researchers hypothesize that in the context of a business venture, an entrepreneur is likely to be
attracted to constantly changing environments and the novelty of new challenges. Individuals who
thrive on challenges and novel environments are those who present creative solutions, business
models, and products, and the openness of entrepreneurs may aid these functions. Meanwhile,
managers are often selected by their superiors for their ability to execute and deliver high-quality
and low-variance results for a given set of directions rather than seek out original solutions. Thus,
researchers theorize that both the environment and job requirements of an entrepreneur select for
individuals who are more open to experience.
Zhao and Seibert (2006) suggest that higher conscientiousness is the most significant
difference between entrepreneurs and managers (C+). Conscientiousness is a composite of
achievement motivation and dependability. Zhao and Seibert (2006) find that entrepreneurs and
managers are similar in dependability, but entrepreneurs score significantly higher than managers
in the achievement facet. In a meta-analysis of 41 studies, Collins et al. (2004) also conclude that
individuals who pursue entrepreneurial careers are significantly higher in achievement motivation
than individuals who pursue other types of careers, and Stewart and Roth (2007) similarly conclude
that entrepreneurs are more achievement-oriented than managers. It is frequently hypothesized that
those with high achievement motivation are drawn to environments in which success is more
closely attributed to their own efforts, rather than a larger institutional setting in which business
success or failure is less a function of one’s individual efforts.
There is a lack of consensus on whether entrepreneurs score higher than managers on
extraversion (E). This trait measures the extent to which one is dominant, energetic, active,
talkative, and enthusiastic (Costa and McCrae, 1992). Some researchers hypothesize that
extraversion could be more important for entrepreneurs than managers since entrepreneurs act as
salespeople for their ideas to investors, partners, employees, and customers. Zhao and Seibert
(2006) conclude, however, that no reliable difference emerges in the literature. Envick and
Langford (2000), who found that entrepreneurs were less extraverted than managers, suggested
that many entrepreneurs may run small businesses from their homes to be away from large
bureaucracies that demand one to be relentlessly sociable. This is an area where the definition of
“entrepreneur” matters greatly: self-employed persons and growth-oriented founders tend to
exhibit very different characteristics.
Finally, entrepreneurs are often found to have modestly smaller amounts of agreeableness
and neuroticism (A-, N-) but these differences measured are quite small between entrepreneurs
and managers. Some researchers hypothesize that, because most entrepreneurs eventually become
the CEOs of their own ventures, they do not need to worry about pleasing other people around
11

them, whereas managers must at least please their own bosses. Zhao and Seibert (2006) find
entrepreneurs to be less neurotic than managers, suggesting that this is because entrepreneurs
require exceptional self-confidence to take on the risks of starting a venture. Overall, however,
there is not a strong pattern of significant results in the current literature on these two dimensions.
Differences across entrepreneurial populations
Recent work seeks to measure these traits across different types of entrepreneurs or
different levels of intent, and these variations are as exciting and policy relevant as the macro-level
depiction of entrepreneurs versus the average person. Antoncic et al. (2015) conduct 62 face-toface interviews at firms and 501 questionnaires at educational institutions in Slovenia, classifying
people into four groups: practicing entrepreneurs who already own a firm (30.2% of responses);
potential entrepreneurs who intend to establish their own firm in the following three years (9.9%);
maybe-entrepreneurs who might establish their own firm sometime in the future (46.7%); or nonentrepreneurs who never intend to set up their own firm (13.2%). The study finds variations that
mirror the meta-survey results for openness: practicing entrepreneurs are the most open to
experience, potential entrepreneurs slightly less open, maybe-entrepreneurs even less open, and
non-entrepreneurs the least open. The surveyed entrepreneurs are also less agreeable, but the
patterns in meta-analyses are not reflected for conscientiousness and neuroticism (in total, O+, C,
E+, A-, N). Antoncic et al. (2015) corroborates the broad consensus that entrepreneurs tend to be
more open to experience than the general population, while the other traits are harder to determine.
What lies behind this latter uncertainty? Much of the variation across individual studies
can be attributed to the small sample sizes, which usually only capture a few hundred respondents
(Envick and Langford, 2000; Antoncic et al., 2015). But small sample sizes are unlikely to be the
only answer, as the patterns in meta-analyses like Zhao and Seibert (2006) and Zhao et al. (2010)
overlap but are also not fully congruous. This limitation for meta-analyses may in part reflect the
influence of environment on each entrepreneurial population’s traits, such that generalizations
across populations, industry, and culture are an impossible task. Necessity- versus opportunitydriven entrepreneurs certainly bring different personality traits, and even the opportunity-driven
entrepreneurs in New York City might be different from those in Silicon Valley. Perhaps as more
studies are conducted, we will become better equipped to separate the noise of small samples from
the actual differences in personality traits for entrepreneurship across environments, which would
be a major accomplishment.
Another critique of the Big-5 framework is the overly general nature of these macro
personality traits, such that they cannot easily predict situation-specific behaviors of entrepreneurs;
also, an understanding of a person’s Big-5 personality may not help in understanding the specific
mechanisms through which personality impacts entrepreneurial attitudes and actions (e.g. Kanfer,
1992; Rauch, 2014). Frustrated by these limitations of the Big-5 framework to describe a coherent
portrait of the entrepreneur, researchers have shifted toward creating a multidimensional
12

personality framework that incorporates other qualities like self-efficacy, innovativeness, locus of
control, and need for achievement. We describe these next.
1.1.2 Self-efficacy and innovativeness
In the uncertain and competitive environment of new venture creation, many researchers
hypothesize that entrepreneurs thrive on a strong sense of personal self-efficacy to execute their
visions and a keen eye for innovation to identify new products and markets. Self-efficacy describes
a person’s “belief that he/she can perform tasks and fulfill roles, and is directly related to
expectations, goals and motivation” (Cassar and Friedman, 2009). High self-efficacy correlates
with work-related performance (Stajkovic and Luthans, 1998), small business growth (Baum and
Locke, 2004), academic performance (Hacket and Betz, 1989; Luszczynska et al., 2005), and
career choice (Lent and Hackett, 1987). Self-efficacy is measured on two levels of specificity,
either as generalized self-efficacy or domain-specific Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy (ESE). Most
researchers focus on the more situation-relevant ESE measure.
Chen et al. (1998) define ESE as a composite of self-efficacy toward five tasks: innovation,
risk-taking, marketing, management, and financial control. Surveying students in three business
study programs, they find that entrepreneurship students have a higher ESE average in marketing,
management, and financial control than did organizational psychology and management students.
Perhaps entrepreneurship programs draw students who feel confident in many areas due to the
diverse demands of being an entrepreneur, or it could be that study of entrepreneurship instills this
ESE. Chen et al. (1998) also finds that business founders have a higher ESE in innovation and
risk-taking than non-founders, even as the locus of control remains the same across the two
populations. In addition, researchers hypothesize that entrepreneurial types may also simply be
more confident, which would induce them to score themselves higher across the board in the
subjective surveys typically used to collect data. We discuss evidence related to this point below.
Rather than evaluating whether entrepreneurs have a greater ESE than other groups (which seems
a somewhat tautological question), most researchers have focused on the effect of ESE on firm
performance. This evidence will be considered in section 1.2.
Utsch and Rauch (2000) examine innovativeness and initiative as mediators of
achievement orientation, which in this case is a composite measure of self-efficacy, higher-order
need strength, need achievement, and internal locus of control. Their surveys and interviews
capture 201 German entrepreneurs defined as founders, owners, and managers of a small business
with less than 50 employees. Innovativeness is found to be a mediator, while initiative is not. (The
psychology literature talks about “mediators,” which for an economist roughly means a mechanism
via which one thing impacts another.) Likewise, innovativeness correlates positively and
significantly with the personality traits of self-efficacy, higher-order need strength, and need
achievement, but not with internal locus of control.

13

In general, innovativeness refers to how individuals respond to new things (Goldsmith and
Foxall, 2003). Innovativeness can be considered as a global or domain-specific personality trait,
or as a behavioral concept such as the adoption of new products by consumers. Different ways to
measure innovativeness have been suggested at least since the 1970s (Hurt et al., 1977), but no
uniform measure exists across the studies reviewed here. In one study, Marcati et al. (2008) argue
that domain-specific innovativeness of founders completely mediates their general innovativeness
in a sample of 188 entrepreneurs of small- and medium-sized firms of various industries. Both
forms of innovativeness display generally consistent correlations with Big-5 traits, not indicating
major differences in their origins.
Kickul and Gundry (2002) analyze the relationship between 107 small-firm ownermanagers’ strategic orientation, personality, and innovation. They adopt the Miles and Snow
strategic orientation typology, which divides business strategies into prospector, defender,
analyzer, and reactor strategies. 2 Kickul and Gundry (2002) find that the prospector strategic
orientation mediates proactive personality and three types of innovations: innovative targeting
processes, innovative organizational systems, and innovative boundary supports. They likewise
find that those with proactive personalities are more likely to both take on a prospector strategy
orientation and innovate in their work, which is to be expected.
1F

Given the vast number of Big-5 and risk attitude studies (the latter of which are discussed
below in Section 2), it is quite surprising how little attention has been paid to the innovativeness
of entrepreneurs as it relates to their personalities. This is a place where the biographies of Steve
Jobs alone likely outnumber the formal academic studies! Nevertheless, scholars likely agree that
entrepreneurs need to be able to tolerate some risk and to create or recognize new business
opportunities, perhaps also innovating new products and concepts that can be brought to market.
Related industry-level evidence certainly supports this, with industries showing high rates of entry
by small firms also tending to have high rates of innovation and high productivity growth (Parker,
2009).
One explanation for this gap may be related to the measurement of “innovativeness”: we
simply do not have an agreed-upon set of survey questions to measure someone’s innovativeness
in the way that we can measure risk preferences or Big-5 traits. As such, the metrics used in the
literature are scattered, and universal, domain-specific measures of entrepreneurial innovativeness
remain elusive. Another explanation is that the identification of ESE traits is especially sensitive
to the reverse causality and omitted variable bias concerns described earlier, raising the difficulty

2

Barney and Griffin (1992): “A prospector strategy constantly seeks out new markets and opportunities; a defender
strategy concentrates on protecting current markets and maintaining stable growth; an analyzer strategy both tries to
maintain market share and seek out new market opportunities; a reactor strategy fails to anticipate or influence events
in the environment.”
14

in studying it or in interpreting results (Bandura, 1997; Forbes, 2005). Consequently, scholars may
be reluctant to pursue it for fear of limited publication possibilities. 3
2F

Cassar and Friedman (2009) compare nascent entrepreneurs in the startup phase of new
ventures with a control group drawn from the general working-age population. A nascent
entrepreneur is defined by the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED) as anyone who
is currently trying to start a new business, expects to be an owner or part owner of the firm, and
has been active in doing so for the past 12 months. Cassar and Friedman (2009) assert that their
data, drawn from the PSED and interview and survey responses of 431 American nascent
entrepreneurs, overcome inference challenges due to venture survivorship and recall bias. They
present evidence that higher ESE increases the likelihood of being a nascent entrepreneur as well
as the successful founding of an operating business.
To sum, theory and a limited dose of empirical evidence suggest that entrepreneurs possess
higher self-efficacy than managers and non-entrepreneurs (Chen et al., 1998). This is perhaps
partly due to proactive personalities being more likely to innovate (Kickul and Gundry, 2002).
Innovativeness, in turn, can mediate one’s achievement motivation in a way that mere initiative
does not (Utsch and Rauch, 2000). In a longitudinal study, Cassar and Friedman (2009) confirm
that those with high ESE are more likely to become nascent entrepreneurs and successful founders.
However, the limits of this literature should not be downplayed. There is still a clear lack of studies
successfully isolating the pre-founding characteristics of to-be entrepreneurs on these dimensions,
as well as longitudinal studies that track characteristics of individuals over time. Given the high
potential for endogenous ESE, this is a large caveat to be addressed.
1.1.3 Locus of control
An important trait in the entrepreneurship literature is locus of control (LOC). A person
with an internal LOC conceptualizes that their own decisions control their lives, while those with
an external LOC believe the true controlling factors are chance, fate, or environmental features
that they cannot influence. Rotter’s (1954) theory of social learning first introduced the LOC
concept. Persons with internal LOC believe that they can influence outcomes through their own
ability, effort, or skills, rather than external forces controlling these outcomes. Previous research
has linked belief in internal control to the likelihood of engaging in entrepreneurial activity (e.g.,
Shapero, 1975; Brockhaus, 1982; Gartner, 1985; Perry, 1990; Shaver and Scott, 1991).

3

Many studies instead focus on the “innovativeness” of the firm rather than on that of the founder, basing their
analyses on patents, R&D efforts, reported product and process innovations, and similar measurable firm traits. We
abstract away from those studies, which are obviously important in their own way, to maintain the survey focus on
the personality findings. Hyytinen et al. (2015) provide a strong survey of this parallel literature and analyze Finnish
survey data combined with official business register data. They find a positive correlation between the innovativeness
of the firm and its survival, although a causal interpretation is not established. For risk-loving entrepreneurs, any
positive impact of firm innovativeness turns negative.
15

Many researchers emphasize LOC in their work. Barrick and Mount (2005) claim that
“specific ‘traits rely on explicit description of entrepreneurial activities that may be situated in
time, place and role,’ which is why specific characteristics such as risk tolerance, need for
achievement, or locus of control are more useful in predicting entrepreneurial performance than
the Big Five.” Caliendo et al. (2009) re-evaluate that assertion and, along with other researchers,
suggest that traits such as LOC can be more directly extrapolated onto decision-making in the
professional field.
Notably, LOC is considered to be a culturally dependent trait. Mueller and Thomas (2000)
find that countries with more individualistic cultures (as opposed to collectivist cultures) show
greater internal LOC, and that LOC and innovativeness are both learned traits. 4 This cultural
variance is affirmed by Tajeddini and Mueller (2009), who find that LOC is higher in British
entrepreneurial populations than Swiss entrepreneurial populations in the high-tech industry. The
authors argue that the difference could be related to the Hofstede’s (1980) defined variations in
cultural characteristics such as individualism, uncertainty avoidance, and risk propensity.
3F

Many researchers find internal LOC to be stronger in entrepreneurial populations than in
other populations. Levine and Rubenstein (2017) find in NLSY longitudinal data that those who
become a self-employed person running an incorporated business display a strong internal LOC
prior to founding their firm than those who are employed by others or self-employed in
unincorporated businesses. This echoes earlier findings by Evans and Leighton (1989), and many
studies find parallel results. In a cross-sectional study, Korunka et al. (2003) measure that Austrian
entrepreneurs (defined as “successful new owner-managers”) have a strong internal LOC
compared to “nascent entrepreneurs.” Gürol and Atsan (2006) find that Turkish students who are
more entrepreneurially inclined have a higher LOC. Caliendo et al. (2014) argue that internal LOC
is among the personality traits that best predicts entrepreneurial entry and exit decisions.
Hansemark (2003) finds in tracking Swedish entrepreneurship students over 11 years that LOC
predicts entry into entrepreneurship for men but not for women.
Looking within entrepreneurial populations, a higher internal LOC is further associated
with venture growth. Rauch and Frese (2007) find in their meta-analysis that an internal LOC has
a significant correlation with business creation and eventual business success. Surveying 168
Chinese entrepreneurs in small and medium-sized enterprises in Singapore, Lee and Tsang (2001)
find internal LOC positively correlates with venture size and growth rates. At the same time, Lee
and Tsang (2001) note that personality traits are less important than industrial and managerial
experience and skills in explaining firm growth in their sample. Overall, the LOC personality trait
finds extensive support and is rather homogeneous across types of entrepreneurs.
4

The Hofstede (1980) index places countries such as the United States, United Kingdom, Canada and Ireland to the
individualist end of the spectrum, and countries such as China and Singapore to the collectivist end of the spectrum.
See also Thomas and Mueller (2000).
16

1.1.4 Need for achievement
The need for achievement refers to an individual’s desire for significant accomplishment,
mastering of skills, and attaining challenging goals. Researchers hypothesize that entrepreneurs
might hold a high need for achievement, as building a business from scratch demonstrates one’s
individual abilities in ways that are often hard to match when working within a system in which
responsibility is diffuse. Along with LOC, this important role for need for achievement finds strong
support in the literature along several dimensions.
Need for Achievement (nAch) is a concept based on McClelland (1985) “acquired-needs
theory” and is one of the dominant needs affecting individual actions in a workplace context. The
concept was first introduced by Murray (1938), and later developed and popularized by
McClelland (1961, 1985). Many researchers have found that a high need for achievement predicts
entry into entrepreneurship, although this finding is sometimes challenged in specific contexts.
Among the settings discussed above, the higher need for achievement is evident in the studies of
the Austrian entrepreneurs (Korunka et al., 2003) and the Turkish students (Gürol and Atsan,
2006), but not in the study of Swedish entrepreneurship students (Hansemark, 2003). Comparing
four Austrian studies, Frank et al. (2007) conclude that the need for achievement selects
individuals for entry into entrepreneurship. Turning to comparative analyses across countries,
Stewart and Roth (2007) conclude from a meta-analysis of 18 studies and 3,272 subjects that
entrepreneurs exhibit a higher achievement motivation than managers regardless of country or type
of instrumentation (“projective” or “objective”). 5 Further differences are also evident across subgroups of venture founders. Mueller and Thomas (2000) find that Swiss entrepreneurs have a
higher need for achievement than U.K. entrepreneurs, suggesting that the trait varies across
cultures and countries.
4F

Some researchers also identify a link between the need for achievement and business
performance. For example, the meta-analysis of Collins et al. (2004) finds that both projective and
self-reported measures of achievement motivation predict entrepreneurial intentions and
performance. Rauch and Frese (2007) find similar results. However, Frank et al. (2007) argue that
the need for achievement, along with other personality factors, is much less relevant than
environmental resources and many “process configurations” (such as the set of management
functions including planning, organization, and human resource practices) in explaining
entrepreneurial performance.

5

Projective instruments utilize unstructured stimuli to get respondents to reveal underlying or hidden emotions or
internal conflicts (e.g., Holzman inkblot tests), whereas objective tests utilize comprehensive personality instruments.
17

1.2 Correlation of personality traits with venture phases
We noted in the Introduction that research has mostly investigated how personality
characteristics correlate with probability of entry into and exit out of entrepreneurship, as well as
with various measures of success as an entrepreneur (including venture creation, venture growth,
and long-term venture survival). By contrast, academic work is only beginning to scratch the
surface of how personality characteristics link to specific phases in the venture process or to
consider narrower topics like industry-specific innovation or business plan quality.
1.2.1 Probability of entry into entrepreneurship
Entry into entrepreneurship is often defined as the act of starting a new business venture.
The correlation between personality traits and probability of successful entry into entrepreneurship
is typically measured in two ways. First, taking advantage of university settings, many researchers
analyze student personalities in correlation with their current entrepreneurial intent, their perceived
learning, perceived ability, and personal investment. Second, studies use national longitudinal
panel datasets like the PSED or the German Socioeconomic Panel (GSOEP) to track whether
measured personality traits in those large-scale surveys predicted later business founding.
Cross-sectional studies and meta-analyses
Research teams surveying student populations focus by necessity on future career
intentions and early developmental views of entrepreneurship. For example, Singh and DeNoble
(2003) examine the relationship between the Big-5 traits and entrepreneurial intent, perceived
ability, and personal investment among 342 students at a large state university on the west coast
of the United States. They find that openness is positively related to perceived ability and personal
investment, whereas neuroticism negatively relates to intent and ability. They also test for
variability between studies that had defined entrepreneurs as founders versus business leaders,
finding no significant differentiation between the two categories. Synthesizing 60 studies
describing the relationship between Big-5 traits and entrepreneurial intentions and performance,
Zhao et al. (2010) find that entrepreneurial intentions are positively related to openness to
experience, conscientiousness, extraversion, emotional stability, and risk propensity, and that only
agreeableness was irrelevant in explaining entrepreneurial intentions (O+, C+, E+, A, N-). Among
these, risk propensity garners the strongest support, followed by openness and emotional stability.
Looking to non-Big-5 traits, Korunka et al. (2003) survey 1,169 nascent entrepreneurs and
new business owner-managers in Austria to study their action patterns. Of 627 new business
owner-managers, 153 who meet success criteria also display a high need for achievement, high
internal LOC, and medium risk-taking propensity. The study also considered three startup
configurations for nascent entrepreneurs to combine analysis of personality traits with situational
factors. The first configuration, “nascent entrepreneurs against their will,” consists of those with a
18

strong push factor and comparatively little social or network support. This group holds a
comparatively low need for achievement, low internal LOC, and low personal initiative. The
“would-be nascent entrepreneurs” have unfavorable financial situations but otherwise strong selfrealization motives and internal LOC. Finally, “networking nascent entrepreneurs with riskavoidance patterns” have supportive environments and strong resources, yet high risk-avoidance.
In a sample of 265 Master of Business Administration (MBA) students across five
American universities, Zhao et al. (2005) find that individuals are most likely to form
entrepreneurial intentions directly because they have high ESE, which in turn is influenced by
learning and experience, and to a lesser degree, by risk propensity. However, even as gender was
not related to ESE, women reported lower entrepreneurial career intentions, suggesting that the
relationship of gender to entrepreneurial intentions is likely quite complex. As pointed out by
Miao, Qian, and Ma (2016) in their meta-analysis of ESE, most other studies also find a positive
relationship between ESE and entrepreneurial intentions and/or venture creation. 6
5F

To summarize these cross-sectional studies and meta-analyses, students who display
certain Big-5 traits (i.e., more open to new experiences, more conscientious, more extraverted, and
less neurotic) and higher levels of ESE, internal LOC, and need for achievement are the group
most likely to enter entrepreneurship after graduating from university. These studies also highlight
the environmental and gender factors that influence these choices.
Longitudinal studies
To move from entrepreneurial intentions to actual business formation, researchers need to
track a group over time. For example, Hansemark (2003) tracks students from a Swedish
entrepreneurship program over an 11-year period by matching psychological data with Swedish
registries of new businesses. The author measures the predictive validity of initially measured
personality characteristics toward becoming an entrepreneur at some point in the future, relative
to a matched control group. Internal LOC has predictive validity for men but not for women;
somewhat surprisingly the need for achievement is not predictive for either gender. These results
are inconsistent with those of Korunka et al. (2003) and two studies discussed next.
Kessler et al. (2012) interview 227 Austrian business founders three times between 1998
and 2005. The authors find that personality traits of need for achievement, LOC, and risk taking
predict early success, measured by first sales revenues, but not longer-term business survival. The
relevance of internal LOC is also observed in the Caliendo et al. (2014) study of 10 waves of the
GSOEP from 2000 through 2009. More broadly, the GSOEP study finds that some personality
traits, such as openness to experience, extraversion, and risk tolerance, predict entry, but entirely
different ones, such as agreeableness or other levels of risk tolerance, govern exit choices from
6

In addition to studies already mentioned, see also Miner (2000), Müller and Gappisch (2005), Barbosa, Gerhardt,
and Kickul (2007), and Wilson, Kickul, and Marlino (2007).
19

self-employment. Only internal LOC holds a similar influence on both the entry and exit decisions.
Caliendo et al. (2014) report that these personality traits can explain 30% of the overall variance,
with risk tolerance, LOC, and openness leading the way.
Two studies specifically consider the impact of ESE on various phases of the
entrepreneurial process. First, Cassar and Friedman (2009) find in the PSED sample that ESE
increases the likelihood of creating an operating business. Second, Brinckmann and Kim (2015)
report that ESE facilitates the development of formal business plans, while entrepreneurial
perseverance tends to promote engagement in business planning studies.
To summarize, recent literature mostly agrees that internal LOC and need for achievement
are important predictors of entry into entrepreneurship. Risk-taking is also found to correlate with
business founding but not necessarily with performance or exit. Finally, there also seems to be a
link between ESE and business founding, as well as with specific related functions such as business
planning skills.
1.2.2 Growth and success as an entrepreneur
Most researchers and policymakers are interested in not only what traits predict entry into
entrepreneurship, but what traits contribute to successful venture performance measures such as
growth, investment, long-term survival, and self-reported success. The literature becomes rather
sparse and idiosyncratic over these various metrics, so we cycle quickly across them and provide
some sample findings. (In addition, it is worth recalling that some studies would consider the
innovativeness discussed above as a personality trait as a possible outcome metric.)
Firm growth is one of the most common measures of venture success. In their sample of
201 German founders, Utsch and Rauch (2000) find that measures of innovativeness predict
employment growth and profit growth, while measures of initiative correlate only with profit
growth. Additionally, they find a positive interaction effect between innovation and ESE. 7 Baum
and Locke (2004) conduct a six-year longitudinal study of North American architectural
woodwork firms. They find that situationally specific motivations of goals, self-efficacy, and
communicated vision have direct effects on venture growth, mediating other traits like passion,
tenacity, and new resource skill.
6F

In some settings, researchers can study how personality traits correlate with firm
investment. Cassar and Friedman (2009) find that ESE increases the amount of personal resources
an entrepreneur invests into a venture, as measured by proportion of personal wealth invested in
the venture and number of hours per week devoted to the venture. This type of personal investment

7

Miao et al. (2016) synthesize 26 studies in their meta-analysis of ESE and firm performance to find a moderatelysized positive correlation (0.309) between these variables.
20

is also reflected at the student level, with Singh and DeNoble (2003) finding that personality could
predict the amount of time students spent preparing for future business efforts.
Another popular measure is the long-term survival of the firm, as it can be readily measured
through techniques as simple as business registers, web presence, or phone directories. Ciavarella
et al. (2004) find that high conscientiousness is positively related to long-term venture survival
(eight years or more), compared to a negative relationship for the entrepreneur’s openness to
experience and no relationship for the other Big-5 personality traits.
Many surveys ask entrepreneurs to rate their success. Different entrepreneurs may have
very different views as to how successful their ventures are, and the typical proxies used by
researchers (e.g., growth and survival) may not correlate very well with the self-defined success
or performance. For example, Poon et al. (2006) assess performance among 96 Malaysian
entrepreneurs by asking respondents to rate their company’s growth, sales volume, market share,
and profit using a scale ranging from ‘very poor’ (1) to ‘very good’ (5). Respondents rate these
four performance criteria relative to that of competitors and their own expectations, yielding an 8item performance scale. The study finds that internal LOC is positively connected to firm
performance, but lesser support exists for ESE and achievement motivations.
Finally, researchers summarize the relationship between personality traits and successful
venture performance through meta-analyses. For example, Rauch and Frese (2007) identify that
the traits most significantly correlated with business success include the need for achievement
(.30), innovativeness (.27), “proactive personality” (.27), generalized self-efficacy (.25), stress
tolerance (.20), need for autonomy (.16), locus of control (.13), and risk-taking (.10). The authors
note that these relationships are of moderate magnitude and that heterogeneity across the different
studies allow the possibility of moderators, which could be included for future studies. Another
meta-analysis by Zhao et al. (2010) finds that conscientiousness, openness to experience,
emotional stability, and extraversion are positively related to entrepreneurial firm performance as
measured by firm survival, growth, and profitability. While risk taking is positively related to
business foundation, it does not correlate with eventual business growth and success.
Additional studies focus on how intelligence interacts with the personality traits. One
example is the Baum and Bird (2010) field study of 143 U.S.-based founders of high-growth
printing industry firms. The authors find that “successful intelligence,” which is defined by them
to consist of practical, analytical, and creative elements, combines with high ESE to promote
venture growth over four years. Likewise, Hmieleski and Corbett (2008) find that improvisational
behavior combined with high ESE has a positive relationship with sales growth. It is often difficult
to bring much conceptual order to these studies as they combine personality traits with different
empirical constructs, and the results are sometimes counterintuitive. We worry most about studies
where individuals define whether they are successful, and such statements are very subjective and
can only be evaluated against initial goals for the business, which vary substantially.
21

1.2.3 Probability of exiting entrepreneurship
While many researchers scrutinize the decision to start a firm, very few consider how
personality characteristics relate to decisions to exit from entrepreneurship. As a rare exception,
Caliendo et al. (2014) find using the GSOEP panel dataset that agreeableness increases the
likelihood of exit from entrepreneurship, and an internal LOC makes exits less likely. The authors
note that risk tolerance also had a non-monotonic relationship with the exit decision.
1.3 Moderating traits and environmental factors
Personality characteristics correlate with each other, while at the same time being impacted
and shaped by environmental forces. Researchers in all disciplines frequently describe how
personality factors interact with or are moderated by other individual traits (e.g., gender, education)
and external conditions (e.g., industry dynamics, city traits). For example, we noted earlier the
Tajeddini and Mueller (2009) study that compares 133 Swiss entrepreneurs with 120 British
entrepreneurs in the high-tech industry. U.K. techno-entrepreneurs scored higher on surveys in
autonomy, risk propensity, and LOC, while Swiss techno-entrepreneurs scored higher on
achievement need, tolerance for ambiguity, innovativeness, and confidence. Because the
technology industries in both countries are quite similar in terms of development and institutional
support, Tajeddini and Mueller (2009) attribute the variation to cultural differences rather than
other environmental factors.
Similarly, Hmieleski and Baron (2008) examine a three-way interaction of ESE,
dispositional optimism, and environmental dynamism on firm performance (e.g., revenue growth
and employment growth). The researchers define environmental dynamism as the rate of
unpredicted change occurring within a given industry, following approaches of Dess and Beard
(1984) and Sharfman and Dean (1991). They find that high ESE improved firm performance in
dynamic environments when combined with moderate optimism, but was detrimental when
combined with high optimism. In stable environments, ESE’s effects are weak and not moderated
by optimism. Hmieleski and Baron (2008) conclude that high ESE is not always beneficial for
entrepreneurs and that environment and industry difference may interact strongly with personality
traits in terms of their impact for venture outcomes.
Researchers in some disciplines (but rarely economics) go further than the study of
interactions to construct “a complex process model of the entrepreneur,” in which the relationships
among these variables are mapped out and ultimately govern venture success. The following
diagram is adapted from Frese (2009) and Brandstätter (2011) to illustrate this process.

22

Entrepreneurship does not occur in a vacuum, and personality traits, human capital, and
environment weave the context for each attempt to start and operate a new business. Regardless of
discipline, this complex and integrated nature of entrepreneurship suggests that researchers must
approach their setting carefully to reach reliable conclusions and be careful to consider how much
the results of any one study can port across locations.
2. Risk attitudes
The world of business venturing is incredibly risky, especially for those seeking highgrowth opportunities. Åstebro et al. (2014) report that over half of startups are no longer operating
after six years, and 75% of entrepreneurs exit with no equity. What is it then that draws 400,000
individuals in the United States every year to start a firm with at least one employee? One
prominent explanation is risk tolerance, which we explore in this section.
Discussions of risk and entrepreneurship date back to Knight (1921), who proposes that
entrepreneurs are differentiated from others by their astuteness toward perceiving and acting on
opportunity despite uncertainty and risk. Knight further separates risk, where the probability of
future states of the world are knowable if beyond one’s control, from uncertainty, where it is hard
to even describe exactly what the future states might be. Pure risk can often be priced and
diversified away, while Knight identifies entrepreneurs as those who can handle well this business

23

uncertainty. Despite the intuitive and important nature of this distinction, most subsequent work
has continued to meld together risk and uncertainty. 8
7F

Khilstrom and Laffont (1979) develop a very popular theory model which predicts that the
most risk-averse people will become employees while those with low risk aversion will become
entrepreneurs; Feng and Rauch (2015) provide simpler forms and extensions of this very technical
model. Åstebro et al. (2014, p. 55) summarize the standard expected utility model of risk
preference as such: “Risk preferences are defined by the utility function over wealth in the standard
expected utility framework. Most people have utility functions that imply risk aversion, and such
people are more willing to take work with regular and less-variable pay. However, a smaller
proportion of people—who exhibit less curvature in their utility functions over wealth, and thus
less risk aversion—are more likely to be attracted to the possibility of large gains from highly risky
ventures such as entrepreneurial activity. Thus, holding constant other factors such as
entrepreneurial ability and financing constraints, the individual’s preferences over risk can play a
critical role in determining the entry decision.”
Risk attitudes are described in the literature as risk preferences, risk tolerance, risk
aversion, and risk propensity. All usages of the concept attempt to answer the question of whether
something in an individual’s personality predisposes them to take on the risky conditions of
entrepreneurship and the impact of this personality trait on outcomes.
2.1 Methods of measuring risk attitudes
One approach toward measuring risk attitudes uses self-reported metrics. These questions
vary on levels of specificity, as many are derived from longitudinal surveys that are not specifically
tailored toward entrepreneurship. For example, the GSOEP used by Caliendo et al. (2009) includes
the general risk-attitude question, “How do you see yourself: Are you generally a person who is
fully prepared to take risks or do you try to avoid taking risks?” Ekelund et al. (2005), who use the
Northern Finland 1966 Birth Cohort Study, study more indirect questions about general risk
attitudes, such as “I usually feel tense and worried when I have to do something new and
unfamiliar” and “Most of the time I would prefer to do something a little risky (like riding in an
automobile over steep hills and sharp turns)—rather than having to stay quiet and inactive for a
few hours.” Block et al. (2015) use a self-scoring question that asks, “In your entrepreneurial
decisions, are you prepared to take risks, or do you try to avoid taking risks?”
The most obvious criticism of self-reported risk-aversion measures is that incomplete
knowledge of oneself may lead a respondent to see him/herself differently than he/she appears to
8

In some sense, the portrait of the risk-taking entrepreneur can also be traced back to Schumpeter’s (1935) notion that
entrepreneurs take advantage of existing opportunities by converting a new idea or invention into a “successful
innovation,” which inherently sounds like a risky and uncertain activity. However, Schumpeter states that the risk is
borne by the investor or the “capitalist,” not the entrepreneur.
24

others. Entrepreneurs are frequently found to be overconfident (Åstebro et al., 2014), possibly
skewing self-reported results. Additionally, general attitudes may not transfer to attitudes toward
the startup process, as one’s risk attitude toward driving a fast car could be unrelated to one’s risk
attitude toward one’s career or finances. Some researchers address this by presenting hypothetical
but business-specific scenarios (or “vignettes”) to measure risk attitudes. Where possible, other
researchers who worry about the self-confidence or self-knowledge gap turn to directly examining
entrepreneurs’ investment portfolios and indices of demonstrated action that could be indicative
of their attitudes to risk.
Among hypothetical situational questions used to measure risk attitudes, there is variation
between questions on general financial risk-taking and more entrepreneurship-specific settings.
Some surveys present a question about career choices with an either/or answer. For example, the
PSED asks: “Assuming you are the sole owner, which situation would you prefer? (1) A business
that would provide a good living, but with little risk of failure, and little likelihood of making you
a millionaire, or (2) A business that was much more likely to make you a millionaire but had a
much higher chance of going bankrupt.” The NLSY79 asks: “Suppose that you are the only income
earner in the family, and you have a good job guaranteed to give you your current (family) income
every year for life. You are given the opportunity to take a new and equally good job, with a 50–
50 chance that it will double your (family) income and a 50–50 chance that it will cut your (family)
income by a third. Would you take the new job?” These situational questions that directly engage
one’s disposition toward risk propensity in business venturing are more reliable than general riskattitude questions.
Some risk-attitude questions allow a wider range of responses beyond an either/or
dichotomy using a hypothetical lottery or investment opportunity. For example, the study by Block
et al. (2015) asks: “Imagine you have won $100,000 in a lottery. After having received the money,
you have the possibility to invest the money in an entrepreneurial activity. With a probability of
50%, you double the amount. With a probability of 50%, you would lose half the invested money.
How much money obtained from the lottery would you invest?”
Finally, other studies circumvent the self-confidence and self-knowledge gap by looking
directly at the demonstrated investment metrics of individuals and firms or other behaviors that
would reveal risk preferences (e.g., Puri and Robinson, 2007; Brown et al., 2006; Uusitalo, 2001).
On the individual level, Hvide and Panos (2014) measure risk preference through stock market
participation, personal leverage, and the fraction of wealth invested in the stock market. Lazear
(2005) uses the standard deviation of industry-wide earnings in the individual’s first job to measure
how willing the person is to tolerate earnings-related risk. At the firm level, Caggese (2012) uses
R&D expenditure behavior to measure risk attitudes under the assumption that research for
introducing new products is riskier than investing in improving existing products.

25

Although individual investment data are limited and do not represent the entire
entrepreneurial population (e.g., a small convenience store owner may not have an extensive stock
portfolio), it avoids the concern that people act differently than how they answer in hypothetical
self-report surveys. Similarly, at the firm level, Hall and Woodward (2010) use a model-based
approach to back out what the relative risk aversion of an entrepreneur has to be for a given wealth
level and external guaranteed earnings option, given the wide distribution of exit outcomes
(ranging from failure to highly successful sales and public offerings) for VC-backed companies.
2.2 Risk attitudes of entrepreneurs vs. other populations
Studies compare the risk attitudes of entrepreneurs to managers within the same industrial
sectors, the general population, and other groups of entrepreneurs with varying levels of skills and
different types of motivation. Lazear (2005) uses a large sample of over 5,000 Stanford GSB
graduates for whom questionnaire data can be combined with student transcripts. The author’s
proxy measure for risk tolerance—the variation of industry-level earnings among first job
selected—is positively correlated with the probability of later entering entrepreneurship (although
for Lazear, this metric is a control variable given the study’s focus on the breadth of skillsets
important for entrepreneurship).
Using a very different approach, Hall and Woodward (2010) agree that entrepreneurs must
have a relatively high risk tolerance. Their study uses proprietary data for many VC-backed
companies, analyzes the realized distribution of exit outcomes, and then infers what the relative
risk aversion of entrepreneurs involved in these businesses must be compared to asset levels and
guaranteed employment options. For example, someone with a coefficient of relative risk aversion
equal to two (a common assumed value) and with assets worth $188,949 would be indifferent
between starting their own VC-backed firm versus being employed at market salary. Individuals
with lower risk aversion and/or higher assets would value the entrepreneurial opportunity more
than wage employment.
The most controversial findings relate to the risk attitudes of entrepreneurs versus business
managers, and here the evidence has been inconclusive if not contradictory. While it is
straightforward to understand why entrepreneurs may be more risk tolerant than managers, some
argue that other attributes, like the high need for achievement that both groups possess, equalize
or obscure the simplest predictions (e.g., Atkinson, 1957). In a meta-analysis of 14 studies, Stewart
and Roth (2001) find that the risk propensity of entrepreneurs is greater than that of managers.
This conclusion is challenged, for example, by Miner and Raju (2004), who present data from 14
other studies that used projective techniques to measure risk preferences rather than self-report
measures. The latter study finds entrepreneurs appear more risk avoidant than managers and
highlights the unsettled nature of these questions. See also the Stewart and Roth (2004) response.

26

Xu and Ruef (2004) further examine the “myth of the risk-tolerant entrepreneur.” They
compare the risk attitudes of American entrepreneurs to the general population, using PSED data
to analyze the reactions of 1,261 nascent entrepreneurs and general population participants in a
series of vignettes concerning business investment decisions. Within these vignettes, they utilize
two models. One is a “strategic” model of risk tolerance based on investment choices, which
captures situational risk tolerance in taking a specific strategy or executing a specific action. The
other is a “non-strategic” model of risk tolerance based on information bias about business success,
which captures pre-dispositional risk tolerance. The researchers conclude that the PSED
entrepreneurs are significantly more risk-averse than the general population, proposing that riskaverse individuals enter highly risky endeavors mostly because they value “identity fulfillment”
and their autonomy more highly than any pecuniary benefits.
Other researchers measure heterogeneity within entrepreneurial groups. Both Stewart and
Roth (2001) and Miner and Raju (2004) find that there are large differences between entrepreneurs
whose primary goal is venture growth versus those whose focus is on producing family income.
Block et al. (2015) expand on these distinctions by comparing opportunity and necessity
motivations among a sample of 1,526 German entrepreneurs via an email questionnaire, in which
participants are asked to indicate their willingness to take risks with regards to startups and the
amount they would invest in a hypothetical investment lottery. The study finds that opportunity
entrepreneurs are more willing to take risks than necessity entrepreneurs, and those who are
motivated by creativity are more risk tolerant than other entrepreneurs.
To sum up, while the literature on entrepreneurial risk attitudes is sizeable and growing,
there is no uniform consensus as to how risk preferences should be elicited and how they differ
between populations. Perhaps a new and more complete synthesis lurks around the corner, but
progress to such an end is not evident in recent studies. More work could be done on narrowly
defined populations to better understand the degree of risk aversion among entrepreneurs. We also
need to continually bear in mind and explore differences between actual risk taken on by
entrepreneurs and the perceptions of the risk they hold (e.g., Palich and Bagby, 1995). It is not
entirely clear whether risk attitudes can be separated from over-optimism and over-confidence in
measurement, a distinction that is meaningful theoretically (Parker, 2009).
2.3 Effect of risk attitudes in the startup process
2.3.1 Probability of entry into entrepreneurship
Not surprisingly, there is a large literature looking at the impact of entrepreneurial risk
attitudes on the likelihood of starting a venture and on the eventual success of that venture. This
section briefly summarizes some key recent studies. There is a considerable heterogeneity in the
samples studied by different scholars, and our illustrations reflect this range.

27

Cramer et al. (2002) consider 1,500 individuals from the 1952, 1983, and 1993 Dutch
Brabant surveys, allowing a long time span for entrepreneurial choices to come about. 9 While the
study finds evidence that risk aversion reduces entrepreneurial entry, the researchers did not feel
confident enough in the link to deem it a causal relationship. In a very different setting, Gürol and
Atsan (2006) administer a 40‐item questionnaire to a random sample of 400 fourth-year university
students from two Turkish universities. The sample of students who intend to start their own
business ventures show higher risk-taking propensity than non-inclined students. Similarly, using
the income gamble questions asked in the two years of the NLSY79 panel, Ahn (2010) finds that
relative risk tolerance has a large, positive, and statistically significant effect on the probability of
entering self-employment. An individual whose level of risk tolerance is one standard deviation
above the mean is 13% more likely to enter self-employment than is an otherwise identical person.
The author notes that the estimated effect of risk tolerance is dramatically understated (by about
90%) if the measurement error is not considered. 10 In another U.S.-based study that utilizes 14,305
observations from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, Brown et al. (2011) measure that
willingness to take financial risk is positively associated with future self-employment. Other
international studies include Ekelund et al. (2005), who analyze psychometric data from the
Finnish 1966 Birth Cohort Study to examine “harm avoidance” as measure for risk aversion. 11
They find that harm avoidance carries a negative effect on the individual’s probability of being
self-employed. Caliendo et al. (2009) observe in the GSOEP that individuals with lower risk
aversion are more likely to become self-employed if they are coming out of regular employment,
but risk aversion does not explain entry for those coming out of unemployment or inactivity.
8F

9F

10F

Across the studies, the weight of the evidence suggests individuals with greater risk
tolerance are more likely to enter entrepreneurship. That said, much more work could be done
using the same measures of risk aversion for different populations of potential entrepreneurs and
comparison groups to improve our estimates of the relationship, which are more directional than
quantitative in nature. The realities of business venturing (and subsequent rates of failure) make it
quite reasonable that a would-be entrepreneur needs to be one who can tolerate a lot of risk, but it
is very important to push onwards. For examples, when designing unemployment insurance
benefits or future universal basic income schemes, it would aid policy makers to have an accurate
understanding of the relative degrees of risk tolerance in their population. Individuals who are risk
tolerant may be more likely to exit unemployment by starting their own business, versus looking
for paid work, if getting small incentives from the government (e.g., Hombert et al., 2017).
9

The Brabant survey covers 5,800 people who were interviewed and tested at the age of 12 in 1952, while attending
the last grade level of elementary school in the Dutch province Noord-Brabant. In so far as they could be traced, they
were subsequently re-interviewed in 1983 and 1993. The data cover a rich set of aptitude scores, parental background
variables, and later labor market outcomes, including detailed information on entrepreneurship experiences.
10
The lifetime gamble questions are asked in 1993, 2002, 2004, and 2006 waves of the NLSY79.
11
Harm Avoidance is measured as one of the four subscales of the temperament dimension of the Temperament and
Character Inventory (TCI), a 240-item, self-reported questionnaire. The other three subscales are Novelty Seeking,
Reward Dependence, and Persistence. An example of a survey question from Ekelund et al. (2005) is “I usually stay
calm and secure in situations that most people would find physically dangerous.”
28

2.3.2 Growth and success as an entrepreneur
In contrast to the strong consensus among researchers that risk tolerance supports venture
creation, it is unclear whether risk attitudes impact long-run business success. In a meta-analysis
of 60 studies, Zhao et al. (2010) find that risk propensity is positively associated with early
entrepreneurial intentions but does not relate to entrepreneurial performance, defined through
study-level indications of firm survival, growth, and profitability. Similar results are found by
Kessler et al. (2012) among Austrian founders for assessed venture success and business survival.
Hvide and Panos (2014) hypothesize that the businesses of risk-tolerant individuals might
underperform over the long run, on average, because more of these individuals select into
entrepreneurship (thus bringing more mediocre ideas) than among risk-averse individuals (who
thus might only be tempted to start firms with the very best ideas). The authors assemble an
impressive dataset that combines the investment data of 400,000 males in Norway who were fully
employed in 1993-1994, and the researchers identified 6,300 who subsequently became
entrepreneurs, defined as having a majority stake in a new firm incorporated between 2000 and
2007. Investment data show that common-stock investors, who are known to take on individual
financial risks, are about 50% more likely to subsequently start a firm, but their firms have roughly
25% lower sales and 15% lower return on assets during the annual observation period between
2000 and 2010, supporting their hypothesis. This type of study represents an important frontier in
this area of research.
Korunka et al. (2003) survey and compare 314 nascent entrepreneurs and 627 new business
owner-managers in the European Union, mostly drawing from German-speaking countries, and
find that those who become successful (self-assessed) displayed a medium risk-taking propensity.
It is possible that while the high risk-takers are not the most successful, some degree of risk-taking
propensity is helpful toward business success. This hypothesis of a non-monotonic relationship
between risk tolerance and firm performance is worthy of study in larger samples.
Hyytinen et al. (2015) use an innovative approach that combines interview data from an
early startup period with national business register data to track firm survival over time. Their main
interest is in the innovativeness of the firm (rather than that of the entrepreneur) but they also ask
about the risk attitudes of the entrepreneur. They find that risk-loving entrepreneurs that operate
innovative firms are much less likely to have their firms survive over a three-year follow-up period
compared to similarly risk-loving entrepreneurs running less innovative operations. The main
effect for risk-attitude is not significant in the firm survival models without this business model
(i.e., “innovativeness”) interaction, while the interacted model displays a positive partial
correlation between entrepreneurial risk preference and firm survival.

29

In contrast, Cucculelli and Ermini (2013) find that firms run by risk-loving entrepreneurs
tend to perform better in their sample of 178 entrepreneurs running Italian manufacturing firms in
2007. The authors compare firms that introduce new products with those without new product
innovations. Risk attitudes are measured with a hypothetical lottery question, and are then matched
with firm-level product portfolios and other financial data. A separate analysis of risk-averse
versus risk-loving entrepreneurs reveals that the introduction of a new product affects firm growth
positively (and significantly) only in the sample of firms owned by risk-loving individuals. The
risk-loving entrepreneurs are also somewhat more likely to introduce new products in the first
place, showing that they may indeed stimulate firm growth through innovation.
2.3.3 Probability of exiting entrepreneurship
Caliendo et al. (2010) measure in GSOEP datasets that risk attitudes have a non-monotonic
relationship with entrepreneurial survival, as the exit rates of medium risk takers are 40 percent
lower than those for low and high risk takers. While a positive relationship emerges from the
literature regarding risk taking and initial entry into self-employment, there appears to be a more
complex relationship between risk taking and growth/exit choices. These early results need further
verification using data from other countries and different entrepreneurial populations.
2.4 Entrepreneurial self-efficacy, risk attitudes, and optimism
Many researchers investigate the relationship between ESE and risk propensity. For
example, Zhao et al. (2005) find in a survey sample of 265 MBA students that the effects of risk
propensity (as well as perceived learning from entrepreneurship-related courses and previous
entrepreneurial experience) is fully mediated by an individual’s ESE. Similarly, Densberger (2014)
considers whether risk propensity is a side effect of high ESE. In 49 in-person interviews with
entrepreneurs in three American cities, the author concludes that high ESE allows entrepreneurs
to be comfortable taking risks. Barbosa et al. (2007) take a more complex approach by considering
the roles of risk preference and cognitive style on four types of ESE and entrepreneurial intentions.
Surveying 528 entrepreneurship program students in Russia, Norway, and Finland, they find that
high risk-preference students hold higher levels of entrepreneurial intentions and opportunity
identification efficacy. Meanwhile, individuals with low risk preference had higher levels of
relationship efficacy and tolerance efficacy. These outcomes appear to support claims that higher
risk preferences select for entrepreneurial qualities, while lower risk preferences select for
managerial qualities.
Researchers also consider that entrepreneurs may enter the risky world of business
venturing because they over-assess their likelihood of positive returns. In a comprehensive
literature review of the topic, Åstebro et al. (2014) examine the relationship between optimism,
overconfidence, and entrepreneurial activity. Optimism refers to a general disposition toward
having unrealistic beliefs in good outcomes, while Åstebro et al. (2014) use Moore and Healy’s
30

(2008) framework of overconfidence as expressions of overestimation and over-placement.
Overestimation refers to estimating one’s abilities to be greater than they really are, while overplacement refers to estimating one’s abilities to be greater than they really are relative to another
group. Both versions of overconfidence appear to encourage people to enter entrepreneurship at
higher rates than average, and they may also encourage people to make riskier decisions. Åstebro
et al. (2014) point out that while it is often difficult to distinguish between the effects of optimism,
overestimation, and over-placement, the effects psychologically operate on different levels of
specificity. Optimism applies to all situations, while overestimation applies to a set of situations
that reference a specific skill, and over-placement applies in a specific situation that involves a
specific reference group, such as a certain market. Because of these differences, Åstebro et al.
(2014) assert that it is important to understand their distinctions for effective policymaking. 12
11F

Researchers measure the correlation between general optimism and entrepreneurial activity
using various survey forecasting answers compared to later outcomes. For example, one research
question is whether entrepreneurs are good at forecasting in general. Shane (2009) finds that
entrepreneurs are generally overconfident in their performance estimates. Using data from the
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM), Shane finds that U.S.-based entrepreneurs believe five
times more often than occurs in reality that they will have at least $10 million in sales. In contrast,
Bengtsson and Ekeblom (2014) examine monthly survey data of 153 Swedish entrepreneurs and
non-entrepreneurs regarding their beliefs about future nationwide economic conditions that spans
13 years. Comparing forecasts to economic reality, these researchers find that entrepreneurs have
higher optimism about the economy, but less forecasting error. However, the forecasting error
component of this study may be inconclusive given the economic growth between 1996 and 2009
that generally exceeded expectations of the general public (apart from the very last year).
Additionally, this study compares entrepreneurs to the general population, who may be less
informed about economic trends than entrepreneurs whose very work requires them to consider
economic conditions.
The general trend in this line of research appears to be that while optimistic people are
more likely to enter into entrepreneurship, they make riskier entrepreneurial decisions and incur
greater losses to income. Puri and Robinson (2007) compare self-estimates of life expectancy from
the Survey of Consumer Finance with actuarial tables. Those who overestimate their lifespan are
more likely to be entrepreneurs, and the most optimistic are more likely to make high-risk financial
decisions. Landier and Thesmar (2009) compare French entrepreneurs’ own expectations of future
income with linked panel data, finding that overconfident entrepreneurs are more likely to use
short-term debt financing. Perhaps due to riskier decision-making, the optimistic entrepreneurs
earn less than pessimistic entrepreneurs. Dawson et al. (2014) compare earning expectations from
12

Åstebro et al. (2014) also review the connected peer effects and entrepreneurship literature (e.g., Giannetti and
Simonov, 2009; Nanda and Sorensen, 2011; Lerner and Malmendier, 2013). While we skip this literature in this
review, it is important to note that peers influence some personality traits like perception of risk.
31

the British Household Panel Study 1991-2008 with future earnings as an entrepreneur. Controlling
for ability and environmental factors, the researchers report that optimistic entrepreneurs earn less
than pessimistic entrepreneurs, with the difference being highest at the top of the earning scale and
insignificant at the bottom.
However, it is more difficult to ascertain whether forecasts stem from general optimism or
overconfidence within a more specific context or a market. Åstebro et al. (2007) attempt to tease
apart the effects of optimism and overconfidence by comparing 820 inventor-entrepreneurs with
non-entrepreneurs in Canada with two scales—the forecasting of one’s score on a general
knowledge test and a general belief that “good things will happen.” Inventor-entrepreneurs tend to
both overestimate their scores and be more optimistic in general. The researchers then compare
measures of optimism and overconfidence with data from the Inventors’ Assistance Program at
the Canadian Innovation Centre that advised inventor-entrepreneurs to either terminate efforts or
continue through with launch. While overestimation does not affect investment of time and money,
optimism increases expenditures of time and money even when prospects are said to be limited.
Entrepreneurs may enter competitive markets with a small chance of venture success due
to overestimation of their own abilities vis-à-vis competitors or because they simply enjoy
competitive environments. Camerer and Lovallo (1999) present a scenario to university students
in which pay depends on rank. When asked whether they would like to receive their rank randomly
or based on performance on a trivia quiz, those with high estimations of their abilities are more
likely to select the trivia quiz. Interestingly, Holm et al. (2013) use a similar approach and find that
Chinese entrepreneurs are more likely to enter skill-based competitions even if they do not overplace themselves, suggesting that entrepreneurs may be more generally drawn to competition
regardless of overconfidence. Bernardo and Welch (2001) describe herding behavior for
entrepreneurship.
In conclusion, research provides clear hypotheses as to why entrepreneurs tend to be
optimistic and overconfident, and at the same time, why these traits may be deleterious for
entrepreneurial performance. Overall, while plenty of room remains for further inquiry and
sharpening of results, this part of the literature is more developed and cohesive than many other
areas of the entrepreneurial characteristics research.
3. Goals and aspirations
Most entrepreneurship scholars measure business success by looking at observable events
in the firm history, such as firm survival, exit, and growth. Different entrepreneurs, however, hold
very different goals and aspirations when starting and operating their firms, and this will impact
many decisions made and outcomes experienced. Research on these topics is, however,
surprisingly slim compared to other aspects that we have reviewed. One bright spot, if contentious,
is the work to examine non-pecuniary motivations (“be my own boss”) for starting businesses,
32

which has seen a surge of influential activity within the economics literature. We close this review
with some recent work on this topic that parallels the personality literature. It is quite likely that
the personality traits of entrepreneurs differ significantly by the goals and aspirations that
entrepreneurs bring to the business, and future research can benefit by bringing tighter alignment
of these two literature strands.
3.1 Reasons for deciding to start a business
One key source of longitudinal data on entrepreneurial motivations is the Panel Survey of
Entrepreneurial Dynamics (PSED), which asks nascent entrepreneurs the open-ended question,
“Why did you want to start this business?” Hurst and Pugsley (2011) organize the original 44
motivations into five categories: non-pecuniary reasons, to generate income, to realize a good
business idea, lack of employment options, and other. 13 The authors find that the vast majority of
small businesses do not intend to innovate or expand their operations, but are instead content to
remain at their current size and scope. They further measure that non-pecuniary motivations are
most frequent driver of new firm birth. Their classification is not standardized, and there are almost
as many motivation typologies as there are studies. For example, Kuratko et al. (1997) use a fourfactor structure of goal statements identified based on responses from 234 entrepreneurs: extrinsic
rewards, independence/autonomy, intrinsic rewards, and family security. Nevertheless, the
importance of non-pecuniary benefits is now well documented and robust in the literature.
12F

There is a second version of this theme in the entrepreneurial finance literature. In a famous
paper, Hamilton (2000) estimates that U.S. entrepreneurs have both lower initial earnings and
lower earnings growth than in paid employment, with a median earnings differential of 35 percent
for individuals in business for 10 years. This differential persists across three alternative measures
of self-employment earnings and across industries, and cannot be explained by selection of lowability employees into self-employment. Thus, Hamilton concludes that there must be substantial
non-pecuniary benefits to self-employment. In parallel, Moskowitz and Vissing-Jorgensen (2002)
examine entrepreneurial investment, finding that investment in U.S. private businesses is
extremely concentrated and non-diversified, yet returns to private equity are no higher than the
returns to public equity. The researchers conclude that households are willing to invest substantial
amounts in single privately held firms with a seemingly far worse risk-return trade-off due to nonpecuniary benefits, a preference for skewness, or an overestimation of survival probability.

13
In their scheme, non-pecuniary reasons include desire for autonomy, independence, flexibility, and various measures
of self-fulfillment. Pecuniary reasons, by contrast, classify different motivations to earn money, whether to generate
additional income or to leave wealth for one’s children. Having a good business idea includes various urges to take
advantage of a new opportunity, whether one is utilizing a new technology or building on one’s talents or experiences.
Lack of other employment options suggests that one is otherwise unemployed, disabled, or retired. Finally, other
reasons may include belief in the value of the work, contributing to a community, or aiding in economic development.

33

These influential studies undergird the conventional wisdom that entrepreneurs sacrifice
earnings to be entrepreneurs, indicating that non-pecuniary motivations must be also present. Over
the last decade, however, a stream of work questions whether entrepreneurs actually earn less. The
challenges include underreporting of income by entrepreneurs (e.g., Hurst et al., 2014; Sarada,
2016), failure to capture the option value of entrepreneurship and the returns present in future wage
employment (e.g., Manso, 2016; Dillon and Stanton, 2016; Galina and Hopenhayn, 2009; Kerr et
al., 2014), and the failure to separate entrepreneurship into types (e.g., Åstebro et al., 2011; Levine
and Rubenstein, 2017; Hegde and Tumlinson, 2016). Kartashova (2014) likewise revisits the
private equity premium puzzle and finds it sensitive to the time periods used by Moskowitz and
Vissing-Jorgensen (2002). Thus, the entrepreneurial finance literature now questions whether
entrepreneurs earn less than paid workers in expectation. However, this does not obscure the
broader fact that non-pecuniary reasons, including desire for autonomy and self-fulfillment, are
now accepted to be an integral part of many choices to create new businesses, and thus measures
of venture returns or growth may mismeasure the true returns that these entrepreneurs experience.
This will undoubtedly remain an important research topic for many years to come.
3.2 Entrepreneurial goals
Entrepreneurs driven by pecuniary versus non-pecuniary benefits often have drastically
different goals for their companies. Hurst and Pugsley (2011) find that most entrepreneurs, being
driven by non-pecuniary benefits, have little intention to innovate or expand their market share.
Hurst and Pugsley (2011, 2016) argue that those who receive large non-pecuniary benefits
naturally gravitate toward industries where the natural scale of production is small (e.g.,
accounting, plumbing). Bhide (2000) describes case studies of fast-growing firms that connect the
actions and behaviors of founders to their firm growth, including some shifts in motivation with
time and experience. Ardagna and Lusardi (2010) measure from the GEM survey that the average
entrepreneurship rate is much higher in low- and middle-low income countries (14%) than highincome countries (6.7%); at the same time, two-thirds of entrepreneurs in poor countries are
necessity-driven entrepreneurs, compared to 22% in high-income countries. Notably, opportunitydriven entrepreneurs provide greater economic growth.
Thus, the literature is increasingly categorizing two broad types of entrepreneurs: growthdriven entrepreneurs who seek opportunity and innovation and necessity-driven entrepreneurs that
open new businesses when options are meager. Schoar (2010) further describes this partition in a
review of the entrepreneurship and development literature. The recognition of this heterogeneity
is important progress, as these distinctions of entrepreneurial heterogeneity are paramount to
understanding entrepreneurial goals and their role in shaping the economy. On the other hand,
researchers need to be diligent in remembering that entrepreneurial motivations are not so binary
in nature. Just as the average performance of an entrepreneur is proving to be a poor conceptual
target in earning estimations, these two sub-groups are likely still too aggregated for the best longterm foundation, even if they allow good progress today.
34

There is ample research looking at specific industries where non-pecuniary motivations
define entrepreneurial goals. For example, Bergevoet (2005) finds that the goals and attitudes of
entrepreneurs are determinants of strategic and entrepreneurial behavior in the Dutch dairy farming
industry. Entrepreneurial competencies and instrumental goals (such as having a large and modern
farm) correlate to self-scored success and larger farm size, and non-pecuniary goals explain much
of the variation in job satisfaction. Santos-Requejo and Gonzalez-Benito (2000) conduct 85 indepth interviews and learn that the objectives of subsistence businesses are highly influenced by
socio-cultural attributions such as family values, goals, and motivation to stay in business. In a
very different setting, Reijonen and Komppula (2007) show in two Finnish studies of microbusinesses in the craft and rural tourism industries how entrepreneurs measure their performance
by non-pecuniary criteria and find success in job satisfaction and satisfied customers. Haber and
Reichel (2005) identify similar performance measures of small ventures in the tourism industry of
Israel. In their study, the most important subjective performance measures include the perceived
customer satisfaction and the perceived profitability relative to competitors, while the key
objective performance measures are related to firm growth (e.g., employment and revenue).
Some researchers consider the role of gender in entrepreneurial goals. Justo et al. (2006)
draw data from 1,236 Spanish entrepreneurs in the 2005 GEM survey to compare gender and
parental status on intrinsic and independence measures of success. Intrinsic measures of success
are generally more valued by women, while independence measures of success are valued equally
by men and women. However, the study finds that parental status alters women’s notions of
success, with independence measures of success overcoming intrinsic measures of success among
women with dependent children. There is no such shift for men with dependent children. In
interviews with 129 successful women entrepreneurs in the United States, Buttner and Moore
(1997) distinguish between corporate climbers, who emphasize gaining managerial experience,
from intentional entrepreneurs who emphasize the importance of technical competence.
While goals for entering entrepreneurship and starting a business are considered on a
personal level, such as generating profit or retaining autonomy, there is little academic examination
into self-defined measures of success for ventures. Large-scale surveys have not, to our
knowledge, asked whether an entrepreneur’s individual goal for the venture is to reach a public
offering, grow the venture until acquisition by another firm, or to stay on as a Founder-CEO for
the long term. At the same time, these entrepreneurial decisions shape the entrepreneurial
landscape, and the alignment of founding teams and their investors on these goals is vital for
venture success (e.g., Wasserman, 2011).
To sum up, much work remains to be done in this largely unexplored area, and much of
the initial research needs to focus on data collection via surveys and interviews. Policymakers have
much to gain from understanding the specific goals of growth-oriented entrepreneurs who disrupt
and develop the broader economy. At the same time, most entrepreneurs have multiple non35

pecuniary goals, and policy makers need to understand and support this important part of the
economy too. Efforts to bridge the literatures on entrepreneurial personality and motivations may
prove very fruitful in the years to come.
4. Conclusion
The topic of personality/psychological traits of entrepreneurs is of great importance for
the study of entrepreneurship in a multitude of contexts, including the examination of the
determinants of occupational choice (entrepreneurship vs. paid employment), the predictors of
entrepreneurial success, the evaluation of the effects of entrepreneurship policies, and the design
and assessment of different approaches to entrepreneurship education. While many theories and
empirical analyses have approached the concept, the literature remains arguably underdeveloped
due to the conceptual and empirical challenges faced by researchers. Our review and assessment
of recent work is built with an eye to catching up on the recent literature and the outline of future
opportunities for applied researchers.
Entrepreneurs are a very heterogeneous bunch, and so it is not surprising that studies of
their personalities are mixed. This review highlights places where empirical findings are
consistent, while also embracing the heterogeneity where it is evident. Some of this variance
appears due to small sample sizes and selected subgroups, and so bigger studies and meta-analyses
will likely yield a clearer picture in the long-term. The multi-disciplinary nature of the
entrepreneurial characteristics and personality literature also means that the terminology is not
well standardized, and the research dialogue does not easily lend itself to learning from past
research and making incremental progress as a field. The sheer number of journals publishing
research related to entrepreneurial characteristics, as well as the large differences across them in
terms of academic field and quality, also complicates the ability to have a linear, chronologically
progressive research dialogue. This challenge too is likely to diminish with time, as the greater
depth and specialization of the emerging field begins to provide returns to scale.
Other heterogeneity will be irreducible as it pertains to the type of venture created, and we
have no reason to think the geeky personality of a 20-something tech founder will be tightly aligned
with that of a 50-something immigrant founder that is opening a Main Street convenience store
with her family members. We should, however, start to build the necessary language and taxonomy
to better label these studies and their subpopulations, using the heterogeneity to our advantage.
Accurate portraits of this heterogeneity will, in the long-term, prove truly valuable to
understanding entrepreneurship: the differences between our two hypothetical founders above and
their businesses can be every bit as informative as the comparison of them to people engaged in
wage work. Our opinion is that future work in this regard is likely to be more productive than a
one-size-fits-all portrait of the entrepreneur.

36

We believe a productive path forward exists utilizing universal administrative datasets that
characterize new firm creation and identify the founders of ventures. These data allow researchers
to model directly the heterogeneous types of firms created, ranging from self-employed nannies to
VC-backed startups, and to measure performance and venture success in objective ways.
Moreover, the data provide insight into the careers that founders have before starting their
companies, ranging from past business success/failure to the peers who they work with, and they
describe the founding team that comes together. Powerful tools are also capturing digital signals
about the growth intentions of founders when they set out (e.g., Guzman and Stern, 2017). These
data are already being matched with additional personal-level information ranging from stock
portfolios to personality assessments.
It has been 30 years since the critique of Gartner (1988), and perhaps the next 30 years will
also be unkind to progress on personality traits for entrepreneurship. Yet, the economics literature
holds such a deep focus on the creation of ventures—the “doing” in Gartner’s critique—that it may
miss fruitful opportunities to learn from personality studies and contribute to them. Administrative
data already afford much potential in terms of empirical assessment, and more data are continually
coming online. Studies can combine these high-quality employer-employee filings with insight on
personality traits that are measured before entrepreneurial spells commence, which would be an
important first step for observing which traits are exogenous predictors versus endogenous
outcomes. In more specialized settings, it may even be possible to build time-varying measures of
personality traits by looking before and after interventions like enrollment in an entrepreneurial
training program. It is hard to envision a setting where one will obtain widespread and exogenous
variation in personality, but substantial progress can be made with pre-determined traits only.
This survey has repeatedly surfaced gaps between the theory of personality traits and how
we can measure them, with our empirical tools frequently falling short of being able to disentangle
complex and overlapping psychological traits to assign causal roles. Significant opportunities and
challenges for research on entrepreneurial traits lie in developing theoretical approaches and
constructs that can be empirically measured in a way that allows for the determination of causality
between psychological traits and entrepreneurial outcomes. The literature is often unclear as to
whether individuals with a given set of personality traits selected into entrepreneurship, or whether
individuals developed the traits endogenously after becoming entrepreneurs. The increasing
availability of detailed longitudinal information on demographic characteristics of entrepreneurs,
including their human and financial capital endowments, as well as on entrepreneurial
environments (regions and ecosystems) provides an opportunity to reduce both heterogeneity and
endogeneity in studies of entrepreneurial traits. This requires the development of theoretical
constructs and measurement procedures that align with detailed longitudinal coverage of people,
but this task seems promising.

37

References
Ahn, T. (2010). Attitudes toward risk and self-employment of young workers. Labour Economics, 17(2),
434-442.
Antoncic, B., T. Bratkovic Kregar, G. Singh & A.F. DeNoble. (2015). The big five personality–
entrepreneurship relationship: Evidence from Slovenia. Journal of Small Business Management,
53(3), 819-841.
Ardagna, S. & A. Lusardi. (2010). Explaining international differences in entrepreneurship: The role of
individual characteristics and regulatory constraints. In Lerner, J. & A. Schoar (Eds.) International
Differences in Entrepreneurship. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL, 17-62.
Åstebro, T., J. Chen & P. Thompson. (2011). Stars and misfits-self-employment and labor market frictions.
Management Science, 57, 1999-2017.
Åstebro, T., H. Herz, R. Nanda & R.A. Weber. (2014). Seeking the roots of entrepreneurship: Insights from
behavioral economics. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 49-70.
Åstebro, T., A.J. Scott & K.A. Gordon. (2007). Inventor perseverance after being told to quit: The role of
cognitive biases. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 20(3), 253-272.
Atkinson, J.W. (1957). Motivational determinants of risk-taking behavior. Psychological Review, 64(6p1),
359.
Audretsch, D.B., O. Falck, M.P. Feldman & S. Heblich. (2012). Local entrepreneurship in context. Regional
Studies, 46(3), 379-389.
Audretsch, D. & M.P. Feldman. (2003). Knowledge spillovers and the geography of innovation. In J.V.
Henderson & J. Thisse (Eds.) Handbook of Urban and Regional Economics: Cities and Geography,
Volume 4. Amsterdam: North Holland Publishing, 2713-2739.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self-efficacy: The Exercise of Control. Freeman, New York.
Barney, J.B. & R.W. Griffin. (1992). The Management of Organizations: Strategy, Structure, Behavior.
Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston.
Barbosa, S.D., M.W. Gerhardt & J.R. Kickul. (2007). The role of cognitive style and risk preference on
entrepreneurial self-efficacy and entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Leadership &
Organizational Studies, 13(4), 86-104.
Baron, R.A. (2004). The cognitive perspective: A valuable tool for answering entrepreneurship's basic
“why” questions. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(2), 221-239.
Barrick, M.R. (2005). Yes, personality matters: Moving on to more important matters. Human
Performance, 18(4), 359-372.
Bateman, T.S. & J.M. Crant. (1993). The proactive component of organizational behavior: A measure and
correlates. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 14(2), 103-118.
Bates, T. (1995). Self-employment entry across industry groups. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(2), 143156.
Bates T. (2006). The urban development potential of black-owned businesses. Journal of the American
Planning Association, 72(2), 279-291.
Baum, J.R. & B.J. Bird. (2010). The successful intelligence of high-growth entrepreneurs: Links to new
venture growth. Organization Science, 21(2), 397-412.
Baum, J.R. & E.A. Locke. (2004). The relationship of entrepreneurial traits, skill, and motivation to new
venture growth. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89(4), 587-598.
Baumol, W. (1990). Entrepreneurship: Productive, unproductive, and destructive. Journal of Political
Economy, 98, 893-921.
Bengtsson, O. & D. Ekeblom. (2014). The Bright but Right View? A New Type of Evidence on
Entrepreneurial Optimism. IFN Working Paper No. 1008.
Bergevoet, R.H.M. (2005). Entrepreneurship of Dutch Dairy Farmers (No. PS. 05.03). LEI.
Bernardo, A. & I. Welch. (2001). On the evolution of overconfidence and entrepreneurship. Journal of
Economics and Management Strategy, 10, 301-330.
Bhide, A. (2000). The Origin and Evolution of New Businesses. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
38

Blanchflower, D.G. & A.J. Oswald. (1998). What makes an entrepreneur? Journal of Labor Economics,
16, 26-60.
Blanchflower, D.G. & A.J. Oswald. (2009). What makes a young entrepreneur? In A. Furlong (Ed.)
International Handbook on Youth and Young Adulthood. Routledge, London, UK.
Block, J., P. Sandner & F. Spiegel. (2015). How do risk attitudes differ within the group of entrepreneurs?
The role of motivation and procedural utility. Journal of Small Business Management, 53(1), 183206.
Bönte, W., O. Falck & S. Heblich. (2009). The impact of regional age structure on entrepreneurship.
Economic Geography, 85, 269-287.
Brandstätter, H. (2011). Personality aspects of entrepreneurship: A look at five meta-analyses. Personality
and Individual Differences, 51(3), 222-230.
Brinckmann, J. & S.M. Kim. (2015). Why we plan: The impact of nascent entrepreneurs' cognitive
characteristics and human capital on business planning. Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 9(2),
153-166.
Brockhaus, R.H. (1982). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In C.A. Kent, D.L. Sexton, & K.H. Vesper
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of Entrepreneurship. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 39-56.
Brockhaus, R.H. & P.S. Horwitz. (1986). The psychology of the entrepreneur. In D. Sexton & R. Smilor
(Eds.), The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship. Ballinger Publishing Company, Pensacola, FL,
25-48.
Brown, S., L. Farrell, M. Harris, & J. Sessions. (2006). Risk preference and employment contract type.
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A, 169(4), 849-863.
Brown, S., M. Dietrich, A. Ortiz-Nuñez & K. Taylor. (2011). Self-employment and attitudes towards risk:
Timing and unobserved heterogeneity. Journal of Economic Psychology, 32(3), 425-433.
Budig, M.J. (2006). Intersections on the road to self-employment: Gender, family and occupational class.
Social Forces, 84(4), 2223-2239.
Buttner, E.H. & D.P. Moore. (1997). Women’s organizational exodus to entrepreneurship: Self-reported
motivations and correlates with success. Journal of Small Business Management, 35(1), 34.
Caggese, A. (2012). Entrepreneurial risk, investment, and innovation. Journal of Financial Economics,
106(2), 287-307.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen & A.S. Kritikos. (2009). Risk attitudes of nascent entrepreneurs–new evidence
from an experimentally validated survey. Small Business Economics, 32(2), 153-167.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen & A.S. Kritikos. (2010). The impact of risk attitudes on entrepreneurial survival.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 76(1), 45-63.
Caliendo, M., F.M. Fossen & A.S. Kritikos. (2014). Personality characteristics and the decisions to become
and stay self-employed. Small Business Economics, 42(4), 787-814.
Camerer, C. & D. Lovallo. (1999). Overconfidence and excess entry: An experimental approach. American
Economic Review, 89(1), 306-318.
Carlino, G. & W.R. Kerr. (2015). Agglomeration and innovation. In G. Duranton, V. Henderson & W.
Strange (Eds.) Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Volume 5. Elsevier, Amsterdam, NL,
349-404.
Cassar, G. & H. Friedman. (2009). Does self-efficacy affect entrepreneurial investment? Strategic
Entrepreneurship Journal, 3, 241–260.
Chatterji, A., E.L. Glaeser & W.R. Kerr. (2014). Clusters of entrepreneurship and innovation. In J. Lerner
& S. Stern (Eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy Volume 14. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, 129-166.
Chen, C.C., P.G. Greene & A. Crick. (1998). Does entrepreneurial self-efficacy distinguish entrepreneurs
from managers? Journal of Business Venturing, 13, 295-316.
Chinitz, B. (1961). Contrasts in agglomeration: New York and Pittsburgh. American Economic Review,
51:2, 279-289.
Ciavarella, M., A.K. Buchholtz, C.M. Riordan, R.D. Gatewood & G.S. Stokes. (2004). The big five and
venture survival: Is there a linkage? Journal of Business Venturing, 19(4), 465-483.
39

Clark, K. & S. Drinkwater. (1998). Ethnicity and self-employment in Britain. Oxford Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 60(3), 383-407.
Collins, C.J., P.J. Hanges & E.A. Locke. (2004). The relationship of achievement motivation to
entrepreneurial behavior: A meta-analysis. Human Performance, 17, 95–117.
Costa, P.T. & R.R. McCrae. (1992). NEO PI-R Professional Manual. Psychological Assessment Resources,
Odessa, FL.
Cowling, M. (2000). Are entrepreneurs different across countries? Applied Economics Letters, 7(12), 785789.
Cramer, J.S., J. Hartog, N. Jonker & C.M. Van Praag. (2002). Low risk aversion encourages the choice for
entrepreneurship: An empirical test of a truism. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization,
48(1), 29-36.
Cucculelli, M. & B. Ermini. (2013). Risk attitude, product innovation, and firm growth. Evidence from
Italian manufacturing firms. Economics Letters, 118(2), 275-279.
Dawson, C., D. De Meza, A. Henley & G.R. Arabsheibani. (2014). Entrepreneurship: Cause and
consequence of financial optimism. Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 23(4), 717742.
Decker, R., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin & J. Miranda. (2014). The role of entrepreneurship in US job creation
and economic dynamism. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28, 3-24.
Densberger, K. (2014). The self-efficacy and risk-propensity of entrepreneurs. Journal of Enterprising
Culture, 22(04), 437-462.
Dess, G.G. & D.W. Beard. (1984). Dimensions of organizational task environments. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 52-73.
Digman, J.M. (1990). Personality structure: Emergence of the five-factor model. Annual Review of
Psychology, 41(1), 417-440.
Dillon, E.W. & C.T. Stanton. (2016). Self-Employment Dynamics and the Returns to Entrepreneurship.
Harvard Business School Working Paper No. 17-022.
Dunn, T. & D. Holtz-Eakin. (2000). Financial capital, human capital, and the transition to self-employment:
Evidence from intergenerational links. Journal of Labor Economics, 18(2), 287-305.
Ekelund, J., E. Johansson, M.R. Järvelin & D. Lichtermann. (2005). Self-employment and risk aversion—
evidence from psychological test data. Labour Economics, 12(5), 649-659.
Envick, B.R. & M. Langford. (2000). The five-factor model of personality: Assessing entrepreneurs and
managers. Academy of Entrepreneurship Journal, 6(1), 6-17.
Evans, D.S. & B. Jovanovic. (1989). An estimated model of entrepreneurial choice under liquidity
constraints. Journal of Political Economy, 97(4), 808-827.
Evans D.L. & L.S. Leighton (1989). Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship. American Economic
Review, 79(3), 519-535.
Fairlie, R.W. (2012). Immigrant Entrepreneurs and Small Business Owners, and Their Access to Financial
Capital. U.S. Small Business Administration Report, Washington DC.
Fairlie, R.W. & M. Lofstrom. (2014) Immigration and entrepreneurship. In B.R. Chiswick & P.W. Miller
(Eds.) Handbook on the Economics of International Migration. Elsevier, Amsterdam, NL.
Fairlie, R.W. & B.D. Meyer. (1996). Ethnic and racial self-employment differences and possible
explanations. Journal of Human Resources, 31(4), 757-793.
Fairlie, R.W. & B.D. Meyer. (2000). Trends in self-employment among white and black men during the
twentieth century. Journal of Human Resources, 35(4), 643-669.
Fairlie, R.W. & A.M. Robb. (2008). Race and Entrepreneurial Success: Black-, Asian-, and White-Owned
Businesses in the United States. MIT Press Books, Cambridge MA.
Fairlie, R.W. & C.M. Woodruff. (2010). Mexican-American entrepreneurship. The BE Journal of Economic
Analysis & Policy, 10(1).
Falck, O., M. Fritsch & S. Heblich. (2011). The phantom of the opera: Cultural amenities, human capital,
and regional economic growth. Labour Economics, 18(6), 755-766.

40

Fallick, B., C. Fleischman & J. Rebitzer. (2006). Job-hopping in Silicon Valley: Some evidence concerning
the microfoundations of a high-technology cluster. Review of Economics and Statistics, 88(3), 472481.
Feng Y. & J.E. Rauch. (2015). The Impact of Entrepreneurial Risk Aversion on Wages in General
Equilibrium. NBER Working Paper 20992.
Field, E., S. Jayachandran, R. Pande & N. Rigol. (2015). Friendship at Work: Can Peer Effects Catalyze
Female Entrepreneurship? NBER Working Paper 21093.
Florida, R. (2004). The Rise of the Creative Class. HarperCollins.
Frank, H., M. Lueger & C. Korunka. (2007). The significance of personality in business startup intentions,
startup realization and business success. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development, 19(3), 227251.
Frese, M. (2009). Towards a psychology of entrepreneurship: An action theory perspective. Foundations
and Trends in Entrepreneurship, 5, 437-496.
Forbes, D.P. (2005). Are some entrepreneurs more overconfident than others? Journal of Business
Venturing, 20(5), 623-640.
Galina, V. & H.A. Hopenhayn. (2009). Risk taking by entrepreneurs. American Economic Review, 99(5),
1808-1830.
Gartner, W.B. (1985). A conceptual framework for describing the phenomenon of new venture creation.
Academy of Management Review, 10, 696-706.
Gartner, W.B. (1988). Who is an entrepreneur? Is the wrong question. American Journal of Small Business,
12(4), 11-32.
Ghani, E., W.R. Kerr & S. O’Connell. (2013). Local industrial structures and female entrepreneurship in
India. Journal of Economic Geography, 13(6), 929-964.
Ghani, E., W.R. Kerr & S. O’Connell. (2014). Political reservations and women’s entrepreneurship in India.
Journal of Development Economics, 108, 138-153.
Giannetti, M. & A. Simonov. (2009), Social interactions and entrepreneurial activity. Journal of Economics
and Management Strategy, 18, 665-709.
Glaeser, E.L., S.P. Kerr & W.R. Kerr. (2015). Entrepreneurship and urban growth: An empirical assessment
with historical mines. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2), 498-520.
Glaeser, E.L. & W.R. Kerr. (2009). Local industrial conditions and entrepreneurship: How much of the
spatial distribution can we explain? Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 18(3), 623663.
Goldberg, L.R. (1990). An alternative "description of personality": The Big-Five factor structure. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 1216-1229.
Goldsmith, R.E. & G.R. Foxall. (2003). The measurement of innovativeness. In Shavinina, L.V. (Ed.), The
International Handbook of Innovation. Elsevier Science, Oxford, UK, 321-328.
Greene, F.J. & G. Saridakis. (2007). Understanding the factors influencing graduate entrepreneurship.
National Council for Graduate Entrepreneurship Research Report, 1, 2007.
Gürol, Y. & N. Atsan. (2006). Entrepreneurial characteristics amongst university students: Some insights
for entrepreneurship education and training in Turkey. Education+ Training, 48(1), 25-38.
Guzman, J. & S. Stern. (2017). The State of American Entrepreneurship? New Estimates of the Quantity
and Quality of Entrepreneurship for 15 US States, 1988-2014. MIT Working Paper.
Haber, S. & A. Reichel. (2005). Identifying performance measures of small ventures-the case of the tourism
industry. Journal of Small Business Management, 43(3), 257.
Hackett, G. & N.E. Betz. (1989). An exploration of the mathematics self-efficacy/mathematics performance
correspondence. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 20(3), 261-273.
Hall, R.E. & S.E. Woodward. (2010). The burden of non-diversifiable risk on entrepreneurship. American
Economic Review, 100(3), 1163-1194.
Hamilton, B.H. (2000). Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns to self‐
employment. Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), 604-631.

41

Hansemark, O.C. (2003). Need for achievement, locus of control and the prediction of business startups: A
longitudinal study. Journal of Economic Psychology, 24, 301-319.
Hegde, D. & J. Tumlinson. (2016). Unobserved Ability and Entrepreneurship. Working paper.
Hmieleski, K.M. & R.A. Baron. (2008). When does entrepreneurial self-efficacy enhance versus reduce
firm performance? Strategic Entrepreneurship Journal, 2, 57-72.
Hmieleski, K.M. & A.C. Corbett. (2008). The contrasting interaction effects of improvisational behavior
with entrepreneurial self-efficacy on new venture performance and entrepreneur work satisfaction.
Journal of Business Venturing, 23(4), 482-496.
Hofstede, G. (1980) Culture’s Consequences: International Differences in Work-Related Values. Sage,
Beverly Hills, CA.
Holm, H.J., S. Opper & V. Nee. (2013). Entrepreneurs under uncertainty: An economic experiment in
China. Management Science, 59(7), 1671-1687.
Hombert, J., A. Schoar, D. Sraer & D. Thesmar. (2017). Can Unemployment Insurance Spur
Entrepreneurial Activity? MIT Working Paper.
Hsu, D.H., E.B. Roberts & C.E. Eesley. (2007). Entrepreneurs from technology-based universities:
Evidence from MIT. Research Policy, 36(5), 768-788.
Hunt, J. (2011). Which immigrants are most innovative and entrepreneurial? Distinctions by entry visa.
Journal of Labor Economics, 29(3), 417-457.
Hunt, J. (2015). Are immigrants the most skilled US computer and engineering workers? Journal of Labor
Economics, 33(S1), S39-S77.
Hurst, E., G. Li, & B.W. Pugsley. (2014). Are household surveys like tax forms: Evidence from income
underreporting of the self employed. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(1), 19-33.
Hurst, E. & A. Lusardi. (2004). Liquidity constraints, household wealth, and entrepreneurship. Journal of
Political Economy, 112(2), 319-347.
Hurst, E. & B.W. Pugsley. (2011a). What do small businesses do? Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
43(2), 73-142.
Hurst, E. & B.W. Pugsley. (2011b). Understanding Small Business Heterogeneity. NBER Working Paper.
Hurst, E. & B.W. Pugsley. (2016). Wealth, tastes, and entrepreneurial choice. In J. Haltiwanger, E. Hurst,
J. Miranda & A. Schoar (Eds.) Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and
Challenges. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Hurt, H.T., K. Joseph & C.D. Cook. (1977). Scale for the measurement of innovativeness. Human
Communication Research, Vol. 4, 58-65.
Hvide, H.K. & G.A. Panos. (2014). Risk tolerance and entrepreneurship. Journal of Financial Economics,
111, 200-223.
Hyytinen, A., M. Pajarinen, & P. Rouvinen. (2015). Does innovativeness reduce startup survival rates?
Journal of Business Venturing, 30(4), 564-581.
John, O.P., L.P. Naumann & C.J. Soto. (2008). Paradigm shift to the integrative big five trait taxonomy:
history, measurement, and conceptual issues. In O.P. John, R.W. Robins & L.A. Pervin (Eds.).
Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research. Guilford Press, New York, 114-158.
Justo, R., J.O. De Castro, A. Coduras & C. Cruz. (2006). Entrepreneurs' perceptions of success: Examining
differences across gender and family status. Instituto de Empresa Business School.
Kanfer, R. (1992). Work motivation: New directions in theory and research. International Review of
Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 7, 1-53.
Kartashova, K. (2014). Private equity premium puzzle revisited. American Economic Review, 104(10),
3297-3334.
Kauffman Index. (2016). Growth Entrepreneurship Report by A. Morelix, E.J. Reedy & J. Russell. Ewing
Marion Kauffman Foundation, Kansas City, MO.
Kenney, M. (2000). Understanding Silicon Valley: The Anatomy of an Entrepreneurial Region. Stanford
University Press, Palo Alto, CA.

42

Kerr S.P. & W.R. Kerr. (2016). Immigrant entrepreneurship. In J. Haltiwanger, E. Hurst, J. Miranda & A.
Schoar (Eds.) Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges.
University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
Kerr, S.P., W.R. Kerr & R. Nanda. (2015). House Money and Entrepreneurship. NBER Working Paper
21458.
Kerr, W.R. & M. Mandorff. (2015). Social Networks, Ethnicity, and Entrepreneurship. NBER Working
Paper 21597.
Kerr, W.R. & R. Nanda. (2011). Financing constraints and entrepreneurship. In D. Audretsch, O. Falck &
S. Heblich (Eds.) Handbook on Research on Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Edward Elgar,
London, UK, 88-103.
Kerr, W.R., R. Nanda & M. Rhodes-Kropf. (2014). Entrepreneurship as experimentation. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 25-48.
Kessler, A., C. Korunka, H. Frank & M. Lueger. (2012). Predicting founding success and new venture
survival: A longitudinal nascent entrepreneurship approach. Journal of Enterprising Culture,
20(01), 25-55.
Khilstrom, R. & J.J. Laffont. (1979). A general equilibrium entrepreneurial theory of firm formation based
on risk aversion. Journal of Political Economy, 87, 719-748.
Kickul, J. & L. Gundry. (2002). Prospecting for strategic advantage: The proactive entrepreneurial
personality and small firm innovation. Journal of Small Business Management, 40(2), 85-97.
Kilby, P. (1971). Hunting the Heffalump. Entrepreneurship and Economic Development, 1-40.
Knight, F. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, MA.
Korunka, C., H. Frank, M. Lueger & J. Mugler. (2003). The entrepreneurial personality in the context of
resources, environment, and the startup process—A configurational approach. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 28(1), 23-42.
Kuratko, D.F., J.S. Hornsby & D.W. Naffziger. (1997). An examination of owner's goals in sustaining
entrepreneurship. Journal of Small Business Management, 35(1), 24.
Landier, A. & D. Thesmar. (2009). Financial contracting with optimistic entrepreneurs. Review of Financial
Studies, 22(1), 117-150.
Lazear, E.P. (2005). Entrepreneurship. Journal of Labor Economics, 23(4), 649-680.
Lee, D.Y. & E.W. Tsang. (2001). The effects of entrepreneurial personality, background and network
activities on venture growth. Journal of Management Studies, 38(4), 583-602.
Lent, R.W. & G. Hackett. (1987). Career self-efficacy: Empirical status and future directions. Journal of
Vocational Behavior, 30, 347-382.
Lerner, J. & U. Malmendier. (2013). With a little help from my (random) friends: Success and failure in
post-business school entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies, 26(10), 2411-2452.
Levine, R. & Y. Rubenstein (2017). Smart and illicit. Who becomes an entrepreneur and do they earn more?
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(2), 963-1018.
Liang, J., H. Wang & E.P. Lazear. (2014). Demographics and Entrepreneurship. NBER Working Paper
20506.
Lofstrom, M., T. Bates & S.C. Parker. (2014). Why are some people more likely to become smallbusinesses owners than others: Entrepreneurship entry and industry-specific barriers. Journal of
Business Venturing, 29(2), 232-251.
Luszczynska, A., U. Scholz & R. Schwarzer. (2005). The general self-efficacy scale: Multicultural
validation studies. The Journal of Psychology, 139(5), 439-457.
Manso, G. (2016). Experimentation and the returns to entrepreneurship. Review of Financial Studies, 29(9),
2319-2340.
Marcati, A., G. Guido & A.M. Peluso. (2008). The role of SME entrepreneurs’ innovativeness and
personality in the adoption of innovations. Research Policy, 37, 1579-1590.
McClelland, D.C. (1961). The Achieving Society. Free Press, New York.
McClelland, D.C. (1985). Human Motivation. Scott Foresman, Glenview, IL.

43

Miao, C., S. Qian & D. Ma. (2016). The relationship between entrepreneurial self-efficacy and firm
performance: A meta-analysis of main and moderator effects. Journal of Small Business
Management, 51(1), 87-107.
Michelacci, C. & O. Silva. (2007). Why so many local entrepreneurs? Review of Economics and Statistics,
89(4), 615-633.
Miles, R.E., C.C. Snow, A.D. Meyer & H.J. Coleman. (1978). Organizational strategy, structure, and
process. Academy of Management Review, 3(3), 546-562.
Milne, A.A. (1926). Winnie the Pooh. Methuen & Co. Ltd., London, UK.
Milne, A.A. (1928). The House at Pooh Corner. Methuen & Co. Ltd., London, UK.
Miner, J.B. (2000). Testing a psychological typology of entrepreneurship using business founders. Journal
of Applied Behavioral Science, 36, 43-69.
Miner, J.B. & N.N. Raju. (2004). Risk propensity differences between managers and entrepreneurs and
between low- and high-growth entrepreneurs: A reply in a more conservative vein. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 89, 3-13.
Moore, D.A. & P.J. Healy. (2008). The trouble with overconfidence. Psychological Review, 115(2), 502.
Moskowitz, T.J. & A. Vissing-Jorgensen. (2002). The returns to entrepreneurial investment: A private
equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review, 92, 745-778.
Mueller, S.L. & A.S. Thomas. (2001). Culture and entrepreneurial potential: A nine country study of locus
of control and innovativeness. Journal of Business Venturing, 16(1), 51-75.
Murphy, K., A. Shleifer & R. Vishny. (1991). The allocation of talent: Implications for growth. Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 106, 503-530.
Murray, H.A. (1938). Explorations in Personality. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Müller, G.F. & C. Gappisch. (2005). Personality types of entrepreneurs. Psychological Reports, 96(3), 737746.
Nanda, R. & J. Sorensen. (2011). Workplace peers and entrepreneurship. Management Science, 56, 11161126.
Obschonka M., M. Stuetzer, S.D. Gosling, P.J. Rentfrow, M.E. Lamb, J. Potter J, et al. (2015).
Entrepreneurial regions: Do macro-psychological cultural characteristics of regions help solve the
“knowledge paradox” of economics? PLoS ONE 10(6): e0129332.
Palich, L.E. & D.R. Bagby. (1995). Using cognitive theory to explain entrepreneurial risk-taking:
Challenging conventional wisdom. Journal of Business Venturing, 10(6), 425-438.
Parker, S.C. (2009). The Economics of Entrepreneurship. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Patterson, F. & M. Kerrin. (2014). Characteristics and behaviors associated with innovative people in smalland medium-sized enterprises. In E. Chell & M. Karatas-Ozkan (Eds.) Handbook of Research on
Small Business and Entrepreneurship. Edward Elgar, London, UK, 187-206.
Perry, C. (1990). After further sightings of the Heffalump. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 5, 22-31.
Poon, J.M., R.A. Ainuddin & S.O.H. Junit. (2006). Effects of self-concept traits and entrepreneurial
orientation on firm performance. International Small Business Journal, 24(1), 61-82.
Puri, M. & D.T. Robinson. (2007). Optimism and economic choice. Journal of Financial Economics, 86(1),
71-99.
Rauch, A. (2014). Predictions of entrepreneurial behavior: A personality approach. In E. Chell & M.
Karatas-Ozkan (Eds.) Handbook of Research on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. Edward
Elgar, London, UK, 165-183.
Rauch, A. & M. Frese. (2000). Effects of human resources strategies on success of small scale businesses:
A longitudinal study. In Frontiers of Entrepreneurship Research, Babson-Kauffman
Entrepreneurship Research Conference.
Rauch, A. & M. Frese. (2007a). Let’s put the person back into entrepreneurship research: A meta-analysis
on the relationship between business owners’ personality traits, business creation, and success.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 16, 353-385.
Rauch, A. & M. Frese. (2007b). Born to be an entrepreneur? Revisiting the personality approach to
entrepreneurship. The Psychology of Entrepreneurship, 41-65.
44

Rauch, A., J. Wiklund, G.T. Lumpkin & M. Frese. (2009). Entrepreneurial orientation and business
performance: An assessment of past research and suggestions for the future. Entrepreneurship
Theory and Practice, 33, 761-787.
Reijonen, H. & R. Komppula. (2007). Perception of success and its effect on small firm performance.
Journal of Small Business and Enterprise Development, 14(4), 689-701.
Reynolds P.D., W.D. Bygrave, E. Autio, L.W. Cox & M. Hay. (2004). GEM Global 2002 Executive Report.
London, UK.
Reynolds, P.D., N.M. Carter, W.B. Gartner & P.G. Greene. (2004). The prevalence of nascent entrepreneurs
in the United States: Evidence from the panel study of entrepreneurial dynamics. Small Business
Economics, 23(4), 263-284.
Reynolds, P.D., W.B. Gartner, P.G. Greene, L.W. Cox & N.M. Carter. (2002). The Entrepreneur Next
Door: Characteristics of Individuals Starting Companies in America: An Executive Summary of
the Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics. SSRN 1262320.
Rosenthal, S. & W. Strange. (2012). Female entrepreneurship, agglomeration, and a new spatial mismatch.
Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(3), 764-788.
Rotter, J.B. (1954). Social Learning and Clinical Psychology. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Samila, S. & O. Sorenson. (2011). Venture capital, entrepreneurship, and economic growth. Review of
Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 338-349.
Santos-Requejo, L. & Ó. González-Benito. (2000). Economic success factors in Spanish small retail
businesses. An analysis based on sector-relative definitions. Small Business Economics, 15(3), 209222.
Sarada. (2016). The Unobserved Returns from Entrepreneurship. Working paper.
Saxenian, A.L. (1994). Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Schneider, B. (1987). The people make the place. Personnel Psychology, 40, 437-454.
Shane, S.A. (2009). Fool’s Gold? The Truth Behind Angel Investing in America. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, UK.
Sharfman, M. P., & J.W. Dean. (1991). Conceptualizing and measuring the organizational environment: A
multidimensional approach. Journal of Management, 17(4), 681-700.
Schoar, A. (2010). The divide between subsistence and transformational entrepreneurship. In J. Lerner &
S. Stern (Eds.) Innovation Policy and the Economy, Number 10. University of Chicago Press,
Chicago, IL, 57-71.
Schumpeter J.A. (1935). The Analysis of Economic Change. Review of Economic Statistics, 17, 2–10.
Shapero, A. (1975). The displaced, uncomfortable entrepreneur. Psychology Today, 83-88.
Shaver, K.G. & L.R. Scott. (1991). Person, process, choice: The psychology of new venture creation.
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 23-45.
Singh, G. & A. DeNoble. (2003). Views on self-employment and personality: An exploratory study.
Journal of Developmental Entrepreneurship, 8(3), 265.
Sorenson, O. (2017). Regional ecologies of entrepreneurship. Journal of Economic Geography, 17, 959974.
Stajkovic, A.D. & F. Luthans. (1998). Self-efficacy and work-related performance: A meta-analysis.
Psychological Bulletin, 124(2), 240-261.
Stewart, W.H. & P.L. Roth. (2001). Risk propensity differences between entrepreneurs and managers: A
meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 86, 145-153.
Stewart, W.H & P.L. Roth. (2004). Data quality affects meta-analytic conclusions: A response to Miner
and Raju (2004) concerning entrepreneurial risk propensity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 89,
14-21.
Stewart, W.H. & P.L. Roth. (2007). A meta‐analysis of achievement motivation differences between
entrepreneurs and managers. Journal of Small Business Management, 45(4), 401-421.

45

Stuetzer, M., M. Obschonka, D.B. Audretsch, M. Wyrwich, P.J. Rentfrow, M. Coombes, L. Shaw-Taylor,
& M. Satchell. (2015). Industry structure, entrepreneurship, and culture: An empirical analysis
using historical coalfields. European Economic Review. doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2015.08.012.
Tajeddini, K. & S.L. Mueller. (2009). Entrepreneurial characteristics in Switzerland and the UK: A
comparative study of techno-entrepreneurs. Journal of International Entrepreneurship, 7(1), 1-25.
Thomas, A.S. & S.L. Mueller. (2000). A case for comparative entrepreneurship: Assessing the relevance
of culture. Journal of International Business Studies, 287-301.
Unger, J.M., A. Rauch, M. Frese & N. Rosenbusch. (2011). Human capital and entrepreneurial success: A
meta-analytical review. Journal of Business Venturing, 26(3), 341-358.
Utsch, A. & A. Rauch. (2000). Innovativeness and initiative as mediators between achievement orientation
and venture performance. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 9(1), 45-62.
Uusitalo, R. (2001). Homo entreprenaurus?. Applied Economics, 33(13), 1631-1638.
Van der Sluis, J., M. Van Praag & W. Vijverberg. (2008). Education and entrepreneurship selection and
performance: A review of the empirical literature. Journal of Economic Surveys, 22(5), 795-841.
Wasserman, N. (2011). The Founder’s Dilemmas: Anticipating and Avoiding the Pitfalls That Can Sink a
Startup. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Wadhwa, V., A.L. Saxenian, B.A. Rissing & G. Gereffi. (2007). America's New Immigrant Entrepreneurs:
Part I. Duke Science, Technology & Innovation Paper.
Wellington, A.J. (2006). Self-employment: the new solution for balancing family and career? Labour
Economics, 13(3), 357-386.
Wilson, F., J. Kickul, & D. Marlino (2007). Gender, Entrepreneurial Self-Efficacy, and Entrepreneurial
Career Intentions: Implications for Entrepreneurship Education. Entrepreneurship Theory and
Practice, 31(3), 387–406.
Xu, H. & M. Ruef. (2004). The myth of the risk-tolerant entrepreneur. Strategic Organization, 2(4), 331355.
Zhao, H. & S.E. Seibert. (2006). The big five personality dimensions and entrepreneurial status: A metaanalytical review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 91, 259-271.
Zhao, H., S.E. Seibert & G.E. Hills. (2005). The mediating role of self-efficacy in the development of
entrepreneurial intentions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 90, 1265-1272.
Zhao, H., S.E. Seibert & G.T. Lumpkin. (2010). The relationship of personality to entrepreneurial intentions
and performance: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Management, 36, 381–404.

46

Appendix 1: Other characteristics of entrepreneurs
A large literature investigates the non-personality traits of entrepreneurs. It is not possible
to do full justice to that literature, especially in an international scope, within the confines of this
review. We only seek here to provide a brief commentary that draws on mostly U.S.-based studies
to afford a flavor of these findings. Parker (2009) provides a more extensive summary of these
determinants of entrepreneurship.
A1.1 Demographics
Research tends to measure that entrepreneurship is more prevalent among men, younger
people, non-minorities, and immigrants. These basic regularities are broadly consistent across subgroups of entrepreneurs like self-employed individuals, the most documented case, and growthoriented entrepreneurs, although the details certainly will differ by the domain studied. 14 We
summarize the key studies making these conclusions. Importantly, with respect to this study’s
primary focus on personality traits, these demographic characterizations have been mostly
developed in parallel and fruitful research can combine the streams (e.g., whether personality
differences explain higher rates of entrepreneurship across some immigrant nationalities compared
to others).
13F

Contrary to popular perceptions, entrepreneurship is not just the domain of 20-somethings.
Studies document that young people are more inclined towards entrepreneurship, but that the
competing effects of better capabilities and resources to start new ventures (encouraging entry)
with higher opportunity costs and family commitments (discouraging entry) tend to prevent major
differences across age ranges in terms of entrepreneurship rates. Many studies that look for nonlinear patterns document an inverted U-shaped relationship between age and rate of
entrepreneurship, with perhaps a peak point in the range of age 45. 15 One’s definition of
entrepreneurship matters here. For example, many older, late-career individuals enter selfemployment as a form of semi-retirement, but it is rarer that someone in the age range pursues
high-growth VC investment, and Glaeser and Kerr (2009) highlight the spatial differences in these
patterns. To contrast, Hsu et al. (2007) survey 45,000 MIT alumni since the 1930s and show that
the average age of a founder has dropped from 40 (in the 1950s) to 30 (in the 1990s).
14F

Women are less likely than men to enter entrepreneurship and this difference has remained
quite persistent over the last several decades. Following the rise of female labor force participation,
studies find mixed evidence for whether rates of female entrepreneurship are continuing to grow
14
Globally, GEM-based measurements find opportunity-driven entrepreneurs to also be slightly younger, male, more
educated, more confident in their skills and abilities, and less afraid of failure.
15
Examples of work in this literature include Bates (1995), Cowling (2000), Reynolds et al. (2002), Blanchflower and
Oswald (2009), Parker (2009), Bönte et al. (2009), and Liang et al. (2014). The Kauffman Index on startup activity
indicates that slightly less than half of the new founders are aged under 45.

47

faster than those for men. Female entrepreneurs are highly represented in some sectors such as
services and sales, while notably absent from other sectors such as construction. 16 Data from the
Survey of Business Owners in 2007 suggest that female business owners are more prevalent in
two-owner firms, with the implication that women are more likely to engage in entrepreneurship
through a family business or cofounded venture rather than as the sole owner of a firm. An
emerging area of research documents how women entrepreneurs tend to be more spatially isolated
within local areas and less networked than male entrepreneurs, and consequently depend upon
other female-owned firms more (e.g., Rosenthal and Strange, 2012; Ghani et al., 2013). 17
15F

16F

Research finds that African Americans and Latinos are less likely to become entrepreneurs
compared to whites (e.g., Fairlie and Meyer, 1996, 2000; Kauffman Index, 2016). A rare exception
is the PSED-based study of Reynolds et al. (2004) that finds that minority groups are more likely
to be “nascent entrepreneurs” than their white comparison groups. The rate for Asians seems to
more closely track that of whites, although some studies suggest that Asian entrepreneurship rates
now exceed those of whites (e.g., Fairlie and Robb, 2008; Kauffman Index, 2016).
Recent studies document that immigrants start a disproportionate number of firms in the
United States, with about a quarter of entrepreneurs being immigrants compared to an overall
immigrant workforce share of 15%. This difference moreover appears to be expanding in the last
two decades (e.g., Fairlie, 2012; Kauffman Index, 2016; Kerr and Kerr, 2016). There are large
differences across groups of immigrants in terms of their entrepreneurial inclinations, with
Mexican and Latin American immigrants showing lower rates than many Asian groups. 18 This
disproportionate contribution appears equally present for self-employed entrepreneurs as for hightech entrepreneurs. For example, Indian and Chinese entrepreneurs are prevalent in the tech sector,
while many of the Latino entrepreneurs can be found in the service sector. Moreover, this
immigrant entrepreneurial behavior is often highly clustered at industry-level by ethnic group (e.g.,
Vietnamese nail care salons, Korean dry cleaners) as described in Kerr and Mandorff (2015), and
it would be interesting to explore how this clustering influences personality factors like optimism
and perceptions of risk. Fairlie and Lofstrom (2014) and Kerr and Kerr (2016) provide greater
details.
17F

16

Examples of work in this literature include Bates (1995), Reynolds et al. (2004), Budig (2006), Wellington (2006),
Greene et al. (2007), Parker (2009), and Kauffman Index (2016).
17
Connected to optimism described before, there is also evidence that female entrepreneurship increases in developing
economies as conditions improve, peer networks take root, and women observe inspiring examples (Ghani et al., 2014;
Field et al., 2015).
18
Examples of work in this literature include Fairlie and Meyer (1996), Clark and Drinkwater (1998), Bates (2006),
Wadhwa et al. (2007), Parker (2009), Fairlie and Woodruff (2010), Fairlie (2012), and Hunt (2011). Some of these
gaps can be explained by differing demographics, education levels, and wealth.
48

A1.2 Financial assets and wealth
The impact of wealth and financial assets on the probability of starting a business has been
studied extensively, with influential early work by Evans and Jovanovic (1989) and Evans and
Leighton (1989). There is clearly a positive correlation between wealth and entry, and the
perceived wisdom for a long time was that substantial financial constraints exist for entrepreneurs,
which holds very important policy implications. Subsequent work utilized unexpected changes in
wealth (e.g., inheritances, home price increases, exchange rate fluctuations) that are arguably
uncorrelated with individual-level abilities and wealth from previous entrepreneurship in an effort
to establish a causal relationship (e.g., Blanchflower and Oswald, 1998), generally finding
supporting evidence.
Recent work challenges this past wisdom following the contrarian finding of Hurst and
Lusardi (2004). These authors first showed that entry rates are very non-linear over the wealth
distribution, with the rate of entry only jumping up in the top 10% of wealth levels or higher. This
poses problems for explaining differences in entrepreneurship across the broad workforce, and the
businesses started by these very wealthy individuals are frequently of a low capital intensity such
that the owners could have opened the business at lower wealth levels had they wanted to.
Moreover, studies have shown that the seemingly solid instruments for wealth changes are often
confounded (e.g., entry might rise upon the expectation of a windfall inheritance gain, well in
advance of actual wealth increases). Since Hurst and Lusardi (2004), it is safe to conclude that the
literature has been very mixed on the presence and importance of financing constraints.
Parker (2009) and Kerr and Nanda (2011) provide complete reviews of this work. We wish
to mostly emphasize one point of connection to our present review. Attitudes towards risk, as well
as the actual relative riskiness of a gamble, can change substantially with higher levels of
individual wealth. Middle income families will often balk at a $25,000 business bet (e.g., the size
of a typical angel investment into a startup), but that bet won’t cause multi-millionaires to lose
sleep. Kerr et al. (2015) describe these complex and ambiguous relationships in the context of
home equity gains and entry behavior by home owners, with a critical point being that rising wealth
levels can influence these personality traits in several ways: adjustments in risk perceptions
consistent with growing wealth, adjustments in risk perceptions or other behavior that are more
behavioral (i.e., playing with the “house money”), pursuit of entrepreneurship as a luxury good
(i.e., the newly rich buy a Porsche and semi-retire into self-employed entrepreneurship), and so
on. Separating these is very tricky, but substantial improvements in wealth data around the world
foreshadow a productive decade ahead for researchers. Dunn and Holtz-Eakin (2000) contrast
financial transfers over generations with those of human capital, which will certainly receive
continued attention with data improvements.

49

A1.3 Industry experience and education
The skill distribution of entrepreneurs versus the general population is also important.
Academic studies typically measure skills through formal education and work experience,
although these are far from complete. Studies often measure a positive relationship between
education and business ownership, but the evidence does not yield very strong relationships (e.g.,
van der Sluis et al., 2008). Parker (2009) estimates that about 60 percent of studies find a significant
positive relationship between educational attainment and entrepreneurship. Lofstrom et al. (2014)
postulate that this may be due to entrepreneurs sorting into industries based on entry barriers, as
those with greater education levels are more likely to enter higher-barrier industries that also offer
higher returns. Interestingly, Hunt (2011, 2015) shows that a good portion of the higher immigrant
propensity towards entrepreneurship can be explained by educational attainments and field of
study. The findings regarding work experience are similar. Parker (2009) discusses these studies
in more detail, emphasizing the importance of separating types of prior experience: general work
experience, industry expertise, prior startup experience, and so on. Prior studies also suggest that
educated business owners run more successful businesses, generate more innovation, and grow
their firms faster over time (e.g., Unger et al., 2011). While the traits are interesting in their own
right, future research should target joint analysis with personality characteristics.
A1.4 Entrepreneurial regions
Recent work in the entrepreneurship literature considers why some places are endowed
with a greater number of entrepreneurs than others. Chinitz (1961) first formulates this question in
his attempt to explain why post-war New York was experiencing more economic success than
post-war Pittsburgh. This literature strongly emphasizes how the past industrial legacies of cities
can lead to lasting cultures that favor or hinder entrepreneurship. 19 These lasting legacies
potentially impact industrial organization (e.g., Fallick et al., 2006; Audretsch and Feldman, 2012;
Carlino and Kerr, 2015), and are reflected in the higher degree to which entrepreneurs operate in
the regions of their birth than wage workers (e.g., Michelacci and Silva, 2007). At a broader level,
work since Baumol (1990) and Murphy et al. (1991) highlights the degree to which a society’s
institutions, laws, and norms lead talented individuals to pursue productive or rent-seeking
opportunities to maximize their returns under the given set of conditions. To date, there has been
little attention given to how these powerful forces operate through the differing composition of
personalities in places, exogenously or endogenously via migration, or are independent of them.
18F

19

Prominent examples include Saxenian (1994), Kenney (2000), Audretsch and Feldman (2003), and Florida (2004),
and recent empirical work includes Falck et al. (2011), Audretsch et al. (2012), Glaeser et al. (2015), Stuetzer et al.
(2015), Obschonka et al. (2015), and Sorenson (2017).
50

