NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WEALTHIER, HAPPIER AND MORE SELF-SUFFICIENT:
WHEN ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMS IMPROVE
ECONOMIC AND SUBJECTIVE WELLBEING AT
A REDUCED COST TO TAXPAYERS
Titus J. Galama
Robson Morgan
Juan E. Saavedra
Working Paper 24090
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24090

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2017

Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institute on Aging of the
National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers P01AG022481, K02AG042452 and
R01AG037398. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Titus Galama is grateful to the
School of Economics of Erasmus University Rotterdam for a Visiting Professorship in the
Economics of Human Capital. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Titus J. Galama, Robson Morgan, and Juan E. Saavedra. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Wealthier, Happier and More Self-Sufficient: When Anti-Poverty Programs Improve Economic
and Subjective Wellbeing at a Reduced Cost to Taxpayers
Titus J. Galama, Robson Morgan, and Juan E. Saavedra
NBER Working Paper No. 24090
November 2017
JEL No. H53,I30,I32,I38,O38,O54
ABSTRACT
We document how an anti-poverty program improves economic and subjective wellbeing, and
self-sufficiency. Familias en Accion Urbano, a conditional cash transfer program implemented at
scale in the country of Colombia, uses a means-test cutoff score selection rule that provides
exogenous variation in program participation. We reproduce the score assignment rule in a
nationally representative living standards household survey that measures multiple dimensions of
economic and evaluative wellbeing. Three years into the program, beneficiary households at the
margin report greater income, consumption and formal employment participation for both the
household head and partner. Household income increased by ten times the amount of the
government transfer, likely because of gains in formal employment. Beneficiary households at
the margin also report greater overall satisfaction with life, greater happiness and greater
satisfaction with food. These results support the hypothesis that among households with basic
unmet needs, policies that have a permanent impact on income and consumption may also have a
lasting impact on subjective wellbeing and self-sufficiency. Moreover, relatively small subsidies,
further offset by additional government tax receipt, may generate substantial benefits to poor
families at a reduced cost to taxpayers.
Titus J. Galama
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
galama@usc.edu
Robson Morgan
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
rhmorgan@usc.edu

Juan E. Saavedra
Dornsife Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
and NBER
juansaav@usc.edu

1. Introduction
It is unclear whether anti-poverty programs can have lasting impacts on economic
wellbeing, subjective wellbeing and self-sufficiency, while mitigating the costs to taxpayers.
Critics argue, for example, that anti-poverty programs are costly redistribution programs that
promote government dependency through reduced work incentives (e.g., Murray 1984).
Alternatively, these programs may expand participants’ choice sets (e.g., through improved
nutrition) enabling them to take advantage of labor-market opportunities, and by increasing selfsufficiency, reduce the burden on taxpayers.
In this paper we empirically address this question in the context of Familias en Accion
Urbano (FAU), a conditional cash transfer program implemented at scale in the country of
Colombia. FAU targets socioeconomically disadvantaged households in Colombia’s fourteen
largest cities, which concentrate over 80 percent of the country’s population. At full scale,
Familias en Accion (rural plus urban expansion) benefits over two million households
nationwide. For eligible households, FAU provides cash transfers to families with children under
the age of 18 conditional on medical visits for younger children and school enrollment and
continued attendance for secondary school students.1
We take advantage of the fact that a means-test score determines FAU eligibility. As we
demonstrate with the aid of administrative baseline data, the means-test score provides
exogenous variation in program participation near the program eligibility cutoff. We then
reproduce the means-test score assignment rule in a nationally representative Colombian living
standards household survey collected three years into the program. The survey measures multiple
dimensions of evaluative wellbeing as well as more objective measures that include income,
consumption, health and education, and that lacks the incentives for strategic reporting because it
was not designed to explicitly target program beneficiaries or track program-related outcomes
(e.g., Camacho and Conover 2011).
Three years, in particular, is a relatively long time frame to study whether or not impacts
are permanent. For instance, Di Tella et al. (2007) find that, among German households, life
satisfaction fully adapts to changes in income within four years.

1

FAU does not provide cash subsidies for primary-school children, since primary school enrollment in Colombia’s
major cities is nearly universal.

2

Three years into the program, beneficiary households at the margin of eligibility report
greater income, consumption and formal employment participation for both household head and
partner. Impacts on household income at the margin are a factor of ten times greater than would
be expected solely on the basis of the cash transfers, likely because of gains in formal
employment. This finding casts doubt on the notion that anti-poverty programs always generate
work disincentives and is consistent with recent evidence from other cash transfer programs
(Banerjee et al. 2016).
Increases in consumption that result from program participation map almost one to one to
increases in income, and there is a substantial increase on food expenditures among beneficiary
households at the margin, which may have influenced the quantity and quality of nutritional
intakes.2 Through enhanced choice sets, anti-poverty programs like Colombia’s conditional cash
transfer program may open new avenues for increased market opportunities among beneficiary
households.
The fact that reported household income at the margin is ten times average transfer size,
and is likely due to greater formal employment participation of household head and partner,
suggests that a portion of the subsidy is offset by additional government tax receipt. A simple
back-of envelope calculation suggests that—for marginal applicants—the actual cost to
taxpayers is about 40 percent of actual program costs, and may even be zero or negative if the
calculation is based on alternative regression specifications.
Participating households at the margin report, three years into the program, greater
overall satisfaction with life and greater happiness. These households also report greater
satisfaction with food. While we cannot conclude from these results that increasing income
increases subjective wellbeing, the results suggest that anti-poverty programs simultaneously
enhance economic wellbeing, subjective wellbeing and self-sufficiency. These results are
consistent with the hypothesis that greater income—presumably through consumption—can
improve happiness for households with unmet basic needs (Veenhoven 1991).
Despite large increases in income, consumption, formal employment and overall
satisfaction with life and happiness, participant households on the margin of eligibility do not
report greater satisfaction with income or work. This is consistent with the hypothesis that the

2

These results are consistent with earlier evidence on the impacts of CCT programs on household consumption
(Filmer and Schady 2009).

3

evaluative assessment of one’s income is based on a reference point, such as the income of
others (e.g., Kahneman et al. 2005). In the case of the FAU, the lack of improved satisfaction
with income or work could be due to the head and partner of participant households being
significantly more likely to hold a formal sector job and therefore interacting with more affluent
peers (e.g., Luttmer 2005).
The paper contributes to a longstanding debate, although few studies establish causally
the effects of social assistance and social insurance programs on economic and subjective
wellbeing. Finkelstein et al. (2012) show that random access to health insurance (uninsured lowincome adults in Oregon were selected by lottery to be given the chance to apply for Medicaid)
increased health-service utilization and improved subjective wellbeing of low-income adults.
Boyd-Swan et al. (2016) use the 1990 federal earned income tax credit (EITC) expansion, and
Kuhn et al. (2011) and Gardner and Oswald (2007) use lottery winnings to explore the effect of
income on subjective wellbeing. These studies suggest that large monetary gains (relative to
income) causally improve subjective wellbeing, but small ones do not.
In the developing world, existing studies typically provide information on the short-term
impacts (at most one year) of small-scale, or pilot, anti-poverty programs on subjective
wellbeing. It is, therefore, unclear whether improvements in wellbeing that result from these
interventions are permanent or transitory and how they would fare implemented at large scale.
Baird, De Hoop, and Özler (2013) use a randomized cash-transfer experiment in Malawi to
estimate psychological effects of unconditional and conditional cash transfers. Compared to the
control group, unconditional and conditional cash transfers diminished psychological stress a few
months after the two-year intervention ended. Relative to the unconditional cash-transfer group,
however, the conditional cash-transfer group maintained a higher level of stress, presumably due
to the constraint provided by the transfer conditions.
Haushofer and Shapiro (2016) also used a randomized controlled trial in which poor rural
households in Kenya were randomly assigned to receive large unconditional cash transfers (at
least two months of average household consumption). The transfers significantly improved
consumption and subjective wellbeing four months (on average) after the end of the program.
Devoto et al. (2012) find positive effects on life satisfaction five to six months after
implementation of a pilot social program in Morocco providing interest-free loans to households
to cover the cost of connecting the household directly to piped water. Cattaneo et al. (2009) find

4

that a large-scale program in Mexico to replace dirt floors with cement floors improved the
health of young children and adult welfare in terms of reductions in depression, perceived stress,
and increased satisfaction with floor quality, house quality and quality of life.
To summarize, our main contribution to this nascent literature is threefold. We document
how a conditional cash transfer anti-poverty program can simultaneously improve material and
subjective conditions for participants, and increase their self-sufficiency. By simultaneously
measuring objective and subjective measures of wellbeing our results may shed light on potential
pathways by which anti-poverty programs can improve wellbeing among households with unmet
needs. Second, our findings suggest that achieving those goals can sometimes be achieved at a
reduced cost to taxpayers, to the extent that anti-poverty programs help enhance participants’
market opportunities. Third, we introduce a potentially new research methodology in which we
reproduce complex program assignment rules in public-use household survey data, enabling
researchers to simultaneously observe multiple measures of economic and subjective wellbeing
at a low cost (data are public use), without attrition (households do not differentially leave the
sample as a result of the program as the survey is not directly tied to the program), and without
the incentives for strategic reporting that pervade many program evaluation surveys (since,
again, the survey is not tied to the program).
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of the
FAU program. Section 3 describes the data. Section 4 describes the methods employed and the
research design. Section 5 presents results, and section 6 concludes.
2. The Familias en Accion Conditional Cash Transfer Program
In 2001, Colombia introduced Familias en Accion, a conditional cash-transfer program
modeled after Mexico’s PROGRESA.3 Familias en Accion targets low-income households with
children in rural areas and cities with less than 100,000 inhabitants. It provides cash transfers to
the target population, conditional on young children attending regular medical checkups and
school-age children enrolling and continually attending school.
In 2007, the Colombian government introduced Familias en Accion Urbano (FAU), an
extension of Familias en Accion to include low-income households with children in Colombia’s
fourteen largest cities: Barranquilla, Bogota, Bucaramanga, Cali, Ibague, Medellin, Monteria,
3

Programa de Educación, Salud, y Alimenación (program for education, health and nutrition).

5

Neiva, Pasto, Pereira, Santamarta, Sincelejo, Villavicencio and Yopal. The FAU program is the
focus of this study.
The Colombian government uses the SISBEN score as the means-test score that
determines eligibility for all social programs in the country, including FAU, subsidized
healthcare, job training and child support. Each program has a different cutoff point. SISBEN
scores range from 0 to 100 and can take any value in between, including non-integer values. To
participate in FAU, households need to document that, at the time of program launch, they have
a SISBEN4 score below the 11-point eligibility cutoff and have children under the age of 18
residing in the household.
To determine eligibility for FAU in 2007, the government used the means-test score from
the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor. To create SISBEN scores, the government uses an
(undisclosed) weighting scheme that takes into account households’ socio-economic
characteristics, including the material living standard of the dwelling (type of floor and roof
materials, number of rooms, type of stove, access to piped water, sewage, electricity and trash
collection), strata (a proxy measure of socio-economic status based on neighborhood of
residence), household size, education of the household head and his/her partner and formal
employment of the head and his/her partner (couples include those married or cohabitating).
Since the SISBEN census of the poor is at the household level, all individuals residing within a
household have the same SISBEN score.
In addition to being a resident of a program city, having a SISBEN score of 11 points or
lower and having children under the age of 18, participation in FAU requires households to meet
certain program conditions. For households with children under the age of one, these children
must see a doctor for checkups every two months. Children between one and two years of age
must see a doctor for checkups three times a year, and children between two and seven years of
age must see a doctor for checkup twice a year. FAU imposes no medical visit conditions on
children 11 years of age and older.5 Instead, these children must be enrolled in school and must
have at least an 80 percent school attendance rate, which is verified every two months.

4

Sistema de Potenciales Beneficiarios para Programas Sociales (system of potential beneficiaries for social
programs).
5
Primary school enrollment is not subsidized and there are no FAU medical visit conditions for ages 8 to 11.

6

Participation in FAU entitles households to two types of subsidies: nutritional and
educational. Throughout, nominal Colombian pesos (COP) subsidy amounts at the start of FAU
are translated into 2010 USD (see Appendix A for detail).
Nutritional Subsidy: Households with any number of children between zero and six years
of age and households with any number of children in both the zero to six and the seven to
eleven years of age groups that meet the above eligibility conditions receive a nutritional subsidy
of $31/month. Households with any number of children between seven and eleven years of age
that meet eligibility conditions receive a nutritional subsidy of $12/month. Households with
children ages 12 and above do not receive a nutritional subsidy.
Educational Subsidy: The FAU educational subsidy amount is contingent on school
grade, not age. Households with children attending elementary school receive no subsidy.6 For
households with children attending secondary school and meeting eligibility criteria, the subsidy
amount increases with school grade and depends on the program modality adopted in the city of
residence.
There are three FAU modalities: savings, incremental and Medellin (Inter-American
Development Bank and World Bank 2006).7
Savings modality: The cities of Bogota, Barranquilla, Bucaramanga, Monteria, Pasto,
Pereira, Villavicencio and Yopal adopted an FAU program modality with a savings modality,
modeled after a pilot project in Bogota (Barrera-Osorio et al., 2011). In the savings modality,
eligible households with students in grades 6 through 8 receive a subsidy of $16/month, eligible
households with students in grades 9 and 10 receive a subsidy of $22/month, and eligible
households with students in grade 11 receive a subsidy of $25/month. Eligible household also
receive a one-time (savings) subsidy of $81 when a child passes grade 9 and enrolls in grade 10,
and a one-time subsidy of $187 when a child successfully graduates from secondary school (i.e.
passes grade 11).
Incremental modality: The cities of Ibague, Neiva, Santa Marta and Sincelejo adopted the
incremental modality. In the incremental modality, eligible households with students in grades 6
through 8 receive a subsidy of $19/month, eligible households with students in grades 9 and 10
6

Primary school enrollment at baseline in FAU program cities was close to universal, which is presumably why the
government subsidizes secondary, but not primary, school enrollment and attendance. Medellin and Cali, however,
operate the rural modality, which also includes an elementary school subsidy.
7
The rural version of Famillias en Accion constitutes a fourth modality, but is not studied in this paper.

7

receive a subsidy of $28/month, and eligible households with students in grade 11 receive a
subsidy of $37/month.8 In the incremental modality no additional payments are made upon
successful grade completion.
Medellin modality: Unlike all other major cities, Medellin and Cali operate the rural
version of Familias en Accion. In the rural version, eligible households with students in grades 6
through 11 receive a subsidy of $19/month, and, in contrast to the savings and incremental
modalities, eligible households with elementary school students do receive a subsidy of
$9.5/month.
In all three modalities of FAU, families receive transfers through a dedicated savings
account and can withdraw the money using an ATM card. These transfer amounts are
substantial. For example, a fully compliant household with two school-aged children—one
starting in grade 6 and one starting in grade 9—receives in the incremental modality a total of
$564 in one year ($19x12 + 28x12). At the time FAU began, this corresponded to 14 percent of
GDP per capita and to 27 percent of the annual income that FAU eligible households report in
the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor.
3. Data sources, sample restrictions and descriptive statistics
a. Data sources
We use three data sources in our analyses: the ECV 2010 survey, the SISBEN 2005
census of the poor, and the 2007 CNPD baseline survey.
ECV 2010 survey: Our main data source is the 2010 Colombian National Quality of Life
Survey (ECV for its original acronym in Spanish).9 The ECV is a nationally representative
survey of the population of Colombia. The Colombian National Administrative Department of
Statistics (DANE for its acronym in Spanish) modeled the ECV survey after the World Bank’s
Living Standards Measurement Survey (LSMS).10 DANE administered the ECV survey in 1993,
1997, 2003, 2007, 2008 and every year since 2010.
The official government SISBEN scores are not included in the ECV surveys. We
obtained confidential access from Colombia’s Central Bank (Banco de la República de
8

The savings and incremental modality transfer comparable monetary amounts (in net present value) to families that
fulfill all conditions under a low-inflation scenario.
9
Encuesta de Calidad de Vida, publicly available from http://www.dane.gov.co/index.php/esp/estadisticassociales/calidad-de-vida-ecv/87-sociales/calidad-de-vida/3885-encuesta-de-calidad-de-vida-2010.
10
For details see http://go.worldbank.org/WKOXNZV3X0.

8

Colombia) to the formula used by the government to generate SISBEN scores (from the SISBEN
2005 census of the poor). We employ this formula to generate SISBEN scores in the ECV 2010
survey. Our analysis is limited to the ECV 2010 since 2010 is the only year for which all the
questions necessary for generating the SISBEN score are available, and for which they are
identical to those used by the government.11
The ECV 2010 survey includes multiple subjective wellbeing questions as well as
monetary measures of wellbeing such as expenditures and income data.12 The subjective
wellbeing questions—the key outcomes in our analyses—ask respondents to rate their subjective
satisfaction with various domains that include: life in general, education, control over one’s life,
dignity, community, ability to help others, food, dwelling, income, health, work, level of
security, friends, and family. The survey asks: “how satisfied or unsatisfied are you with the
following...” Response options are categorical: very dissatisfied (1), unsatisfied (2), satisfied (3)
and very satisfied (4).13 Appendix A describes in detail the construction of variables used in the
analysis.
SISBEN 2005 census of the poor: The Colombian government uses the SISBEN census
of the poor to determine eligibility for FAU and a host of other government assistance programs.
The census provides the exact SISBEN score as used by the government. To capture the entire
population of Colombia’s poor, the government administers the SISBEN census of the poor to all
households residing in poor neighborhoods. Households have an incentive to be surveyed and
they can request a survey if not initially canvassed. The SISBEN census of the poor was
collected between 2005 and 2006 and contains information on about 20 million individuals,
roughly 50 percent of Colombia’s population. For comparison, the percentage of the population
living below the national poverty line at the time of the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor was
about 40 percent (World Bank, 2016).
11

The 2008 ECV survey also contains subjective wellbeing questions, but does not contain all the variables
necessary to generate SISBEN scores. Further, the SISBEN score formula changed after 2010 so that later waves of
the ECV can also not be used. For these reasons our analyses are limited to the ECV 2010.
12
Some questions in the ECV 2010 survey refer to the household (e.g., physical characteristics of the household and
household expenditures), others to the full roster of individuals in the household (income and educational
attainment) and others to the survey respondent only (e.g., subjective wellbeing questions). Note that the survey
respondent may not be the head of the household.
13
This question is an evaluative subjective wellbeing measure where respondents are asked to consider their life as a
whole, weighing what aspects of their life are important to their wellbeing, before choosing a response category that
most closely reflects their evaluation. Evaluative measures of wellbeing are strongly correlated with objective
measures of life circumstances (World Happiness Report, 2012).

9

2007 CNPD baseline survey: Baseline data for the evaluation of the FAU program,
commissioned by Colombia’s National Planning Department, was collected in 2007 and contains
the actual SISBEN scores from the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor. The 2007 CNPD baseline
survey oversampled households just above and just below the FAU eligibility cutoff (Appendix
Figure C-1). Because of this oversampling the 2007 CNPD baseline survey allows for an
accurate assessment of the extent to which actual program participation is matched to having a
score below the FAU SISBEN cutoff of 11.
b. Sample restrictions
We impose various restrictions on the ECV 2010 raw dataset. First, we restrict the sample
to the 14 participating FAU cities, using survey indicators for each of the 14 major Colombian
cities. We then restrict the sample to households with children age 18 and younger, as this is a
key FAU program eligibility criterion. Finally, we restrict the data to households with
(estimated) SISBEN scores between 0 and 22 points (recall that the FAU eligibility cutoff is 11
points). The final analysis sample contains 668 households.
As noted earlier, FAU operated through three payment modalities—a savings modality,
an incremental modality, and the Medellin modality. Due to the already small number of
households around the SISBEN cutoff in the final analysis sample, we do not analyze the FAU
payment modalities separately.
c. Descriptive statistics of ECV 2010 households and comparison with the SISBEN 2005
census of the poor
Panels A, B, C and D of Table 1 compare characteristics of households located in the 14
FAU cities in the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor with those in the ECV 2010 survey. Panel A
does not impose any restrictions on the household. Panel B restricts both data sources to
households with children of eligible age (under age 18). Panel C further restricts both samples to
include only households with SISBEN scores below 22 (actual score in the SISBEN census,
estimated score in ECV 2010 survey). Note that Panel C reflects the restrictions imposed in our
analyses. Finally, panel D further restricts to households with SISBEN scores below the
eligibility cutoff of 11 points. In all four panels, the SISBEN census’ households appear more
socioeconomically disadvantaged than those in the ECV 2010 survey.

10

There are three main reasons for observed differences. First, the sampling frame for both
data sources differs: the SISBEN census of the poor targets the poorest households whereas the
ECV 2010 is a nationally representative survey.
Second, part of the difference may stem from actual improvements in living conditions
between the collection of the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor and the ECV 2010 survey due to
economic growth or changes in government policy between 2005 and 2010. Observed
differences in average household income in Panels C and D of Table 1 imply a rate of income
growth of 26 and 24 percent per year, respectively. Gross national income during that same
period grew by 3.2 percent per year, suggesting that general improvements in living conditions
play a minimal role.
Third, there are incentives to underreport in the SISBEN census of the poor (e.g.,
Camacho and Conover, 2011) but not in the ECV 2010 survey. SISBEN scores determine
eligibility for all government social programs. Households have incentives to underreport
whenever possible. For the SISBEN census of the poor, enumerators visit each household and
physically inspect the dwelling. Information on educational attainment, formal employment and
income, however, is entirely based on self-reports. Given the desirability of being eligible for as
many government welfare programs as possible, households may underreport some of these nonverifiable characteristics. Income, a measure that appears to be underreported, is not included in
the computation of SISBEN scores yet families do not necessarily know this. Determining
program participation is therefore not affected by the extent to which families underreport
income. Note further that the average SISBEN score in panel D is very similar for the SISBEN
2005 census and the ECV 2010 survey, suggesting SISBEN scores are relatively robust to
manipulation.
4. Research design
As discussed, a limitation of the ECV 2010 survey is that the variables used to calculate
SISBEN scores are measured in 2010, three years after the start of FAU (2007) and five years
after the SISBEN scores were assigned (2005 census of the poor). The 2010 SISBEN scores of
those who are eligible could have been affected by FAU program participation, potentially
improving the scores of participating households. Individual, household, local and national level
changes in economic conditions and fortune may also change SISBEN scores up or down.

11

Differences in the sampling frame, with the SISBEN census targeting the poorest households
may also lead to differences with ECV 2010 estimated SISBEN scores. Last, there is an
incentive to underreport in the SISBEN 2005 census of the poor since the census is used to
determine eligibility for FAU as well as other government assistance programs.
We hypothesize that underreporting in the SISBEN census and general improvements in
living conditions would shift the mean of the cut-off score (estimated from ECV 2010 survey
data) upward, while individual and household level changes in economic conditions and fortune
would reduce (blur) the sharpness in the observed drop between FAU participation and the
estimated SISBEN score around the cutoff. Some households initially above the cutoff and not
participating end up below the cutoff (reducing the rate of participation below the cutoff) while
other households initially below the cutoff and participating end up above the cutoff (increasing
the rate of participation above the cutoff). This would blur the discontinuity in program
participation at the cutoff.
In this section we validate the research design and discuss our approach to dealing with
measurement error in the ECV 2010 survey’s estimated SISBEN scores.
a. First stage: program participation around the FAU eligibility cutoff
To validate the research design we need to establish that there is a sharp drop in program
participation at the eligibility cutoff shortly after the program was implemented. We use the 2007
CNPD baseline survey to determine the functional relationship between program participation at
baseline and the actual SISBEN scores, since both are available in the 2007 CNPD baseline
survey.
Panel A of Figure 1 plots the FAU participation rates in the 2007 CNPD baseline survey
as a function of the distance in the SISBEN score from the FAU eligibility cutoff (dotted vertical
line). Each data point represents the program participation mean in a one-unit SISBEN score
interval. We also include the 90 percent confidence interval for each mean and non-parametric
(lowess) fits to the data, separately estimated for each side of the cutoff. Recall that this survey
significantly oversampled near the FAU eligibility cutoff, explaining the greater accuracy of
measurement near the cutoff. There is a significant discontinuity (a strong drop) in FAU
participation at the FAU eligibility cutoff. Compliance with the FAU assignment rule, however,
is imperfect. For instance, about 65 to 70 percent of eligible households (below the cutoff)
participate in the FAU program. Similarly, while immediately above the cutoff there is no

12

evidence of significant program participation (at most a few percent), further out some 15 to 20
percent of ineligible households participate in FAU. At the cutoff, the difference in participation
rates is 60 to 65 percentage points.
In the absence of measurement error in estimated ECV 2010 SISBEN scores, we would
expect to see a similarly sharp drop in participation at the FAU eligibility cutoff in the ECV 2010
data. As noted above, however, underreporting in the SISBEN census and general improvements
in living conditions would shift the mean of the cut-off score upward, while individual and
household level changes in economic conditions and fortune would reduce the sharpness in the
observed drop between FAU participation and the estimated SISBEN score around the cutoff.
The ECV 2010 asks respondents whether they currently receive subsidies from the FAU
program. We use this question to demonstrate the existence of a drop in the probability of
receiving FAU subsidies around the estimated SISBEN eligibility cut-off score. Panel B of
Figure 1 shows FAU participation as reported in the ECV 2010 as a function of estimated (not
actual) SISBEN scores from ECV 2010 data. The vertical dashed lines represent a “doughnut
hole” and we will return to this later. Average FAU participation rates for eligible and ineligible
households in ECV 2010 are remarkably similar to those in the 2007 baseline data. Specifically,
about 60 percent of eligible households (below the cutoff) participate in FAU and about 15 to 20
percent of ineligible households (above the cutoff) participate in FAU (note that participation
drops down further away from the cutoff). However, as expected from SISBEN scores generated
with error, Panel B of Figure 1 does not show the steep fall in program participation above the
cutoff as was documented in Panel A for the 2007 CNPD baseline survey data.
To circumvent the issue of measurement error in the running variable (generated SISBEN
scores) around the FAU eligibility cutoff, we use a “doughnut hole” regression discontinuity
(RD) approach. In the “doughnut hole” RD approach, households with estimated SISBEN scores
inside the doughnut hole are eliminated from the analysis. Traditionally, the “doughnut hole”
RD approach has been used to deal with strategic manipulation of one’s position relative to the
cutoff, inducing reverse-causality bias (e.g., Hoxby and Bulman, 2015). To our knowledge, we
are the first to use this approach to deal with measurement error in the running variable.
To date, no econometric theory exists to optimally estimate doughnut holes. Intuitively,
however, one would want the smallest possible hole so as to maximize comparability across the
cutoff and to maximize statistical power (Hoxby and Bulman, 2015). In the absence of such

13

theory, we propose, as follows, a simple post-hoc cross-validation approach to choose the size of
the doughnut hole in our analysis.
Given that we know the first-stage functional relationship between actual SISBEN scores
and FAU participation from the 2007 CNPD baseline data, our approach consists of choosing the
smallest doughnut hole that produces a similar first-stage in the ECV 2010 survey data. Our
preferred doughnut hole drops observations between -1 and 2 points of the estimated SISBEN
score. As Panel B of Figure 1 shows, the [-1, 2] doughnut hole produces a first-stage functional
relationship that resembles the actual program participation functional relationship at the cutoff
documented in Panel A of Figure 1.14
Table 2 presents regression analogs to Figure 1. In the 2007 CNDP baseline data,
households just below the eligibility threshold have a seventy-percentage point higher
probability of FAU participation relative to households just above (local control mean is 3
percent). This first stage estimate is consistent across various bandwidths (Panel A, Table 2).
The first stage F-stat for the program eligibility indicator in the 2007 CNDP baseline data
exceeds two thousand in all specifications.
Panels B and C of Table 2 show linear and non-linear (probit), respectively, first-stage
results in the ECV 2010 survey data using the [-1, 2] doughnut hole around the cutoff point. In
the ECV 2010 data, households just below the eligibility threshold have a roughly fortypercentage point higher probability of FAU participation relative to households just above. The
difference in the probability of FAU participation induced by the cutoff rule is smaller in the
2010 ECV survey than in the 2007 CNPD baseline administrative data. However, program
participation among eligible households is similar in both datasets. The point-estimate difference
at the cutoff is due to a larger fraction of local non-eligible households participating in FAU in
the 2010 ECV survey data (16.5 percent) than in the 2007 baseline administrative data (3
percent). The first stage F-stat for the program eligibility indicator in the in the ECV 2010
survey exceeds ten in most specifications.15
14

Note that, as with the cross-validation approach to choosing the bandwidth for RD estimation (Imbens and
Lemieux, 2008), there is no restriction imposed on the doughnut hole being symmetrical around the cutoff. The [1,2] doughnut hole is also consistent with the notion that general improvements in living conditions shift the mean
of the cutoff score upward.
15
An alternative fuzzy RD empirical approach would be to use the first-stage moments from the 2007 CNPD
baseline administrative data and the reduced-form moments from the ECV 2010 survey data. This approach would
be akin to a two-sample instrumental variables estimator (see, for example, Angrist and Krueger 1992, 1995; Dee
and Evans 1999). While the source of variation and resulting reduced form estimates are the same, fuzzy RD

14

b. Covariate continuity and the density of SISBEN scores around the FAU eligibility
cutoff
We provide evidence of covariate continuity from two alternative data sources: the
SISBEN 2005 census data—which determined program eligibility at baseline—and the ECV
2010 survey data. As noted, variables measured in the SISBEN 2005 census clearly represent
pre-treatment characteristics, while variables measured in the ECV 2010 data may have been
affected by FAU participation or other factors. For this reason, we examine covariate continuity
in the ECV data for variables that are potentially less likely to be influenced by program
participation for three years, which include dwelling and infrastructure characteristics,
educational attainment of the head and partner and average children age.
We cannot reject continuity at the cutoff for any of these characteristics in the SISBEN
2005 census data (Left-hand Panels of Figure B-1 in Appendix B). In the ECV 2010 survey we
cannot reject continuity at the cutoff for most variables except, for some bandwidths, whether the
partner of the household head has completed secondary education and dormitories per person
(Right-hand Panels of Figure B-1). In addition to evidence on covariate continuity, there is a
high degree of similarity in the functional-form relationship between actual SISBEN scores and
household characteristics in the SISBEN 2005 census, and between estimated SISBEN scores
and characteristics in the ECV 2010 survey (Figure B-1). The high degree of comparability
between the SISBEN census and the survey in the functional-form relationship between SISBEN
scores and household characteristics, selected such that they are not likely affected by FAU,
provides further credence to the research design.
An additional test for the validity of the RD design is the absence of bunching in the
density of SISBEN scores just below the FAU eligibility cutoff. We present results from this test
in Figure 2. Actual SISBEN scores in the SISBEN 2005 census exhibit a bimodal distribution,
the density is continuous at the cutoff, and there are fewer households below the cutoff than there
are above the cutoff (Panel A, Figure 2). The absence of bunching below the cutoff is consistent
with households not being able to manipulate their position relative to the cutoff in response to
introduction of FAU—unsurprising since the government collected the SISBEN 2005 data
roughly two years before FAU was introduced. Importantly, the distribution of generated

estimates of the impact of FAU participation would be smaller given that the first stage estimates in the 2007 CNPD
data are greater than those in the ECV 2010 survey data with the doughnut hole.

15

SISBEN scores in the ECV 2010 survey also shows absence of bunching below the cutoff with a
lower density below the cutoff compared to above the cutoff (Panel B, Figure 2).16 The absence
of evidence of manipulation in the ECV 2010 survey is reassuring as it is the main dataset used
in our analyses. The covariate continuity and density tests in the SISBEN 2005 and ECV 2010
data thus help validate the RD research design. Further, the doughnut hole design reduces the
role of manipulation should it still exist.
c. Fuzzy RD estimation strategy
As shown above in subsection (b), not all eligible households below the SISBEN cutoff
participated in FAU, while some households above the SISBEN cutoff did. Because of the
households’ imperfect compliance and measurement error in generated SISBEN scores in the
ECV 2010 data we use a fuzzy RD design with a doughnut hole. In the doughnut hole fuzzy RD
design, we omit households within estimated SISBEN scores between -1 and 2 SISBEN points
from the eleven-point eligibility cutoff. Specifically, the first-stage equation is:
1. 𝐹𝐴𝑈! = 𝛾 + 𝛿𝑊! + 𝜌𝑋! + 𝜆𝑊! ∗ 𝑋! + 𝜂! + 𝑣! ,
where 𝐹𝐴𝑈! equals one if household 𝑖 reports participating in FAU in the ECV 2010 data,
𝑊! = 1 if 𝑋! ≤ 𝑐 !"#$% and equals zero otherwise, 𝑊! = 0 if 𝑋! ≤ 𝑐 !""#$ , 𝑋! is the distance in
the generated SISBEN score for household 𝑖 from the doughnut boundary, 𝜂! are program city
dummies to capture the fact that eligibility is tied to residence and that there is variation in FAU
program characteristics across cities, and 𝑣! is an estimation error term. Estimates of 𝛿 measure
the estimated difference in the probability of receiving FAU at the boundary cutoff as a function
of generated SISBEN scores and correspond to those reported in Figure 1 and Panels B and C of
Table 2.
The second-stage equation is:
2. 𝑌! = 𝛼 + 𝜏𝐹𝐴! + 𝛽𝑋! + 𝜉𝐹𝐴! ∗ 𝑋! + 𝜇! + 𝜀! ,
where 𝑌! is the outcome variable of interest for household 𝑖, 𝐹𝐴! is the predicted probability of
FAU participation for household 𝑖 from the first-stage model, 𝑋! is defined as before, 𝜇! are
program city dummies and 𝜀! is the error term of the second-stage equation.

16

Appendix Figure C-1 shows the density of SISBEN scores among participants in the 2007 baseline survey. The
density is continuous at the cutoff. The mass around the cutoff is the result of a sampling frame that oversampled
households near the FAU eligibility cutoff.

16

In our results, we report fuzzy RD estimates for bandwidths 9, 8, 7, 6 and 5 SISBEN
points away from the doughnut boundary cutoff. For binary outcomes 𝑌! , we employ bivariate
probit models (Angrist and Pischke 2009; Chiburis et al. 2012). We assess statistical significance
relative to p-values adjusted for multiple hypotheses testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg
(1995) procedure.
5. Results
This section contains three subsections. In subsection (a) we present evidence on impacts
of FAU participation on income, expenditure and formal employment. In subsection (b) we
present evidence of impacts on self-reported health, health service utilization and school
enrollment of children. In subsection (c) we present evidence of impacts on subjective wellbeing,
including domain-specific satisfaction, life satisfaction, and happiness.
a. Impacts of FAU participation on household monthly income, expenditure and formal
employment
Three years after the introduction of FAU, eligible households just below the boundary
cutoff report having higher monthly household income than households just above the eligibility
cutoff (Panel a, Figure 3). Accounting for the fraction of eligible FAU non-participants below
the cutoff as well as for the fraction of participants above the cutoff in the fuzzy RD regression
framework of equations 1 and 2 above, yields an implied local estimate of FAU participation that
ranges from $525/month to $643/month for bandwidths of 5 to 7 SISBEN points (Row 1, Table
3). These estimates use a conservative linear fit with a uniform kernel (unlike Figure 3, which
shows flexible lowess fits that may be more sensitive to observations near the doughnut
boundary). For these smaller bandwidths, estimates of FAU participation are statistically
significant, even after accounting for multiple testing (at the 5 percent level for the 5-SISBEN
point bandwidth, and 10 percent level for the 6- and 7-point bandwidth). For bandwidths 8 and
9, the estimates are positive but smaller, $388 and $316, respectively, and not statistically
significant.
Estimated effects of FAU participation on monthly income are large in magnitude.
Depending on the bandwidth, they represent a 46 to 95 percent increase relative to average
income of $607/month for local control households. Estimated income increases that result from
FAU participation at the margin are substantially more than would be expected solely on the

17

basis of FAU income subsidies. As explained earlier, a fully compliant household with two
school-aged children may receive in the FAU incremental modality a total of $564/year, or a
factor of about ten less.
The large effect of FAU participation on household income may be explained by FAU
participation also improving formal labor market outcomes of the household head and his/her
partner among marginal households (Panels c and d, Figure 3). Accounting for non-compliance
at the eligibility boundary, the implied local estimate of FAU participation on the probability of
formal employment of the household head ranges from 43 to 66 statistically significant
percentage points depending on bandwidth choice (Row 3, Table 3). Similarly, the implied local
estimate of FAU participation on the probability of formal employment of the partner of the
household head ranges from 15 to 27 statistically significant percentage points depending on
bandwidth choice (Row 4, Table 3).
For marginal households, income increases that result from FAU participation—and
improved labor market opportunities—map almost one to one to changes in consumption.
Monthly expenditures increase for eligible households just below the boundary cutoff relative to
those above (Panel b, Figure 3). Accounting for non-compliance at the eligibility boundary, the
implied local estimate of FAU participation on household expenditures ranges from $386/month
to $566/month depending on bandwidth (Row 2, Table 3).

For local control households,

monthly expenditures three years after the introduction of FAU imply a marginal propensity to
consume of about 63 percent of income ($384/$607, Table 3).

In contrast, the marginal

propensity to consume out of the additional dollar due to FAU participation (and improved labor
market opportunities for the head and partner) ranges from 88 percent ($566.3/643.3, bandwidth
of seven SISBEN points, Table 3) to 124 percent ($480.0/$388.1, bandwidth of nine SISBEN
points, Table 3).
Estimated effects of FAU participation on income, expenditure and formal employment
outcomes are consistent across alternative definitions of the doughnut hole around the eligibility
cutoff (Appendix Tables C1 and C4). In sum, our evidence suggests that three years into the
program, households have higher consumption due to a combination of additional income from
the program’s cash subsidies and from improved formal labor market opportunities for the
household head and partner.

18

A simple back-of-the-envelope calculation illustrates how the program may have
achieved these outcomes at a reduced cost to taxpayers. A fully compliant participant household
with two school-aged children—one starting in grade 6 and one starting in grade 9—may receive
in FAU’s incremental modality a total of $564 in one year ($19x12 + 28x12) or $47/month.
Transfer amounts are about 90 percent of total program costs, with the remaining 10 percent
being administrative costs (Garcia and Saavedra 2017). Hence, to distribute $1 in transfers, the
government needs to spend about $1.1. This implies that for a fully compliant household, a
transfer of $47/month costs the government about $52, not accounting for the deadweight loss of
taxation. In Colombia, employee payroll contributions are 10 percent of income. Conservatively
assuming no increased VAT tax collection through consumption and an increase in household
income coming entirely through increased formal employment, increased payroll taxes among
participants at the margin are between $32-$64/month, depending on the bandwidth of choice
used in estimating the impacts on monthly household income (0.1 x impact of the program on
monthly household income of participants, Row 1, Table 3). Therefore, our point estimates
imply that three years into the program, the cost to taxpayers may be between 40 percent and -23
percent of total program costs.
b. Impacts of FAU participation on self-reported health, health-service utilization and
school enrollment of children
Graphical evidence suggests that FAU eligibility improves self-reported health for
marginal households (Panel a, Figure 4). Accounting for non-compliance at the eligibility
boundary, estimates of FAU participation are positive for all bandwidths (Row 1, Table 4).
However, once we adjust critical values for multiple testing, we only reject at the 10-percent
level and for the largest 9-SISBEN point bandwidth that FAU participation does not affect selfreported health of household members. We do not find evidence that FAU participation affected
the likelihood of paid medical consultations (Panel b, Figure 4 and Row 2, Table 4) or the
likelihood of illness not requiring hospitalization (Panel c, Figure 4 and Row 3, Table 4).
Eligibility for and participation in the FAU program does not affect school enrollment
outcomes for marginal households (Panel d, Figure 4 and Row 4, Table 4). This result is
consistent with survey evidence from Nuñez et al. (2011) who show that after four years of
program participation, FAU did not affect school enrollment outcomes of participants. However,
it is inconsistent with other results from Nuñez et al. (2011), based on administrative data,

19

suggesting that three to four years into the program, FAU participation improved educational
outcomes such as grade progression and the probability of completing grade 9. Our point
estimates and confidence intervals are large, however. Therefore, we cannot make any definitive
statements with regards to the impact of FAU participation on the fraction of age-eligible
children in the household who are enrolled in school.
Appendix Tables C2 and C5 show results for self-reported health, health service
utilization and school enrollment under alternative definitions of the doughnut boundary.
Results are robust to these alternative choices.
c. Impacts of FAU participation on subjective wellbeing on domain satisfaction, overall
life satisfaction, and happiness.
We estimate the effect of FAU participation on satisfaction with life, happiness, and all
domain satisfaction questions included in the EVC 2010. The head of the household was the
only person to be asked these questions, so we lack information on the perceptions of other
members of the household. Domain satisfaction variables included in the EVC 2010 are
satisfaction with: income, work, food, level of control over one’s life, dwelling, ability to help
others, health, education, community, level of security, and friends.
Figure 5 shows graphical evidence of the effect of FAU eligibility on wellbeing variables.
Table 5 shows results of FAU participation accounting for the fraction of eligible FAU nonparticipants below the cutoff as well as for the fraction of participants above the cutoff. We find
some evidence that FAU participation increases overall satisfaction with life and happiness, as
reported by the household head. However, these conclusions are sensitive to bandwidth choice
(Rows 1 and 2, Table 5).
We do not find evidence that FAU increased domain satisfaction with income or with
work for households on the margin of eligibility (Rows 3 and 4, Table 5). The lack of improved
satisfaction on these two domains stands in contrast with the large effects of FAU participation
on income and formal employment outcomes three years into the program documented earlier.
We find consistent evidence that marginal households participating in the FAU program
are more satisfied with food (Row 5, Table 5). Satisfaction with food, three years into the
program, may be a consequence of increased household expenditures, as documented earlier in
Table 3. Food may be a domain of life’s circumstances in which income increases lead to
permanent changes in evaluative wellbeing.

20

Participation may also lead to increased satisfaction with the level of control over one’s
life and to increased satisfaction with one’s dwelling (Rows 6 and 7, Table 5). However, in these
two domains, results are sensitive to RD bandwidth choice.
Participation in FAU does not improve marginal household’s satisfaction with health or
education (Rows 9 and 10, Table 5). This result may be consistent with FAU not improving selfreported health, health utilization or school enrollment outcomes for marginal participants, as
documented earlier. We also do not find evidence that three years into the program, FAU
participation increases marginal household’s satisfaction with their ability to help others (Row
8), their community (Row 11), their level of security (Row 12) or their friends (Row 13, Table
5).
Due to the small sample size in the ECV 2010 some of the null results on the domain
satisfaction variables could simply be due to lack of statistical power given variability in the
outcome variables. To test if there is an overall improvement in satisfaction with domains in
general, we employ a variance weighted mean meta-analysis approach to test for an average
aggregated effect of domain satisfaction (Cooper et al. 2009).
Rows 14 and 15 of Table 5 show effects of FAU participation on the precision-weighted
overall satisfaction and happiness variables. Under this precision-weighted technique, we find
evidence consistent with FAU participation improving overall life satisfaction and happiness
three years into the program. For the average effect, over eleven domain variables, estimates of
FAU participation are positive and significant for all bandwidths with the exception of the
smallest 5-SISBEN point bandwidth. For the average effect of overall satisfaction with life and
happiness we find positive effects for all bandwidths with the exception of the 5-point
bandwidth, and statistical significance for the 6- and 7-SISBEN point bandwidth. These results
are robust to alternative definitions of the doughnut boundary (Appendix Tables C3 and C6).
VI. Conclusion
In the context of a conditional cash transfer program in Colombia, this paper documents
how anti-poverty programs may make participants relatively wealthier, happier and more selfsufficient at a reduced cost to taxpayers. These results cast doubt on the notion that welfare
programs always generate work disincentives for participants.

21

Our results suggest that three years into the program household income increased by tenfold the amount of the government cash-transfer, likely because of gains in formal employment.
This finding highlights how relatively small subsidies, further offset by additional government
tax receipt, generate substantial benefits to poor families. A simple back-of envelope calculation
suggests that—for marginal applicants—the actual cost to taxpayers is about 40 percent of actual
program costs, and may even be zero or negative under alternative regression models.
Greater expenditures, particularly on food, appear to have led to improvements in
subjective wellbeing, suggesting that one way in which anti-poverty programs improve
household wealth, happiness and self-sufficiency is through improved choice sets, such as
opportunities for more plentiful and better quality nutrition.
Our findings provide some support for the notion that people’s reported satisfaction with
life could be a worthy goal of policy making. In our setting, subjective self-reports respond to
policy changes, these responses are relatively long lasting and they are associated with important
improvements in objective measures such as income, expenditures and participation in the
workforce.

22

References
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan Krueger, “The Effect of Age at School Entry on Educational
Attainment: An Application of Instrumental Variables with Moments from Two Samples,”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 87 (1992): 328-336.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan Krueger, “Split Sample Instrumental Variables Estimates of the
Return to Schooling,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13 (1995): 225-235.
Angrist, Joshua D., and Jorn-Steffen Pischke, ‘Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricists
Companion’, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, (2009).
Baird, Sarah, Jacobus de Hoop, and Berk Özler, "Income Shocks and Adolescent Mental
Health." Journal of Human Resources 48.2 (2013): 370-403.
Banerjee, Abhijit, Rema Hanna, Gabriel Kreindler and Benjamin Olken, “Debunking the
Stereotype of the Lazy Welfare Recipient: Evidence from Cash Transfer Programs” mimeo MIT
(2016).
Barrera-Osorio, Felipe, Marianne Bertrand, Leigh Linden, and Francisco Perez-Calle,
"Improving the Design of Conditional Transfer Programs: Evidence from a Randomized
Education Experiment in Colombia." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 3.2
(2011): 167-95.
Benjamini, Yoav and Yosef Hochberg, “Controlling the False Discovery Rate: A Practical and
Powerful Approach to Multiple Testing,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society 57.1 (1995):
289-300.
Bettinger, Eric, Michael Kremer, Maurice Kugler, Carlos Medina, Christian Posso and Juan E.
Saavedra, “Can Educational Voucher Programs Pay for Themselves?” mimeo, Harvard
University, (2017).
Boarini, Romina, Conal Smith, Margherita Comola, Robert Manchin, and Femke de Keulenaer,
What Makes for a Better Life?: The Determinants of Subjective Well-being in OECD Countries –
Evidence from the Gallup World Poll., 2012. http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k9b9ltjm937-en
Boyd-Swan, Casey, Chris M. Herbst, John Ifcher, and Homa Zarghamee, "The Earned Income
Tax Credit, Mental Health, and Happiness." Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization
126 (2016): 18-38.
Camacho, Adriana, and Emily Conover, "Manipulation of Social Program Eligibility." American
Economic Journal: Economic Policy 3.2 (2011): 41-65.
Carr, Ewan, and Heejung Chung, "Employment Insecurity and Life Satisfaction: The Moderating
Influence of Labour Market Policies Across Europe." Journal of European Social Policy 24.4
(2014): 383-99.

23

Cattaneo, Matias D., Sebastian Galiani, Paul J. Gertler, Sebastian Martinez, and Rocio Titiunik,
"Housing, Health, and Happiness." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 1.1 (2009):
75-105.
Chiburis, Richard C., Jishnu Das, and Michael Lokshin, “A practical comparison of the bivariate
probit and linear IV estimators.” Economics Letters 117(2012): 762-766.
Cooper, Harris M., Larry V. Hedges, and Jeff C. Valentine, 'The Handbook of Research
Synthesis and Meta-Analysis', 2nd ed., New York, Russell Sage Foundation, (2009).
Deaton, Angus, “Income, Health and Well-Being Around the World: Evidence from the Gallup
World Poll,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 22.2 (2008): 53-72.
Dee, Thomas and William Evans, “State Alcohol Policies, Teen Drinking and Traffic Fatalities" ,
Journal of Public Economics, 72 (1999): 289-315.
Devoto, Florencia, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, William Parienté, and Vincent Pons,
"Happiness on Tap: Piped Water Adoption in Urban Morocco." American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy 4.4 (2012): 68-99.
Di Tella, Rafael, Robert J. MacCulloch, and Andrew J. Oswald, "The Macroeconomics of
Happiness." The Review of Economics and Statistics 85.4 (2003): 809-27.
Di Tella, Rafael, John Haisken-De New, and Robert MacCulloch, "Happiness adaptation to
income and to status in an individual panel," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 76.3
(2010): 834-852.
Easterlin, R.A. “Well‐Being, Front and Center: A Note on the Sarkozy Report.” Population
and Development Review (2010a): 36(1), pp.119-124.
Finkelstein, Amy, Sarah Taubman, Bill Wright, Mira Bernstein, Jonathan Gruber, Joseph P.
Newhouse, Heidi Allen, and Katherine Baicker, "The Oregon Health Insurance Experiment:
Evidence from the First Year." Quarterly Journal of Economics 127.3 (2012): 1057-106.
Garcia, Sandra and Juan E. Saavedra, “Educational Impacts and Cost-Effectiveness of
Conditional Cash Transfer Programs in Developing Countries: A Meta-Analysis.” Review of
Educational Research July (2017): 1-45.
Gardner, Jonathan, and Andrew J. Oswald, "Money and Mental Wellbeing: A Longitudinal
Study of Medium-Sized Lottery Wins." Journal of Health Economics 26.1 (2007): 49-60.
Haushofer, Johannes, and Jeremy Shapiro, “The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash
Transfers to the Poor: Evidence from Kenya.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming,
2016.

24

World Happiness Report 2012, Helliwell, John F., Richard Layard, and Jeffery Sachs, ed. (New
York: Sustainable Development Solutions Network).
Helliwell, John F., and Haifang Hwang, "How's Your Government? International Evidence
Linking Good Government and Well-being." British Journal of Political Science 38.4 (2008):
595-619. Web.
Hoxby, Caroline and Bulman, George. “The effects of the tax deduction for post-secondary
tuition: Implications for structuring tax-based aid.” NBERWorking Paper no. 21554, 2015.
Imbens, Guido W., and Thomas Lemieux, "Regression Discontinuity Designs: A Guide to
Practice." Journal of Econometrics 142.2 (2008): 615-35.
Inter-American Development Bank and World Bank, “Solicitud Estándar de Propuestas para la
Evaluación de Impacto de la Expansión Urbana del Programa Familias en Acción.” Solicitud de
Propuestas SP Crédito BID No. 1947-OC-CO-1, República de Colombia, 2011.
Kahneman, Daniel, Alan B. Krueger, David Schkade, Norbert Schwarz and Arthur Stone,
“Would you be Happier if you were Richer? A Focusing Illusion,” Science 312.5782 (2006):
1908-10.
Kuhn, Peter, Peter Kooreman, Adriaan Soetevent, and Arie Kapteyn, "The Effects of Lottery
Prizes on Winners and their Neighbors: Evidence from the Dutch Postcode Lottery." The
American Economic Review 101.5 (2011): 2226-47.
Layard, Richard, Happiness: Lessons from a New Science, (2005). New York: Penguin Press.
Luttmer, Erzo, “Neighbors as Negatives: Relative Earnings and Well-Being,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 120.3 (2005): 963-1002.
Murray, Charles, Losing Ground: American Social Policy 1950-1980, (1984). New York: Basic
Books.
Nuñez, Jairo et al. “Evaluación del Programa Familias en Acción en Grandes Centros Urbanos:
Informe Final.” Report, Centro Nacional de Consultoria, Colombia, 2011.
Pacek, Alexander C., and Benjamin Radcliff, "Welfare Policy and Subjective Well-being Across
Nations: An Individual-Level Assessment." Social Indicators Research 89.1 (2008a): 179-91.
Pacek, Alexander, and Benjamin Radcliff, "Assessing the Welfare State: The Politics of
Happiness." Perspectives on Politics 6.2 (2008b): 267-77.
Rothstein, Bo, "Happiness and the Welfare State." Social Research 77.2 (2010): 441-68.

25

Report by the Commission on the Measurement of Economic Performance and Social Progress,
2009, Stiglitz, Joseph E., Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi; available at http://www.stiglitzsen-fitoussi.fr/documents/ rapport_anglais.pdf.
Veenhoven, Ruut, “Is Happiness Relative?” Social Indicators Research 24.1 (1991): 1-34.
World Bank. 2016. World Development Indicators, available at data.worldbank.org/indicators.
Wulfgramm, Melike, "Life Satisfaction Effects of Unemployment in Europe: The Moderating
Influence of Labour Market Policy." Journal of European Social Policy 24.3 (2014): 258-72.

26

Table 1:
Household
Characteristics,
2005 and
CensusECV
of the Poor
ECV 2010 Household Survey
Table 1: Household Characteristics,
2005
Census
of the Poor
2010and
Survey
Panel A: Program Cities, all
Households
Household member characteristics
SISBEN Census ECV 2010
Total number of people in household
3.95
3.55
Household head completed secondary education
0.49
0.66
Partner of household head completed secondary education
0.55
0.71
Monthly household income (2010 USD)
310.55
1289.57
House has child
0.52
0.49
Average age of children in house
10.44
10.45
Share of employed people in household
0.36
0.43
Share of formally employed workers in the household
0.13
0.28
Low stratum
0.76
0.57
Mid stratum
0.24
0.37
High stratum
0.00
0.06
SISBEN score
17.74
24.85
Dwelling characteristics
Household asset index
House has finished floor materials
House has indoor water source
House has trash collection
House has toilet connected to sewage system
Number of dormitories per person
House has electricity
House has gas connection
Phone service is shared, conditional on not having a phone

3.87
0.53
0.78
0.97
0.93
0.57
1.00
0.52
0.30

4.75
0.74
0.95
0.98
0.95
0.66
1.00
0.75
0.95

Panel B: Program Cities, all
Households with Children
SISBEN Census ECV 2010
4.50
4.19
0.58
0.74
0.62
0.77
294.77
1240.38
1.00
1.00
10.44
10.45
0.29
0.37
0.11
0.23
0.80
0.65
0.20
0.31
0.00
0.04
16.68
22.39

3.78
0.49
0.77
0.97
0.92
0.44
1.00
0.51
0.28

4.65
0.72
0.94
0.98
0.94
0.57
1.00
0.74
0.94

Panel C: Program Cities, all
Households with Children,
SISBEN<22
SISBEN Census ECV 2010
4.61
4.35
0.49
0.60
0.52
0.60
220.81
623.73
1.00
1.00
10.38
10.54
0.28
0.33
0.07
0.15
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
11.35
14.34

3.36
0.36
0.70
0.96
0.90
0.39
1.00
0.44
0.26

4.19
0.55
0.91
0.96
0.88
0.50
1.00
0.70
0.91

Panel D: Program Cities, all
Households with Children,
FAU Eligible
SISBEN Census ECV 2010
4.75
4.74
0.38
0.38
0.39
0.37
176.24
461.23
1.00
1.00
10.24
10.54
0.26
0.31
0.02
0.05
1.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
6.47
6.55

2.45
0.23
0.50
0.92
0.82
0.34
0.99
0.31
0.20

3.39
0.26
0.76
0.85
0.68
0.43
1.00
0.51
0.74

Households
2,447,200
2632
1,264,362
1287
930,823
668
431,277
161
Notes: Data is from the 2005 census of the poor and the ECV 2010 survey. Panel A includes all households surveyed in the fourteen cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion.
Panel B further restricts the sample to households with children of eligible ages (18 years of age and younger). Panel C further limits the sample to households with a SISBEN
score of 22 or less. Panel D further limits the sample to households with a SISBEN score under 11, the cutoff for FAU eligibility. All variables - besides household asset index,
total number of people in household, monthly household income, and SISBEN score - are dummy variables with the value of 1 if the household has the characteristic, and 0
otherwise. Household asset index is defined as the sum of dummy variables that take the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling has: a sewage system, telephone, piped water,
toilet, refrigerator, or heater. Incomes from 2005 are converted to 2010 USD by using the consumer price index (CPI) to translate 2005 USD in 2010 terms. Next, the 2010
exchange rate between the USD and COP is used to convert to 2010 USD (See appendix A for details). Incomes from 2010 are converted to 2010 USD using the 2010 exchange
rate between the USD and COP. CPI is from the World Bank (http://databank.worldbank.org/). Exchange rate in 2010 is the average USD to COP exchange rate for all days in
2010 taken from the IMF (http://www.imf.org/external/data.htm). Stratum is a measure of socio-economic status. Any household with a stratum value less than 2, either 3 or 4, and
either 5 or 6 is defined as low, mid, and high stratum respectively. Houses with finished floor materials are houses with tile, vinyl, tablet, brick, marble, polished wood, finished
wood, or carpet as the primary floor material. Share of formally employed workers in the household only includes houses with working members. House has toilet connected to
sewage system is conditional on house having a toilet. Not shown are rare characteristics (less than one percent) or those already captured by a comparable measure.

Table

2.

2. FirstFAU
Stage: FAU
Participation as a Function
of SISBEN
First Table
Stage:
Participation
a Function
ofScores
SISBEN
Local
Control
Mean

Below cutoff (eligible)

0.030

F-stat of below cutoff indicator
P-value of below cutoff indicator
Number of households in sample

Below cutoff (eligible)

2923

0.165

F-stat of below cutoff indicator
P-value of below cutoff indicator

Below cutoff (eligible)
Chi Square of below cutoff indicator
P-value of below cutoff indicator

0.165

Scores

Dependent Variable: Household Received FAU Subsidy (s.e)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)
9
8
7
6
5
Panel A: 2007 CNDP City Controls (no doughnut hole)
0.703**
0.699**
0.697**
0.706**
0.705**
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.013)
(0.014)
(0.015)
2664.6
2704.0
2679.4
2381.3
2089.9
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
5933

5927

5913

5877

5831

Panel B: ECV 2010 City Controls OLS First Stage
0.386**
0.396**
0.388**
0.455**
0.603**
(0.113)
(0.117)
(0.129)
(0.137)
(0.168)
11.56
11.48
9.07
10.97
12.97
0.001
0.001
0.003
0.001
0.000
Panel C: ECV 2010 City Controls Probit First Stage
0.324**
0.337**
0.336**
0.402**
0.438**
(0.110)
(0.112)
(0.118)
(0.118)
(0.118)
8.77
9.09
8.18
11.62
13.81
0.003
0.003
0.004
0.001
0.000

Households
184
583
530
472
413
336
Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and the 2007 CNDP and is at the household level. Sample restricted to all
households in the 2007 FAU expansion cities with at least one child age 18 and younger and a SISBEN score of 22
and lower (the 2007 CNDP data doesn't include Cali and Medellin). In the ECV 2010, doughnut hole is [-1,2]
SISBEN points around the FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5
and 9 SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (both sides). The regression results presented are the first
stage of a 2SLS with the receiving FAU support dummy instrumented with an eligibility dummy that takes the value
of 1 if the household's SISBEN score is below the cutoff. The first stage also controls for SISBEN score and an
interaction between linear SISBEN score and eligibility. The local control mean is the mean variable value for
ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side, households above the
doughnut hole) or 7 units from the cutoff for the CNDP data. Panel B and C have the same number of households
(reported on the bottom row). Robust standard errors are reported in parenthesis. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1,
* p<.05, ** p<.01.

Table 3. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Income, Expenditure, and Formal
Table 3. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Income, Expenditure, and Formal Employment
Employment
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Monthly income (2010 USD)

606.9
(397.8)

388.1
(237.0)

316.6
(224.3)

643.3+
(312.2)

542.4+
(267.8)

525.2*
(230.3)

(2) Monthly expenditure (2010 USD)

384.1
(119.5)

480.0+
(263.5)

385.9
(245.7)

566.3+
(317.7)

506.2+
(281.3)

528.3+
(277.7)

(3) Household head is formally employed
(binary)

0.32

0.43*
(0.17)

0.45*
(0.17)

0.51**
(0.11)

0.50**
(0.12)

0.66**
(0.13)

(4) Partner of head is formally employed
(binary)

0.32

0.26**
(0.09)

0.27**
(0.09)

0.15+
(0.07)

0.14+
(0.08)

0.21+
(0.12)

184

583

530

472

413

336

Dependent Variable

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates for monthly income and monthly expenditure are linear IV. Estimates for employment are
bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not shown include SISBEN
score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage).
The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut
hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are
presented in parenthesis under the control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under
estimates. Number of observations for head formally employed variable are 293, 251, 212, 171, and 131 for
bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Number of observations for partner of head formally employed variable are
260, 240, 215, 187, and 145 for bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Currency is converted to 2010 USD (see
Appendix A for detail). Total expenditure is the sum of all expenditure categories. Expenditure items are defined in
Appendix A. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple
hypotheses testing using the method described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column in the table
represents a family of outcomes and the corrected critical value levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .075, .025, and .005
for bandwidth 9, .05, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 8, .1, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 7, .1, .025, and .005 for
bandwidth 6, and .1, .0375, and .0025 for bandwidth 5.

29

4. Fuzzy
RD Estimates
of Participation
on Health
and Education Outcomes
Table 4. EffectTable
of FAU
Subsidy
on Health
and Education
Outcomes
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Self-reported health--household average
(1-4 scale)

2.91
(0.33)

0.74+
(0.30)

0.52
(0.24)

0.54
(0.29)

0.48
(0.26)

0.36
(0.20)

(2) Paid non-hospital medical consultation last
month -- household average (0-1 scale)

0.07
(0.16)

0.17
(0.09)

0.17
(0.09)

0.18
(0.11)

0.11
(0.08)

0.09
(0.08)

(3) Illness last month that didn't require
hospitalization --household average (0-1 scale)

0.12
(0.19)

-0.10
(0.13)

-0.12
(0.14)

-0.03
(0.14)

0.02
(0.13)

0.02
(0.11)

(4) Fraction of children in household enrolled in
school (0-1 scale)

0.89
(0.29)

0.41
(0.26)

0.44
(0.27)

0.39
(0.33)

0.42
(0.32)

0.02
(0.24)

Dependent Variable

Households
184
583
530
472
413
336
Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). All estimates are linear IV. Other controls not shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible
with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage). The local control mean is the
mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side,
households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are presented in parenthesis under the
control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under estimates. P-values are denoted by: +
p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the method
described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family, and the corrected critical value
levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .025, .0125, and .0025 for all bandwidths.

30

Table
Fuzzy RD
RD Estimates
of Participation
on Household
Head Domain
Life
Table
5. 5.Fuzzy
Estimates
of Participation
on Household
HeadSatisfaction
Domain Variables,
Satisfaction
Satisfaction, and Happiness
Variables, Life Satisfaction, and Happiness

Dependent Variable (all binary)

Local
Control
Mean

FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)
9
8
7
6
5

(1) Satisfaction with life

0.78

0.39
(0.52)

0.49
(0.36)

0.47
(0.27)

0.58**
(0.05)

0.14
(0.51)

(2) Happiness

0.78

0.06
(0.36)

0.16
(0.40)

0.59**
(0.05)

0.13
(0.31)

-0.15
(0.23)

(3) Satisfaction with income

0.27

0.13
(0.18)

0.19
(0.18)

0.17
(0.18)

0.11
(0.19)

0.00
(0.18)

(4) Satisfaction with work

0.50

0.08
(0.39)

0.08
(0.45)

0.37
(0.24)

0.20
(0.50)

0.12
(0.54)

(5) Satisfaction with food

0.81

0.58**
(0.05)

0.57**
(0.05)

0.57**
(0.06)

0.47+
(0.20)

0.49
(0.26)

(6) Satisfaction with level of control over
one's life

0.89

0.03
(0.34)

0.25**
(0.06)

0.24**
(0.07)

0.01
(0.45)

0.01
(0.18)

(7) Satisfaction with dwelling

0.71

0.18
(0.36)

0.31
(0.54)

0.57**
(0.04)

0.57**
(0.04)

0.38
(0.20)

(8) Satisfaction with ability to help others

0.81

0.26
(0.15)

0.32+
(0.15)

0.22
(0.19)

0.19
(0.20)

0.13
(0.16)

(9) Satisfaction with health

0.78

-0.31
(0.24)

-0.28
(0.41)

-0.28
(0.20)

-0.21
(0.36)

-0.14
(0.31)

(10) Satisfaction with education

0.78

-0.22
(0.23)

0.10
(0.48)

0.17
(0.49)

0.29
(0.26)

0.31
(0.16)

(11) Satisfaction with community

0.78

-0.31
(0.13)

-0.26
(0.17)

-0.18
(0.22)

-0.20
(0.25)

-0.07
(0.38)

(12) Satisfaction with level of security

0.53

-0.39
(0.23)

-0.30
(0.31)

0.09
(0.57)

0.28
(0.41)

0.14
(0.38)

(13) Satisfaction with friends

0.83

-0.09
(0.35)

0.24
(0.47)

0.36
(0.26)

0.47*
(0.16)

0.23
(0.21)

31

(14) Average Treatment Effect: Domain
satisfaction variables (11 items)

0.72

0.38**
(0.04)

0.38**
(0.03)

0.46**
(0.03)

0.50**
(0.04)

0.17
(0.07)

(15) Average Treatment Effect: satisfaction
with life and happiness (2 items)

0.78

0.17
(0.30)

0.34
(0.27)

0.59**
(0.05)

0.57**
(0.05)

-0.10
(0.21)

184

583

530

472

413

336

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates are bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not
shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2
for first and second stage). The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5
SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Satisfaction with
level of dignity and satisfaction with family are not reported because there is very little variation when converted to
a binary variable. Robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under estimates. Average treatment effects are
variance-weighted averages and standard errors as described in Cooper et al. (2009). P-values are denoted by: +
p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the method
described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family, and the corrected critical value
levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .015, .004, and .0007 for bandwidth 9, .031, .015, and .003 for bandwidth 8, .031,
.015, and .003 for bandwidth 7, .023, .011, and .001 for bandwidth 6, and .008, .004, and .0007 for bandwidth 5.

32

Figure 1. Baseline and 2010 FAU Participation Discontinuity Around Eligibility Cutoff
Panel A. 2007 CNPD Baseline Data

Panel B. ECV 2010 Data, Doughnut Hole Between -1 and 2

Notes: Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals around average FAU subsidy receipt in bin with one unit width. If no confidence interval is reported, there
is no variance within bin. SISBEN scores are normalized to be zero at the 11-point eligibility cutoff (shown by the vertical line at zero). Data for panel A is from
the baseline CNPD survey, which oversampled households near the 11-point eligibility cutoff. Data from Panel B is from the ECV 2010 survey and SISBEN
scores are estimated as explained in the text. Data from both figures are limited to households from cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion with children age
18 and younger and a SISBEN score under 22. The 2007 CNPD baseline data excludes Cali and Medellin program cities. The ECV 2010 data includes all
fourteen FAU program cities. Dashed vertical lines in panel B represent the doughnut hole boundary. In all panels, lowess curves are fit to FAU program
participation over SISBEN score. In panel A lowess curves are fit separately on either side of the eligibility cutoff and in panel B lowess curves are fit separately
on either side of the [-1,2] doughnut hole.

Figure 2. Density of Households over SISBEN Scores, 2005 SISBEN Census and ECV 2010 Data
Panel A: 2005 SISBEN Census

Panel B: ECV 2010

Notes: Data for the Panel A is from the 2005 SISBEN census. Data for the Panel is from the ECV 2010 survey. Data in both panels are limited to households
from all 14 cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion with children 18 years of age and younger and a SISBEN score under 22. SISBEN scores are shifted to
represent the distance from the eligibility cutoff (zero at the 11-point eligibility cutoff; shown by the vertical line at zero).

Figure 3. Income, Expenditure, and Formal Employment Outcomes Over SISBEN Scores
a: Household Income

b: Total Expenditure

c. Household Head Formally
Employed

d. Partner of Head Formally
Employed

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. SISBEN scores are estimated as explained in the text and normalized to be zero at the eligibility cutoff.
Dashed vertical lines represent the doughnut hole boundary. Lowess curves are fit separately on either side of the doughnut hole. Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals
around average variable values in bins with one unit width. If no confidence interval is reported, there is no variance within the bin. Data includes households from all fourteen
cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion with children age 18 or younger and a SISBEN score under 22. Currency is converted to 2010 USD (see Appendix A for detail).
Variables are defined in Appendix A. Total expenditure is the sum of all expenditure categories.

35

Figure 4. Health and Education Outcomes Over SISBEN Scores
a: Self-reported health – Household
Average

b: Paid Non-hospital Medical Consultation
Last Month -- Household Average

c: Illness Last Month that didn't Require
Hospitalization -- Household Average

d. Child Enrollment – Household Average

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. SISBEN scores are estimated as explained in the text and expressed in terms of the distance
from the eligibility cutoff. Dashed vertical lines represent the doughnut hole boundary. Lowess curves are fit separately on either side of the doughnut hole.
Red lines represent 90% confidence intervals around average variable values in bins with one unit width. If no confidence interval is reported, there is no
variance within bin. Data includes households from all fourteen cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion with children age 18 or younger and a SISBEN score
under 22.

36

Figure 5. Household Head Domain Satisfaction Variables, Life Satisfaction, and Happiness over SISBEN scores
a: Satisfaction with Life

d: Work

b: Happiness

e: Food

c: Income

f: Level of Control over One’s Life

37

g: Dwelling

j: Education

h: Ability to Help Others

k: Community

i: Health

l: Level of Security

38

m: Friends

n: Average Treatment Effect:
Domain Satisfaction Variables

o: Average Treatment Effect:
Evaluative Variables

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. SISBEN scores are estimated as explained in the text and expressed in terms of the distance
from the eligibility cutoff. Satisfaction variables are converted from a 1-4 scale to binary, with responses 1 and 2 recoded as 0, and responses 3 and 4 recoded to
1. Dashed vertical lines represent the doughnut hole boundary. Lowess curves are fit separately on either side of the doughnut hole. Error bars represent 90%
confidence intervals around average variable values in bins with one unit width. If no confidence interval is reported, there is no variance within bin. Data
includes households from all cities included in the fourteen 2007 FAU expansion with children age 18 or younger and a SISBEN score under 22.

39

Appendix A. Definition of variables from EVC 2010
Amounts in Colombian pesos (COP) are converted to 2010 USD using the average exchange
rates between the COP and USD from Jan 1 to Dec 31 2010
Exchange rates are taken from the International Monetary Fund:
https://www.imf.org/external/np/fin/ert/GUI/Pages/CountryDataBase.aspx
Exchange rate used = 1897.98 COP per USD
Household Characteristics
Total Number of People in Household – Response to the question, “How many people make up
this household?”
Monthly Household Income – Total monthly household income as reported by the survey
respondent and converted to 2010 USD.
House has finished floor materials – Response to the question, “What is the predominant
material of the floors?” Finished floor materials are defined as tile, vinyl, tablet, brick, marble,
polished wood, finished wood, or carpet
House has indoor water source – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household
dwelling’s water supply is located within the house.
House has trash collection – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling
has trash collection.
House has toilet connected to sewage system – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the
household has a toilet that is connected to the public sewage system.
Number of dormitories per person – Calculated as the number of rooms where people sleep
divided by the total number of people in household.
House has electricity – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling has
electricity.
House has gas connection – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling
has a connection to the public gas network.
House has shower – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling has a
bathroom with a shower.
House has child – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household reports at least one
member of the household is 18 year old or younger.

Number of Toilets – Number of toilets in household’s dwelling.
Phone service is shared – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if household shares a phone
service. This variable is only calculated for households that do not have a private phone.
Stove connected to public gas network – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the material
used as fuel for cooking is gas, and the gas comes from the public gas network.
House has washing machine – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 is the household’s dwelling
has a washing machine for clothes.
House has air conditioning – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 is the household’s dwelling
has air conditioning.
House has cable T.V. – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 is the household’s dwelling has
cable T.V.
House has hot water – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 is the household’s dwelling has a
gas or electric water heater.
Low stratum – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household belongs to stratum of 2 or
lower. Stratum is a proxy for socio-economic status defined by neighborhood. The range of
stratum values ranges between 0 and 6.
Mid stratum – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household belongs to stratum of 3 or
4. Stratum is a proxy for socio-economic status defined by neighborhood. The range of stratum
values ranges between 0 and 6.
High stratum – Dummy variable taking the value of 1 if the household belongs to stratum of 5 or
6. Stratum is a proxy for socio-economic status defined by neighborhood. The range of stratum
values ranges between 0 and 6.
Discretionary items are defined as: tobacco items, matches or lighters; bus, taxi, or metro tickets;
alcoholic beverages, home vehicle, parking fees, shoe polishes, newspapers and magazines,
gambling, eating outside of the house, domestic services, gifts to other households.
Household expenditure on services and personal items in past month (2010 USD) – The total
expenditure on the following items in the past 30 days: mail, fax, toothpaste, soap, shampoo,
toilet paper, deodorant, towels, detergent, disinfectant, combs, napkins cotton, gas,
disinfectants, alcohol, Band-Aids, contraceptives, aspirin and other pharmaceutical drugs,
socks/pantyhose for women, light bulbs, batteries, other electronics, washed and ironed clothes
services, haircuts, manicures, entertainment, maid service, internet, credit card payments,
cable T.V., monetary transfers to other homes (helping father, brother, children, etc.), or
medicines consumed regularly. The total expenditure is converted to 2010 USD.

41

Household expenditure on discretionary items in past month (2010 USD) – The total expenditure
on the following items in the past 7 days (multiplied by 4 to convert to monthly expenditure):
tobacco items, matches or lighters; bus, taxi, or metro tickets; alcoholic beverages, home vehicle,
parking fees, shoe polishes, newspapers and magazines, gambling, eating outside of the house,
domestic services, gifts to other households. The total expenditure is converted to 2010 USD.
Household expenditure on food in past month (2010 USD) – The total expenditure on the
following items in the past 7 days (multiplied by 4 to convert to monthly expenditure): baked
items, dairy items, eggs, beef, pork, lamb, chicken, fish, frozen fish, cured meats, vegetables, fruits, unprocessed grains, oils and butter, seasonings and condiments, canned foods,
sweets, juices, water, or other food. The total expenditure is converted to 2010 USD.
Household expenditure on durable goods in past month (2010 USD) – The total expenditure on
the following items in the past year (divided by 12 to convert to monthly expenditure):
furniture, house repairs (plumbing, paint, electricity), pillows, blankets, and bed related
products, eating utensils, T.V., vacuum cleaners, hotels, air travel, vehicles, motorcycles, real
estate, extraordinary
fees
(vehicular
taxes, rental
taxes
and
other
taxes,
complementary insurance for fire, theft, vehicles, rings, watches, jewelry, etc.) art, livestock,
pets, personal computers, computer accessories, cellular phones, or gaming consoles, such as,
playstation, xbox, nintendo, Gameboy. The total expenditure is converted to 2010 USD,
Household semi-durable goods expenditure in past months (2010 USD) – The total expenditure
on the following items in the past three months (divided by 3 to convert to monthly expenditure):
clothes, shoes, clothing repairs, fabrics for clothing, vehicle repairs, books, discs, cd's, repairs of
semi-durable goods, inter-municipal transport or ferries, games, movies, or DVDs. The total
expenditure is converted to 2010 USD.
Asset Index – The sum of dummy variables that take the value of 1 if the household’s dwelling
has: a sewage system, telephone, piped water, toilet, refrigerator, or heater. The possible range of
values for the asset index is 0 to 6.
SISBEN score – To create SISBEN scores, we use the Colombian government’s (undisclosed)
weighting scheme that takes into account households’ socio-economic characteristics including
material living standard of the dwelling (floor and roof materials, number of rooms, stove type,
access to piped water, sewage, electricity and trash collection), strata (a proxy measure of socioeconomic status based on neighborhood), household size, education of the household head and
his/her partner and formal employment of the head and his/her partner.
Household Member Characteristics
Average age of children in the house – The average age of all members of the household who are
18 years old and younger.

42

Household head completed secondary education – Dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if
the household head has completed a secondary level of education.
Partner of household head completed secondary education– Dummy variable that takes the value
of 1 if the partner of the household head has completed a secondary level of education.
Share of employed people in household – The number of people reporting that working is their
primary activity over the past week divided by the total number of people in the household.
Share of formally employed workers in the household – A person is considered formally working
if they are contributing to social security and they spend the majority of their time working. The
number of people formally working is divided by the total number of people in the household to
get the share of formally employed workers.
Head of household is formally working – A dummy taking the value of 1 if the head of the
household is formally working. A person is considered formally working if they are contributing
to social security and they spend the majority of their time working.
Partner of household head is formally working – A dummy taking the value of 1 if the partner of
the household head is formally working. A person is considered formally working if they are
contributing to social security and they spend the majority of their time working.
Paid non-hospital medical consultation last month – A dummy variable that takes the value of 1
if the household paid to see a doctor for medical treatment that does not include hospitalization
in the past month.
Self-reported health – The self-reported health of the household head on a scale of 1 to 4, coded
(translated to English): 1 (poor), 2 (fair), 3 (good), 4 (very good).
Hospitalized last year – Dummy value that takes the value of 1 if hospitalized in past year.
Illness last month that didn’t require hospitalization – Dummy value that takes the value of 1 if
had an illness that did not require hospitalization within the past month.
Fraction of children in household enrolled in school – The fraction of children in a household age
18 and under that are currently enrolled in school.
Fraction of literate children in household– The fraction of children in a household age 18 and
under that are literate.
Subjective Satisfaction Variables
The following subjective satisfaction variables are asked as prompts following the general
question (translated to English), “How satisfied or dissatisfied are you with the following
aspects?” The response options range from 1 to 4 and are coded: 1 (very dissatisfied), 2
(dissatisfied), 3 (satisfied), 4 (very satisfied). The question is only asked to the household head.

43

Household head satisfaction with life – Response to the prompt, “life in general”
Household head satisfaction with dignity – Response to the prompt “dignity”
Household head satisfaction with ability to help others – Response to the prompt “ability to help
others”
Household head satisfaction with food – Response to the prompt “food”
Household head satisfaction with dwelling – Response to the prompt “dwelling”
Household head satisfaction with income – Response to the prompt “income”
Household head satisfaction with work – Response to the prompt “work”
Household head satisfaction with family – Response to the prompt “family”
Household head satisfaction with friends – Response to the prompt “friends”
Household head satisfaction with level of security – Response to the prompt “level of security”
Household head satisfaction with health – Response to the prompt “health”
Household head satisfaction with community – Response to the prompt “community”
Household head satisfaction with control over one’s life – Response to the prompt “control over
one’s life”
Household head satisfaction with education – Response to the prompt “education”

44

Appendix B
Figure B-1: Continuity of Variables around the Eligibility Cutoff
a: Total Number of People in Household
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

b: Household Head Completed Secondary Education
2005 SISBEN Census
ECV 2010

c: Partner of Household Head Completed Secondary Education
2005 SISBEN Census
ECV 2010

45

d: Average Age of Children in House
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

e: House has Finished Floor Materials
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

f: House has Indoor Water Source
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

46

g: House has Trash Collection
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

h: House has Toilet Connected to Sewage System
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

i: Number of Dormitories Per Person
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

47

j: House has Electricity
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

k: House has Gas Connection
2005 SISBEN Census

ECV 2010

Notes: Data for the left panel is from the 2005 SISBEN census. Data for the right panel is from the ECV 2010
survey. Data in both panels are limited to households from all 14 cities included in the 2007 FAU expansion with
children 18 years of age and younger and a SISBEN score under 22. Error bars represent 90% confidence intervals
around the average variable in bin with one unit width. If no confidence interval is reported, there is no variance
within the bin. Estimates of size of discontinuity are included in the ECV 2010 graphs with standard errors in
parenthesis. No estimate is reported for house has electricity because there is no variation. SISBEN scores are
expressed in terms of the distance from the 11-point eligibility cutoff (shown by the vertical line at zero). Lowess or
spline curves are fit separately on either side of the eligibility cutoff. Due to computational limitations and a dataset
with over 8 million observations, splines are fit to the average bin values in the left panel (2005 SISBEN census
data). Lowess curves are fit to the raw data in the right panel (2010 ECV survey data).

48

Appendix C. Supplementary Analysis
Figure C-1: Density of Households over SISBEN Scores, 2007 CNPD Baseline Survey

49

Table C1. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Income, Expenditure, and Formal
Table C1. Fuzzy
RD Estimates
on Income, Expenditure, and Formal Employment
Employment,
Doughnut
Hole -1 of
to Participation
1
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Monthly income (2010 USD)

571.1
(380.3)

340.1
(264.3)

474.8
(297.9)

699.3
(417.5)

545.7
(316.9)

676.2
(370.3)

(2) Monthly expenditure (2010 USD)

370.3
(235.2)

492.0
(318.0)

514.7
(327.7)

763.2
(480.5)

661.5
(384.0)

760.4
(479.4)

(3) Household head is formally employed
(binary)

0.59

0.53**
(0.08)

0.51**
(0.09)

0.54**
(0.09)

0.63**
(0.09)

-0.34
(0.41)

(4) Partner of head is formally employed
(binary)

0.23

0.39**
(0.08)

0.47**
(0.09)

0.48**
(0.11)

0.44**
(0.14)

0.59**
(0.13)

233

563

516

452

391

333

Dependent Variable

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,1]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates for monthly income and monthly expenditure are linear IV. Estimates for employment are
bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not shown include SISBEN
score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage).
The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut
hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are
presented in parenthesis under the control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under
estimates. Number of observations for head formally employed variable are 293, 251, 212, 171, and 131 for
bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Number of observations for partner of head formally employed variable are
260, 240, 215, 187, and 145 for bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Currency is converted to 2010 USD (see
Appendix A for detail). Total expenditure is the sum of all expenditure categories. Expenditure items are defined in
Appendix A. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple
hypotheses testing using the method described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family,
and the corrected critical value levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .05, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 9, .05, .025, and .005
for bandwidth 8, .05, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 7, .1, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 6, and .025, .013, and .0025
for bandwidth 5.

50

Table C2. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Health and Education Outcomes,
Table
C2.1 Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Health and Education Outcomes
Doughnut Hole
-1 to
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Self-reported health--household average
(1-4 scale)

2.88
(0.33)

0.84
(0.39)

0.68
(0.34)

0.89
(0.49)

0.77
(0.39)

0.78
(0.42)

(2) Paid non-hospital medical consultation last
month -- household average (0-1 scale)

0.06
(0.14)

0.14
(0.10)

0.14
(0.11)

0.10
(0.11)

0.09
(0.10)

-0.04
(0.10)

(3) Illness last month that didn't require
hospitalization --household average (0-1 scale)

0.11
(0.19)

-0.13
(0.16)

-0.15
(0.17)

0.05
(0.18)

0.00
(0.15)

0.06
(0.16)

(4) Fraction of children in household enrolled in
school (0-1 scale)

0.89
(0.28)

0.40
(0.31)

0.47
(0.32)

0.44
(0.46)

0.28
(0.37)

-0.13
(0.32)

Dependent Variable

Households
233
563
516
452
391
333
Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,1]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). All estimates are linear IV. Other controls not shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible
with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage). The local control mean is the
mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side,
households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are presented in parenthesis under the
control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under estimates. P-values are denoted by: +
p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the method
described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family, and the corrected critical values
levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .025, .0125, and .0025 for all bandwidths.

51

Table
C3.Fuzzy
Fuzzy RD
of Participation
on Household
Head Domain
Variables, Life
Table
C3.
RDEstimates
Estimates
of Participation
on Household
HeadSatisfaction
Domain Satisfaction
Satisfaction,Doughnut
and Happiness
Variables, Life Satisfaction, and Happiness,
Hole -1 to 1

Dependent Variable (all binary)

Local
Control
Mean

FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)
9
8
7
6
5

(1) Satisfaction with life

0.75

0.46+
(0.20)

0.43*
(0.17)

0.49*
(0.20)

0.49**
(0.15)

-0.40
(1.03)

(2) Happiness

0.77

0.59**
(0.04)

0.59**
(0.04)

0.60**
(0.05)

-0.13
(0.33)

-0.19
(0.17)

(3) Satisfaction with income

0.25

0.12
(0.21)

0.20
(0.15)

0.08
(0.25)

0.06
(0.24)

-0.08
(0.29)

(4) Satisfaction with work

0.49

0.06
(0.53)

0.35
(0.23)

0.20
(1.00)

0.06
(1.10)

0.30
(0.34)

(5) Satisfaction with food

0.77

0.56**
(0.04)

0.56**
(0.04)

0.57**
(0.05)

0.53**
(0.06)

0.00
(0.00)

(6) Satisfaction with level of control over
one's life

0.88

0.29**
(0.06)

0.31**
(0.07)

0.27**
(0.07)

-0.07
(0.04)

-0.05
(0.11)

(8) Satisfaction with ability to help others

0.79

0.35*
(0.14)

0.31*
(0.14)

0.32
(0.25)

0.19
(0.22)

0.26
(0.19)

(9) Satisfaction with health

0.79

-0.38
(0.18)

-0.39**
(0.12)

-0.39**
(0.13)

-0.39*
(0.15)

-0.29
(0.34)

(10) Satisfaction with education

0.76

0.12
(0.69)

-0.04
(0.92)

0.39
(0.31)

0.35
(0.21)

0.49**
(0.13)

(11) Satisfaction with community

0.79

-0.27
(0.16)

-0.14
(0.26)

-0.27
(0.21)

-0.35+
(0.16)

-0.14
(0.31)

(12) Satisfaction with level of security

0.51

-0.28
(0.31)

-0.14
(0.45)

0.59**
(0.04)

0.04
(0.57)

0.07
(0.52)

(13) Satisfaction with friends

0.79

0.55**
(0.17)

0.54**
(0.14)

0.59**
(0.05)

0.56**
(0.05)

0.47**
(0.08)

52

(14) Average Treatment Effect: Domain
satisfaction variables (10 items)

0.70

0.41**
(0.03)

0.41**
(0.03)

0.49**
(0.02)

0.21**
(0.03)

0.28**
(0.05)

(15) Average Treatment Effect: satisfaction
with life and happiness (2 items)

0.76

0.59**
(0.04)

0.58**
(0.04)

0.59**
(0.05)

0.38+
(0.14)

-0.20
(0.17)

233

563

516

452

391

333

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-1,1]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates are bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not
shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2
for first and second stage). The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5
SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Satisfaction with
level of dignity and satisfaction with family are not reported because there is very little variation when converted to
a binary variable. Satisfaction with dwelling is not reported because it cannot be estimated. Robust standard errors
are presented in parenthesis under estimates. Average treatment effects are variance-weighted averages and standard
errors as described in Cooper et al. (2009). No weight is put on satisfaction with food for bandwidth 5 because the
estimated effect and s.d. is 0. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected
for multiple hypotheses testing using the method described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column
represents a family, and the corrected critical value levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .025, .0125, and .0025 for
bandwidth 9, .058, .029, and .003 for bandwidth 8, .058, .029, and .005 for bandwidth 7, .058, .029, and .006 for
bandwidth 6, and .058, .029, and .004 for bandwidth 5.

53

Table C4. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Income, Expenditure, and Formal
Table C1. Fuzzy
RD Estimates
on Income, Expenditure, and Formal Employment
Employment,
Doughnut
Hole -2 of
to Participation
2
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Monthly income (2010 USD)

606.9
(397.8)

392.1
(369.4)

272.6
(345.8)

484.0
(389.3)

808.3
(628.4)

515.0
(362.1)

(2) Monthly expenditure (2010 USD)

384.1
(245.6)

460.4
(357.7)

352.9
(324.6)

365.4
(318.5)

633.0
(530.1)

460.5
(321.2)

(3) Household head is formally employed
(binary)

0.65

0.32
(0.57)

0.40
(0.29)

0.52**
(0.11)

0.55**
(0.11)

0.68**
(0.11)

(4) Partner of head is formally employed
(binary)

0.23

0.09
(0.10)

0.09+
(0.04)

0.03
(0.02)

0.03
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

236

572

520

473

409

348

Dependent Variable

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-2,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates for monthly income and monthly expenditure are linear IV. Estimates for employment are
bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not shown include SISBEN
score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage).
The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut
hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are
presented in parenthesis under the control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under
estimates. Number of observations for head formally employed variable are 287, 245, 210, 168, and 133 for
bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Number of observations for partner of head formally employed variable are
257, 238, 217, 189, and 160 for bandwidths from 9 to 5 SISBEN units. Currency is converted to 2010 USD (see
Appendix A for detail). Total expenditure is the sum of all expenditure categories. Expenditure items are defined in
Appendix A. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple
hypotheses testing using the method described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family,
and the corrected critical values levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .05, .0125, and .005 for bandwidth 9, .05, .125, and
.005 for bandwidth 8, .05, .025, and .005 for bandwidth 7, .025, .025, and .0025 for bandwidth 6, and .025, .025, and
.0025 for bandwidth 5.

54

Table C5. Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Health and Education Outcomes,
Table
C2.2Fuzzy RD Estimates of Participation on Health and Education Outcomes
Doughnut Hole
-2 to
FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)

Local
Control
Mean
(s.d.)

9

8

7

6

5

(1) Self-reported health--household average
(1-4 scale)

2.91
(0.33)

1.07
(0.61)

0.91
(0.57)

0.62
(0.42)

0.91
(0.69)

0.62
(0.41)

(2) Paid non-hospital medical consultation last
month -- household average (0-1 scale)

0.07
(0.16)

0.30
(0.19)

0.30
(0.20)

0.30
(0.20)

0.29
(0.25)

0.22
(0.16)

(3) Illness last month that didn't require
hospitalization --household average (0-1 scale)

0.12
(0.19)

-0.34
(0.25)

-0.37
(0.27)

-0.37
(0.27)

-0.17
(0.24)

-0.18
(0.18)

(4) Fraction of children in household enrolled in
school (0-1 scale)

0.89
(0.29)

0.73
(0.45)

0.75
(0.47)

0.85
(0.48)

1.04
(0.92)

0.68
(0.51)

Dependent Variable

Households
236
572
520
473
409
348
Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007 FAU
expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-2,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). All estimates are linear IV. Other controls not shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible
with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2 for first and second stage). The local control mean is the
mean variable value for ineligible households within 5 SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side,
households above the doughnut hole). Standard deviation of control means are presented in parenthesis under the
control means, and robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under estimates. P-values are denoted by: +
p<0.1, * p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the method
described in Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family, and the corrected critical value
levels for 0.1, .05, and .01 are .025, .0125, and .0025 for all bandwidths.

55

Table
C3.Effect
Fuzzy of
RDFAU
Estimates
of Participation
on Household
Head Domain
Satisfaction
Variables,
Life
Table
C6.
Subsidy
on Household
Head Domain
Satisfaction
Variables,
Life
Satisfaction,
Satisfaction, and Happiness, Doughnut
Hole -2and
to Happiness
2

Dependent Variable (all binary)

Local
Control
Mean

FAU Participation Estimate (s.e.)
Distance from Doughnut Hole Boundary
(SISBEN points)
9
8
7
6
5

(1) Satisfaction with life

0.78

0.56**
(0.04)

0.56**
(0.04)

0.55**
(0.05)

0.58**
(0.05)

0.50**
(0.07)

(2) Happiness

0.78

-0.23
(0.38)

0.02
(1.05)

0.18
(2.01)

-0.14
(0.54)

-0.35
(0.35)

(3) Satisfaction with income

0.27

0.13
(0.26)

0.23
(0.23)

0.26
(0.18)

0.15
(0.26)

0.11
(0.22)

(4) Satisfaction with work

0.50

-0.17
(0.46)

-0.35
(0.35)

0.10
(0.51)

-0.56**
(0.11)

-0.58**
(0.05)

(5) Satisfaction with food

0.81

0.58**
(0.05)

0.56**
(0.05)

0.56**
(0.05)

0.56**
(0.06)

0.48**
(0.09)

(6) Satisfaction with level of control over
one's life

0.89

-0.09
(0.31)

0.01
(0.72)

-0.04
(0.32)

-0.21+
(0.10)

-0.14
(0.08)

(7) Satisfaction with dwelling

0.71

0.56**
(0.04)

0.57**
(0.04)

0.56**
(0.04)

0.57**
(0.04)

0.55**
(0.05)

(8) Satisfaction with ability to help others

0.81

0.20
(0.19)

0.26
(0.19)

0.23
(0.17)

0.11
(0.34)

-0.02
(0.27)

(9) Satisfaction with health

0.78

-0.43**
(0.12)

-0.44**
(0.12)

-0.42**
(0.11)

-0.41**
(0.14)

-0.39*
(0.14)

(10) Satisfaction with family

0.93

0.03
(0.03)

0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.01
(0.01)

0.00
0.00

(11) Satisfaction with education

0.78

-0.29+
(0.15)

0.50**
(0.06)

-0.17
(1.30)

0.48**
(0.07)

0.25
(0.19)

(12) Satisfaction with community

0.78

-0.36*
(0.14)

-0.33+
(0.18)

-0.24
(0.28)

-0.41+
(0.21)

-0.46*
(0.19)

(13) Satisfaction with level of security

0.53

-0.44
(0.26)

-0.38
(0.40)

-0.11
(0.88)

0.62**
(0.04)

0.25
(0.73)

56

(14) Satisfaction with friends

0.83

0.41*
(0.16)

0.45**
(0.12)

0.44**
(0.13)

0.45**
(0.08)

0.34*
(0.12)

(15) Average Treatment Effect: Domain
satisfaction variables (11 items)

0.72

0.41**
(0.03)

0.47**
(0.03)

0.46**
(0.03)

0.45**
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)

(16) Average Treatment Effect: satisfaction
with life and happiness (2 items)

0.78

0.55**
(0.04)

0.56**
(0.04)

0.55**
(0.05)

0.57**
(0.05)

0.47**
(0.07)

236

572

520

473

409

348

Households

Notes: Data is from the ECV 2010 survey and at the household level. Sample restricted to households in the 2007
FAU expansion cities with a child age 18 and younger and SISBEN scores of 22 or lower. Doughnut hole is [-2,2]
SISBEN points around FAU eligibility cutoff of 11 SISBEN points. Columns represent bandwidths between 5 and 9
SISBEN units from the doughnut hole boundary (on both sides). The estimates of FAU receipt effects are from
separate regressions in which receipt is instrumented with an indicator for having a SISBEN score below 11 points
(eligible). Estimates are bivariate probit, with the marginal probability of 1 reported at the cutoff. Other controls not
shown include SISBEN score, an interaction of eligible with linear SISBEN score, and city (see equations 1 and 2
for first and second stage). The local control mean is the mean variable value for ineligible households within 5
SISBEN units of the doughnut hold boundary (single side, households above the doughnut hole). Satisfaction with
level of dignity and satisfaction with family are not reported because there is very little variation when converted to
a binary variable. Robust standard errors are presented in parenthesis under estimates. Average treatment effects are
variance-weighted averages and standard errors as described in Cooper et al. (2009). No weight is put on
satisfaction with food for bandwidth 5 becuase the estimated effect and s.d. is 0. P-values are denoted by: + p<0.1, *
p<.05, ** p<.01. The critical values are corrected for multiple hypotheses testing using the method described in
Benjamini and Hochberg (1995). Each column represents a family, and the corrected critical value levels for 0.1,
.05, and .01 are .069, .031, and .006 for bandwidth 9, .077, .038, and .007 for bandwidth 8, .038, .019, and .004 for
bandwidth 7, .054, .023, and .005 for bandwidth 6, and .054, .027, and .004 for bandwidth 5.

57

