                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                                 STOCK PRICE CRASHES:
                             ROLE OF SLOW-MOVING CAPITAL

                                         Mila Getmansky
                                        Ravi Jagannathan
                                         Loriana Pelizzon
                                        Ernst Schaumburg
                                         Darya Yuferova

                                       Working Paper 24098
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24098


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2017, Revised July 2018



Previously circulated as "Stock Price Crashes: Role of Capital Constrained Traders." We thank
the Centre for Analytical Finance at the Indian School of Business and the National Stock
Exchange of India for data. We thank Viral Acharya, Lawrence Glosten, Merrel Hora, Dermot
Murphy, Nirmal Mohanty, Todd Pulvino, Ramabhadran Thirumalai, Ravi Varanasi, Vish
Viswanathan, Pradeep Yadav, Brian Weller, Roberto Renó, Aleksey Kolokolov, and Jonathan
Brogaard for helpful comments. Isacco Baggio, Yakshup Chopra, Nuri Ersahin, Naveen Reddy
Gondhi, Caitlin Gorback, Mrinal Mishra, and Roberto Panzica provided valuable research
assistance. Special thanks to Rudresh Kunde and Tomasz Wisniewski for data support. Loriana
Pelizzon gratefully acknowledges the research support from the Research Center SAFE, funded
by the State of Hessen initiative for research LOEWE. All errors are our own. The views
expressed in the paper are those of the authors and do not represent the views of AQR Capital
Management LLC or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24098.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Mila Getmansky, Ravi Jagannathan, Loriana Pelizzon, Ernst Schaumburg, and Darya
Yuferova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Stock Price Crashes: Role of Slow-Moving Capital
Mila Getmansky, Ravi Jagannathan, Loriana Pelizzon, Ernst Schaumburg, and Darya Yuferova
NBER Working Paper No. 24098
December 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. G00,G1,G12,G14,G18,G2

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the role of various trader types in providing liquidity in spot and futures markets based
on complete order-book and transactions data as well as cross-market trader identifiers from the
National Stock Exchange of India for a single large stock. During normal times, short-term
traders who carry little inventory overnight are the primary intermediaries in both spot and
futures markets, and changes in futures prices Granger-cause changes in spot prices. However,
during two days of fast crashes, Granger-causality ran both ways. Both crashes were due to large-
scale selling by foreign institutional investors in the spot market. Buying by short-term traders
and cross-market traders was insufficient to stop the crashes. Mutual funds, patient traders with
better trade-execution quality who were initially slow to move in, eventually bought sufficient
quantities leading to price recovery in both markets. Our findings suggest that market stability
requires the presence of well-capitalized standby liquidity providers.

Mila Getmansky                                         Ernst Schaumburg
Isenberg School of Management                          AQR Capital Management LLC
Room 308C                                              Greenwich Plaza
University of Massachusetts                            Greenwich, CT 06830
121 Presidents Drive, Amherst, MA 01003                ernst.schaumburg@gmail.com
msherman@isenberg.umass.edu
                                                       Darya Yuferova
Ravi Jagannathan                                       Norwegian School of Economics (NHH)
Kellogg Graduate School of Management                  Helleveien 30
Northwestern University                                5045 Bergen
2001 Sheridan Road                                     Norway
Leverone/Anderson Complex                              darya.yuferova@nhh.no
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@kellogg.northwestern.edu

Loriana Pelizzon
SAFE/Goethe University Frankfurt
House of Finance
Grüneburgplatz 1
60323 Frankfurt am Main
Germany
pelizzon@safe.uni-frankfurt.de
   A liquid and stable stock market plays a critical role in the economy. It channels savings
into long-term illiquid investments while at the same time providing liquidity to investors,
thereby promoting economic growth (see Levine (2005)). The “Flash Crash” of May 6, 2010,
focused the attention of exchanges and regulators on the need to better understand the forces
that affect market liquidity and stability. According to CFTC and SEC (2010) report, there
was a large institutional sell order (more than USD 4 billion) for E-mini S&P 500 futures that
was quickly executed, resulting in the price crashing by more than 9% and bouncing back
within 30 minutes. This has led to an ongoing debate regarding the role of high-frequency
traders (HFTs) in precipitating crashes.1 SEC (2010) defines HFTs as algorithmic traders
having two characteristics: (i) superior speed relative to other market participants and (ii)
little intraday and end-of-day inventory positions, indicating their limited inventory capacity.
We contribute to the debate by focusing on the role the HFTs’ second attribute plays in
crashes.
   We show that traders who carry little end-of-day inventory (short-term traders [STTs])
are the primary providers of liquidity during most times, with no distinction between the
spot and the futures markets. Cross-market arbitrageurs are also largely traders who carry
little inventory (i.e., they are a subset of STTs) and thus, they lack the capacity to prevent
crashes. When the demand for liquidity is unusually large, STTs’ inventory capacity is
stretched, and prices crash until mutual funds (MFs) and other standby liquidity providers
are able to step in to provide liquidity, thereby helping price recovery. MFs, however, have
a natural advantage in making a market for stocks they hold when the rewards are adequate
(i.e., when price concessions are large enough – they moved in only after prices dropped
   1
     Easley, de Prado, and O’Hara (2012) show that order-flow toxicity increased in the hours before the
Flash Crash, making liquidity provision costly and eventually leading to the withdrawal of many liquidity
providers – most of whom were HFTs – from the market. In contrast, Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun
(2017) show that HFTs were important market participants (jointly responsible for 34% of the trading
volume in E-mini S&P 500 futures on the days surrounding the Flash Crash) and that their behavior did
not change during the Flash Crash. Subsequently, Menkveld and Yueshen (2018) found that cross-market
arbitrage typically conducted by HFTs broke down prior to the Flash Crash, consistent with arguments in
Easley, de Prado, and O’Hara (2012).


                                                   1
sufficiently).2 Our findings highlight the slow-moving feature of standby market-making
capital that enables recovery from crashes in the stock and futures markets. Our results
are consistent with Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007), who made a related observation
based on data from the convertible debt market.
    We use a unique database of orders and transactions data for the period April – June
2006 for a large firm in the NIFTY-50 and SENSEX indexes traded on the National Stock
Exchange of India (NSE).3 Based on the number of trades, the NSE was the third-largest
stock exchange after NYSE and NASDAQ in the world in 2006. Even though we use data for
three months in 2006 for just one stock from the NSE, we believe that our main conclusions
carry over to the current U.S. stock market and several other markets around the world.
    Our data have the following advantages. First, the data have a unique identifier for each
broker-trader combination across spot and futures markets, which allows us to calculate
the evolution of individual traders’ inventory over time.4 Second, the data have the legal
classification (Mutual Fund [MF], Foreign Institutional Investor [FII], etc.) for each trader in
addition to the unique individual trader identity. Therefore, we are able to identify the types
of legal entities who are standby liquidity providers. Third, we are able to track individual
traders who trade across spot and futures markets, which allows us to examine cross-market
activity and spillover effects.
    In this study, we go beyond legal classification of traders and identify short-term and
long-term liquidity providers directly based on their trading behavior. Short-term liquidity
providers (STTs) tolerate deviations from their desired inventory positions only for short
   2
      Another potential reason for the slow-moving nature of MFs’ intermediation capital could be the fol-
lowing. A sharp drop in the price of a stock draws the attention of MFs who have to evaluate whether
this drop is due to lack of liquidity or adverse information. And this evaluation may take time, slowing the
deployment of market-making capital.
    3
      NSE became the largest stock exchange in India in terms of volume traded, overtaking the Bombay
Stock Exchange (BSE) at the end of 1995. The NSE is organized as a limit order book market, which has
become the dominant market design.
    4
      We note that this firm’s stock is traded in both the spot and the single-stock futures markets, with the
trading volume in the futures market being almost five times larger than the trading volume in the spot
market.


                                                      2
periods of time. Long-term liquidity providers (LTTs) can tolerate persistent deviations
from their target inventory positions. Some legal entities are natural liquidity providers
and demanders: MFs can tolerate deviations from their desired holdings if prices become
attractive; FIIs have a global view on the market, and thus their behavior might be affected
by the shocks originated outside the Indian market. Therefore, we keep them as separate
trader categories.
    We find that STTs, who carry relatively small amounts of intraday inventory relative
to their trading volume and carry little inventory overnight (less than 10% of their daily
trading volume), are present in at least one side of the transaction for 85% (89%) of the
daily transactions in the spot (futures) market. Moreover, 37% (45%) of the daily trading
volume in the spot (futures) market occurs among STTs themselves. Overall, STTs act
as main intermediaries in both spot and futures markets. Though each individual trader
belonging to the STT category has a limited inventory capacity, STTs as a group are able
to provide sufficient liquidity to both spot and futures markets. They use trading among
themselves as an important inventory-management tool.
    During our sample period, high-frequency trading (and any algorithmic trading in gen-
eral) was not allowed at the NSE, and thus any order submission, modification, and/or
cancellation required a manual entry. Our data therefore provide us with a unique labora-
tory to isolate the effect of the second characteristic of HFTs in fast crashes.
    There were two fast crashes and recoveries in both spot and futures markets together
with stock market indices such as NIFTY and SENSEX.5 The first (second) fast crash was
   5
     Analysts speculated that the reason for this drop was that the U.S. CPI number, released a day before
the first crash, was above expectations, indicating rising U.S. interest rates. This, coupled with weaknesses
observed in the London Metal Exchange, has led to losses in emerging markets like India, Mexico, and Brazil.
As a result, on May 18, 2006, the SENSEX (Indian stock market index) registered a fall of 826 points (6.76%)
to close at 11,391, followed heavy selling by foreign institutions and weakness in global markets. This market
meltdown was followed by a drop in SENSEX on May 19, 2006, by 452 points and the biggest intraday fall
in the history of Indian stock market on May 22, 2006, when SENSEX dropped by 1,111 points, triggering a
market-wide circuit breaker. Market crashes on May 19, 2006, and May 22, 2006, are also identified as fast
crash periods for the anonymous stock under consideration.



                                                      3
characterized by a drop in the spot market mid-quote by 7.9% (10.2%) within 30 minutes,
followed by sharp recovery of more than 60% within the 30 minutes after the trough of
the crash. The futures market experienced contemporaneous price crashes and recoveries
comparable to the spot market.
   The unusually large liquidity shocks in both crashes were due to large selling pressure
coming from FIIs (as defined by the NSE) in the spot market that spilled over to the futures
market. We find that 50% of STTs who were active on the crash days withdrew from
the market during the drawdown period, and 60% of those STTs who remained active hit
their inventory constraints on the crash days. Therefore, market recovery required better-
capitalized standby liquidity providers to step in.
   In our sample, we find that MFs were patient traders, buying when prices went down
and selling when prices went up. Some MFs entered the market and bought only during the
crash days. Moreover, net aggressive buying by MFs Granger-caused a rise in spot prices
during the crash days; however, there was no observed causality during non-crash days.
Further, spot returns did not Granger-cause net aggressive buying by MFs during crash and
non-crash days. This is consistent with buying by MFs helping price recovery, but price
recovery did not cause MFs to buy. Interestingly, spot and futures returns Granger-caused
each other during crash days, whereas causality ran from futures to spot market during non-
crash days. This is consistent with both crashes originating in the spot market and spilling
over into the futures market (Note that the crash-day causality averages the effects during
market drawdown and other periods in the day. The market drawdown period is too short
to estimate causality.)
   To summarize, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the roles of STTs, cross-market
traders, and slow-moving standby liquidity providers during price crashes and recoveries.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I relates our work to the literature.
Section II describes the data. Section III introduces the methodology we use to identify
STTs and LTTs. Section IV characterizes intraday liquidity provision by STTs and long-

                                              4
term liquidity provision by institutional investors during the two fast crashes in our sample
and describes the stabilizing role of the slow-moving capital. We conclude in Section V.



                             I.    Related literature
   We contribute to two different streams of literature: liquidity provision in open limit
order book markets and market fragility. The literature on liquidity provision is vast and
covers markets of different financial instruments (equities, bonds, derivatives, and foreign
exchange) as well as markets with different trading mechanisms (dealer markets, limit order
book markets, and hybrid markets), and therefore, we discuss only a few closely related
papers with a particular focus on the limited inventory capacity of liquidity providers in the
limit order book markets.
   Naik and Yadav (2003) provide support for the view that market-makers’ inventories
affect market quality. Comerton-Forde, Hendershott, Jones, Moulton, and Seasholes (2010)
find that market-maker financial conditions explain time variation in liquidity. Hendershott
and Seasholes (2007) and Hendershott and Menkveld (2014) document market-makers’ in-
ventory management and the price pressures that arise from it for NYSE. Venkataraman
and Waisburd (2007) and Menkveld and Wang (2013) document the liquidity benefits of
the designated market-makers, especially for smaller firms. Raman and Yadav (2013) study
limit order revisions. They find that informed traders and voluntary market-makers revise
orders more often, and that changes in market prices and inventories, including inventories
of other related stocks, influence order revisions. Kahraman and Tookes (2017) find that
the ability to trade on margin increases liquidity; however, in crisis periods, due to massive
deleveraging liquidity deteriorates (i.e., there is a downward liquidity spiral).
   We find that STTs are primary intermediaries and that they actively trade among them-
selves in order to manage their inventories. STTs have limited inventory carrying capacity
across trading days, and are similar along that dimension to HFTs who are known to end

                                               5
the day with flat inventory positions.6
    Our paper is also related to the literature on market liquidity during turbulent peri-
ods. The voluntary nature of liquidity provision raises concerns about whether endogenous
market-makers will be present in the market during turbulent periods, when they are most
needed to provide liquidity.7 Those who normally provide liquidity in the market stood on
the sidelines during turbulent times. Kyle and Obizhaeva (2016) document five cases wherein
large bets made by institutional investors led to price crashes, three of which occurred well
before the rise of algorithmic trading. Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017) study the
role of HFTs in the Flash Crash and document that their behavior did not change during the
Flash Crash,8 while Menkveld and Yueshen (2018) argue that cross-market arbitrage (often
conducted by HFTs) broke down before the Flash Crash.
    These papers focus on identifying why crashes occur and on understanding the role HFTs
and arbitrageurs play in this process. In our paper, in addition to establishing the reason for
the fast crashes and understanding the role of traders with limited inventory capacity and
cross-market arbitrage activity, we examine the role of slow-moving market-making capital in
initiating recovery. Therefore, we are able to investigate the interaction between short-term
traders, cross-market traders, and slow-moving standby liquidity providers at the same time.
   6
      SEC (2010) and Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017) use flat end-of-day inventory positions
to classify traders as HFTs, while Korajczyk and Murphy (2016) and Brogaard, Hagströmer, Norden, and
Riordan (2015) using a different classification criteria document above-mentioned characteristic of HFTs.
    7
      There is a plethora of studies investigating the effect of HFTs on liquidity provision. Hendershott,
Jones, and Menkveld (2011) show that increase in automation leads to increase in liquidity provision as well.
Menkveld (2013) focuses on a single cross-venue HFT and documents that in four out of five trades, that
trader was providing liquidity. Malinova, Park, and Riordan (2013) show that retail traders enjoy better
liquidity due to HFTs’ activity. Lyle and Naughton (2015) examine specific mechanisms through which this
reduction in spreads may have occurred and why spreads did not continue to fall further with increased
algorithmic trading.
    8
      Brogaard, Riordan, Shkilko, and Sokolov (2014) provide evidence for HFTs’ behavior around extreme
market movements and show that HFTs do not cause these rapid price movements, though their liquidity
demand dominates liquidity supply in case of systematic extreme price movements.We note that this paper
focuses on the events of a different nature than fast crashes that normally develop over a prolonged time
period – for example, the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010, which developed over 15 minutes, while Brogaard,
Riordan, Shkilko, and Sokolov (2014) focus on rapid movements that occur within 10 seconds (the smallest
frequency used for robustness purposes is one minute).


                                                     6
Further, we show that it is the market-making capital from domestic institutional investors
that absorbs the liquidity shocks and stabilizes the market, even though this market-making
capital is slow to get deployed. Mitchell, Pedersen, and Pulvino (2007) make a related
observation using data from the convertible debt market, and Duffie (2010) examines the
implications using a theoretical framework. An important difference between these papers
and our paper is that we focus on the role of the slow-moving capital during fast intraday
crashes, while the above-mentioned papers focus on normal market conditions.



                                             II.      Data
   We use a unique database of orders and transactions for three months in 2006 (April
– June) of a large anonymous firm traded on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India
which provides us with a unique identifier for each broker-trader combination and legal
classification in spot and futures markets. Our data includes detailed information on trades
and quotes (the full history of the order: submission, modification, cancellation, execution).
All our subsequent analysis is conducted for this one representative NSE stock.9 We exclude
three days from our sample with half-day trading sessions (April 29, May 23, and June 25,
2006).
   Table I shows that there are 108,052 traders in the spot market, while in the futures
market for this stock, there are only 35,951 traders during the sample period. In total, there
were 137,830 traders that (i) traded in the spot market, (ii) traded in the futures market,
(iii) traded in both spot and futures, or (iv) submitted the orders that were not executed
during this time period. The latter category includes 8.47% of traders (11,681 traders),
therefore, the number of effective traders whose orders resulted in at least one trade during
this time period is 126,149. The majority of the active traders on either spot (70.65%) or
futures (86.13%) markets execute their orders on both sides of the market (i.e., they both
   9
       We refer to Appendix A for detailed description of the NSE market.


                                                     7
buy and sell). 67.47% of traders execute their orders in spot market only, while 20.17% of
traders execute their orders on futures market only. Only 3.89% of traders are active in
both markets; however, they are responsible for around 40% of trading activity in each of
the markets.

                                INSERT TABLES I – II HERE

   Table II shows that the majority of the order flow in the spot market is represented by
new order submissions (around 71% for both buy and sell sides of the market), followed by
cancellations (around 17% for the buy side and 15% for the sell side of the market) and
modifications (around 13% for the buy side and 14% for the sell side of the market). Similar
patterns also hold for the futures market.10 We note that the numbers above are based on
regular book orders only. Our data also include several stop-loss orders; however, none of
them were executed during our sample period.



                  III.      Trader types and their trades
   The NSE classifies all traders in terms of their legal affiliations. There are three primary
categories: individuals, corporations, and financial institutions; and 13 subcategories: indi-
vidual traders, partnership firms, Hindu undivided families, public and private companies or
corporate bodies, trust or society, MFs, domestic financial institutions, banks, insurances,
statutory bodies, nonresident Indians, FIIs, and overseas corporate bodies. However, legal
classifications of traders are not adequate for analyzing the role of traders in liquidity pro-
vision in different types of market conditions. Some traders could tolerate deviations from
their desired inventory positions only for short periods of time, while other could tolerate
persistent deviations from their target inventory positions. Therefore, we classify traders
  10
     For example, momentum strategies employed by Numeric Investors (an investment-management com-
pany currently known as Man Numeric with assets under management around USD 30 billion in 2018)
typically leave around 10% to 15% of orders unexecuted or cancelled (see Perold and Tierney (1997)).

                                                 8
based on their trading behavior and their role in the market (see Figure 1). We focus our
attention on those with a short inventory-holding horizon (STTs) and examine how their
inventory positions affect market liquidity, and how they manage their inventory risk. We
do this based on the conjecture that STTs are continuously present in the market, whereas
LTTs are present in the market only at periodic intervals and when trigger events happen.

                                      INSERT FIGURE 1 HERE

    As Figure 1 shows, on a given day, we classify traders into Small and Other. Small
traders are traders whose trading volume is less than or equal to 750 shares (equivalent of
one futures contract) on a given day.11 Other traders are traders whose trading volume
exceeds 750 shares on a given day. We further classify other traders by their end-of-day
inventory. STTs are traders whose end-of-day inventory is less than 10% of traded volume.
The LTTs are traders whose end-of-day inventory is more than 10% of traded volume. We
further split LTTs into MFs and FIIs and other long-term traders (OLTTs). MFs and FII
are legal entities according to the National Stock Exchange of India.12 To determine the final
category of a trader, we look at the modal classification of the trader across days and select
it as the trader’s category unless the mode equals “Small” trader. If a mode classification is
equal to “Small” trader, we assign it as a trader category if and only if a trader is classified
as Small trader on more than two-thirds of days, otherwise we use the next most frequent
classification as the trader’s category.13 In other words, each trader belongs only to one
category during our sample period (i.e., traders do not switch categories from one day to
another day).14
  11
      The size of a futures contract is 750 shares in our sample. Therefore, traders that trade less than 750
shares per day do not have an opportunity to use futures market for hedging purposes.
   12
      We note that several MFs and FIIs end up in Small or STT groups. However, their activity during the
period considered is negligible. These traders are active on average 5 (2) days in the spot (futures) market
and transact on average 109 (2,375) shares per day in the spot (futures) market.
   13
      We also document that the categorization of STT is persistent over time. Please see Appendix B for
details.
   14
      For some of the forthcoming analysis, we also split traders into those active in the spot market only,

                                                     9
    Table III shows buy and sell trading volume for each of the three trader categories. In
particular, we find that STT are responsible for 61.1% (67.3%) of the total (buy+sell) trading
volume for spot (futures) market. LTT are responsible for 22.3% (31.3%) of the total trading
volume for spot (futures) market. Small traders are responsible for 16.5% (1.4%) of the total
trading volume for spot (futures) market. Besides that, a considerable portion of trading
activity stems from STTs who are active in spot and futures markets alike: 35.6% and 28.4%
for spot and futures markets, respectively, while all other trader categories are active mainly
in either the spot market or the futures market. We also note that the size of the futures
market is five times larger than the size of the spot market. Although the spot market is
smaller than the futures market, it is more diverse in terms of market participants.

                                     INSERT TABLE III HERE

    The difference in size of the spot and futures markets is caused by a security transaction
tax (an important part of transaction costs) that is much larger for the spot market (around
10 bps) than for the futures market (around 1 bps). Moreover, it is easier to take short
positions in the futures market than in the spot market. Overnight short positions in the
spot market was not allowed during our sample period except through participatory notes,
but this way of borrowing shares was available to very few investors, mainly FIIs.

                                     INSERT TABLE IV HERE

    Table IV shows average daily trading volume between each possible trader-pair (i, j).
We document that STTs are the most frequent counterparties for LTTs and Small traders,
for the spot and futures markets alike. Roughly 26.4% (41.6%) of the average daily volume
for the spot (futures) market is between STTs and LTTs. Roughly 21.7% (1.9%) of the
total daily trading volume for the spot (futures) market is between STTs and Small traders,
those active in the futures market only, and those active in both markets. The latter category allows us to
draw conclusions on cross-market arbitrage activity.


                                                    10
with Small traders being not that active in the futures market. The volume traded among
STTs is 37.1% and 45.4% of the total daily trading volume for the spot and futures markets,
respectively. Overall, STTs are responsible for around 85.2% (88.9%) of the daily trading
volume for the spot (futures) market. To summarize, STTs are the hub for the majority of
the transactions and the primary liquidity providers in the market.
     The proportion of trading activity among STTs themselves is in line with Reiss and
Werner (1998), who report that inter-dealer trading in 1991 on the London Stock Exchange
accounts for on average 24% and can be as high as 65% of all trades when dealer inventories
are high. However, if we consider HFTs as a natural evolution of STTs once algorithmic
trading is allowed, we document twice-as-high total trading activity among such traders as
reported by Brogaard, Hendershott, and Riordan (2014), who document that in 2009, on
the NASDAQ (a dealer market with elements of the limit order book), HFTs overall were
responsible for 42% (18%) of volume for large (small) stocks. Moreover, Johnson, Van Ness,
and Van Ness (2017) document (using the same dataset, but for NASDAQ-listed stocks only)
that HFTs are responsible for 47% of trading volume; however, only 8% of it is among HFTs
themselves, as compared to our estimate of 37% among STTs for the spot market.



           IV.        Stock price fast crashes and recoveries
     In this section, we identify stock price fast crashes and study the behavior of different
types of traders during the four-day window surrounding crashes.


A.     Identification of the fast crashes

     We identify fast crashes using drift-burst statistics developed by Christensen, Oomen,
and Renò (2016)15 , and also used by Bellia, Christensen, Kolokolov, Pelizzon, and Renò
   15
      We thank the authors for sharing the code for the estimation procedure as well as the dataset containing
critical values of the drift-burst statistic.


                                                     11
(2018):
                                        r
                                          hµ µt
                                 Tt =
                                         K 2 σt
                                           n                        
                                        1 X             ti−1 − t
                                 µt =          K             rti−1
                                      hµ i=1               hµ
                                      v
                                      u      n                     
                                      u1 X           ti−1 − t    2
                                                                                                       (1)
                                 σt = t          K              rti−1
                                        hσ i=1          hσ

                                 K(x) = exp(−|x|)1(x ≤ 0)
                                      Z
                                 K2 =    K 2 (x)dx
                                          R

   Under the null of no drift burst Tt follows standard normal distribution; however, when
there is a drift burst, |Tt | goes to infinity. We estimate drift-burst statistics for the mean
bandwidth (hµ ) of 15 minutes and the volatility bandwidth (hσ ) of 45 minutes. This implies
that we are interested in the fast crashes that develop, on average, within 15 minutes, similar
to the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010. In the end of each one-minute interval, we compute the
drift-burst statistics based on the one-second mid-quote returns for the spot market. Given
that we are interested in the crashes, we focus our attention on negative drift-burst statistics.
We mark one-minute intervals when the absolute value of the drift-burst statistics exceeds
its critical value at 95% confidence level as troughs of the crash. We account for the multiple
tests as in Christensen, Oomen, and Renò (2016). In our sample, we detect eight such
troughs. The drift-burst statistic by itself does not tell us whether the crash is reverted.
Therefore, we look at the cumulative returns 30 minutes before and after the trough. We
select only those crashes that recover by at least 50%. After applying the recovery condition,
only two fast crashes remain: those that took place on May 19, 2006, and May 22, 2006. On
May 19, 2006, the trough of the crash is at 10:38 a.m. On May 22, 2006, the trough of the
crash is at 11:52 a.m.16
  16
       For further analysis, we focus our attention on the four days surrounding the crash days from May 16


                                                     12
                                    INSERT FIGURE 2 HERE

     Figure 2 shows the spot and futures mid-quotes evolutions during the trading day together
with NIFTY prices (median over a one-minute interval) for the two days days on which the
fast crashes happened. On May 19, we observe two events that look like a fast crash followed
by a fast recovery. Indeed, on May 19, we identify two troughs based on the drift-burst
statistic. However, only during the first event did the crashes develop and revert quickly
enough. During the 30 minutes before the trough of the first crash, price fell by 7.9% and
recovered by 5.1% only (reversal of 64.5%) in the 30 minutes that followed. However, during
30 minutes before the trough of the second crash price fell by 6.1% and recovered in the
next 30 minutes by only 0.6% (9.1% reversal). Put differently, during the second event on
May 19, prices did not fall and recover fast enough to be classified as a fast crash. On May
22, during the 30 minutes before the trough, prices fell by 10.2% and recovered in the next
30 minutes by 7.0% (reversal of 68.4% reversal). This fast crash was also characterized by
a trading halt (from 11:56 a.m. to 12:56 p.m.) before market recovery took place. We also
note that the two fast crashes were accompanied by similar movement in the NIFTY index,
though it was less pronounced.


B.     Traders’ behavior during fast crashes

     We investigate trader behavior by looking at the trading volume between the different
categories during the two fast crashes over the total trading volume on a given day. In
particular, for each one-minute interval t on day k, we compute the trading volume, V olijkt
(in number of shares), coming from each possible trader-pair (i, j) relative to the total trading
volume on day k, and regress it on trader-pair dummies (Dij , where i refers to selling category
and j to buying category) and their interaction with dummy variables for market drawdowns
till May 25. We note that May 18 and May 23 are either missing from our data or only include trades for
the first 30 minutes of the trading session.



                                                  13
(Downkt ) and recovery (U pkt ) periods, day fixed effects (F Ek ), and half-hour time dummies
(T Db ). More formally:



                V olijkt        X               X                       X
              P               =       βij Dij +        γij Downkt Dij +       δij U pkt Dij +
                (i,j) V olijk   (i,j)            (i,j)                  (i,j)
                                X                 X                                             (2)
                              +       αk F E k +        db T Db + ijkt f or all (i, j)
                                 k                b


where Downkt (U pkt ) is equal to one for – (+) 30 minutes from the trough of the fast crash
and zero otherwise.
   Table V shows the results of the trading-activity regression estimation around the two
fast crashes in our sample (May 19, 2006, and May 22, 2006) for spot and futures markets.
We note that in Table V we focus on one-minute trading volume relative to the daily trading
volume, and thus the numbers reported in the Table V are not directly comparable to the
numbers reported in Table IV where we focus on daily trading volume per each category.

                                     INSERT TABLE V HERE

   Panel A of Table V shows that during the market drawdown period, STTs significantly
increase their buying from LTTs by 5.34 basis points of total daily volume for the spot
market (i.e., their buying from LTTs more than doubled relative to the normal period),
while LTTs do not increase trading activity among themselves. We acknowledge that STTs
buying from LTTs during the fast crash was similar to their buying from LTTs during the
recovery period. In summary, STTs tried to accommodate the volume sold by LTTs, but
STTs are not able to stop market drawdown. At the same time, during the drawdown period,
STTs increase trading among themselves by 5.87 basis points of total daily volume (i.e., their
trading among themselves is 1.5 times larger than during the normal period). This finding
is in line with “hot potato” trading increasing during the crash, when traders with limited


                                                      14
inventory capacity tried to unload their inventory to other market participants to manage
inventory risk. Interestingly, according to CFTC and SEC (2010), HFTs engaged in “hot
potato” trading during the Flash Crash of May 6, 2010.
   Panel A of Table V shows that during market recovery after the fast crash, there is
a significant increase in trading activity between LTTs by 7.31 basis points of total daily
volume in the spot market (i.e., trading activity between LTTs tripled relative to the normal
period). STTs unloaded their inventory accumulated during market drawdown to LTTs (a
significant increase of selling volume by 7.81 basis points of total daily volume – or, in other
words, STTs’ selling to LTTs almost tripled) during the recovery period.
   Panel B of Table V repeats the analysis discussed above for the futures market. During
drawdown periods, STTs increase their buying from LTTs by 3.90 basis points of total daily
volume (i.e., their buying from LTTs increased 1.5 times relative to the normal period).
LTTs decrease trading among themselves during the drawdown period in the futures market
by 1.28 basis points of total daily volume (i.e., their trading among themselves decreased by
one quarter relative to the normal period). STTs also used the recovery period to unload
inventory bought from LTTs (a significant increase of selling volume by 6.25 basis points of
total daily volume – or, in other words, STTs’ selling to LTTs almost doubled) during the
recovery period.
   Remarkably, during both drawdown and recovery periods, STTs increased their trading
activity in the opposite direction to the market movement, and therefore, provided liquidity
to the market when necessary. Our findings are in line with Brogaard, Riordan, Shkilko,
and Sokolov (2014), who document that HFTs provide liquidity in case of a single stock
experiencing an extreme price movement by absorbing order flow from non-HFTs.
   We observe that trading patterns in the spot and futures markets are different. In
particular, we do not observe a remarkable increase in trading among LTTs themselves
during the recovery period in the futures market. In order to uncover the reason for this
difference we split the LTT category and look at the activity of FIIs and MFs on the crash

                                              15
days.
   Unfortunately, we cannot estimate equation (2) by enriching it with FII and MF cate-
gories due to multicollinearity problem: FII activity is concentrated during the drawdown
period and MF activity is concentrated during the recovery period, but we also provide
graphical representation of the behavior of MFs and FIIs (see Figure 3). Figure 3 shows
that FIIs’ selling in the spot market coincides with the fast crashes (see Panels A and C),
while buying by MFs in the spot market is followed by the market recovery (Panels B and
D). These graphs are consistent with the stabilizing role of the slow-moving capital (see
Duffie (2010)). However, there was no selling pressure by FIIs in the futures market. We
also emphasize that FIIs take opposite positions in spot and futures markets; however, these
positions are established by different traders within the FII group, so they are not driven by
cross-market arbitrage activity.

                                   INSERT FIGURE 3 HERE

   To provide further evidence on ex-ante liquidity provision by the different categories
during fast crashes, we look at the limit order book and plot the number of shares quoted
within 100 basis points of the mid-quote (see Figures 4 – 5). We observe that STTs are still
present during the fast crash period within 100 basis points from the mid-quote, although
their presence is less profound than during normal periods (which is in line with quoted
spread widening during the turmoil periods). Further, the behavior of FIIs and MFs in the
spot market are in line with FIIs causing the fast crash and MFs helping price recovery.
In particular, we observe that FIIs quoted a lot of depth at the ask side of the limit order
book within 100 bps of the mid-quote in the spot market, while MFs quoted a lot of depth
at the bid side of the limit order book within 100 bps of the mid-quote in the spot market.
Overall, this is consistent with MFs in the spot and futures markets and FIIs in the futures
market being slow-moving liquidity providers. We provide a more detailed analysis on the
role played by MFs and FIIs in Section IV.D.

                                             16
                              INSERT FIGURES 4 – 5 HERE

   Figures 3 – 5 suggest that the crashes were driven by a selling pressure from FIIs in the
spot market, while the behavior of FIIs in the futures market is not related to the price
patterns. In other words, the futures market followed the spot market. Even though the
two prices came down together, there were not fully synchronized and there were apparent
cross-market arbitrage opportunities, as we show below. We follow Menkveld and Yueshen
(2018) and construct two proxies for cross-market arbitrage between the spot and futures
markets:


              P roxy1k,t = max(0, max(Bidspot     f ut         spot     f ut
                                         k,t , Bidk,t − min(Askk,t , Askk,t ))              (3)


                                                  i
                                                      − Askk,t )2 + (Bidik,t − Bidk,t )2
                              P
                               i=spot, f ut   (Askk,t
               P roxy2k,t =                                                                 (4)
                                                          4
   Bidspot    spot
      k,t (Askk,t ) is the futures price that we compute using a call money rate based on

the best bid (ask) price in the spot market at time t on day k. Bidfk,tut (Askk,t
                                                                              f ut
                                                                                   ) is the best
bid (ask) in the futures market at time t on day k. Bidk,t (Askk,t ) is the average between
the futures price that we compute using a call money rate based on the best bid (ask) price
in the spot market and the best bid (ask) in the futures market at time t on day k.
   Figure 6 plots a time series of the two proxies for arbitrage opportunities for May 19
and May 22 together with the spot mid-quote (median by minute). We observe that there
are more opportunities for arbitrage during the crash and recovery periods of the market.
Menkveld and Yueshen (2018) document similar patterns for the Flash Crash of May 6,
2010. This is consistent with cross-market arbitrage trading not being backed by sufficient
capital. Thanks to our unique database, we could argue that this result is in line with
the evidence provided in Table III that most of the cross-market traders are STTs (i.e.,
even the cross-market traders do not have enough capital capacity to exploit the arbitrage


                                                    17
opportunities).

                                   INSERT FIGURE 6 HERE

   Further, we investigate whether STTs change their behavior during crashes. We follow
Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017) and estimate the following equation that mea-
sures the sensitivity of the inventory changes, 4Invikt , of trader category i (STT, FII, and
MF) during time interval t on day k to the contemporaneous mid-quote return (Retkt ) during
market drawdown (Downkt ) and recovery (U pkt ) periods controlling for lagged spot/futures
inventory (Invik,t−1 ) and lagged changes in the spot /futures inventory (4Invik,t−1 ), day
fixed effects (F Ek ), and time fixed effects (T Db ):


               4Invikt =β1 Retkt + β2 Downkt Retkt + β3 U pkt Retkt +

                           + β4 Downkt + β5 U pkt + β6 4Invik,t−1 + β7 Invik,t−1 +

                           + β8 Downkt 4Invik,t−1 + β9 Downkt Invik,t−1 +                    (5)
                           + β10 U pkt 4Invik,t−1 + β11 U pkt Invik,t−1 +
                             X              X
                           +     αk F E k +     db T Db + ikt
                               k              b


where Downkt (U pkt ) is equal to one for – (+) 30 minutes from the trough of the fast crash
and zero otherwise.

                                   INSERT TABLE VI HERE

   In Table VI, we document the estimation results of equation (5). The first column reports
the sensitivity of STT as a group (STT-All) inventories to the spot and futures returns (Panel
A and Panel B, respectively). We show that for STT-All, the coefficient in front of the spot
return is positive and significant, indicating that as a group, STT-All move with the spot
market (Panel A), and the coefficient in front of the futures return is negative and significant,


                                                  18
indicating that STT-All are contrarian (Panel B). The result for the spot market is in line
with Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017), who document that HFTs are moving
with the market during normal times (based on the coefficient in front of contemporaneous
returns). However, this comparison is misleading, as some STTs trade in either the spot or
futures market only, while other STTs trade across both markets. Hence, we split STT-All
into three groups: STT-Spot, STT-Futures, and STT-Both.
   The second column of Panel A of Table VI reports the sensitivity of STT-Spot inventories
with respect to the spot return. We show that this coefficient is negative and significant,
indicating that STT-Spot are contrarian (i.e., in general, they provide liquidity). During
market drawdown, STT-Spot inventory sensitivity to the spot return does not change since
the coefficient is not significant. However, during market recovery, STT-Spot inventory
sensitivity to the spot return becomes zero (the interaction coefficient between dummy for
the recovery and the spot return is positive and significant, and is of the same magnitude
as the coefficient of the spot return itself). That is, STT-Spot withdraw from the market,
perhaps due to exhausting their inventory capacity. In Section IV.C.2, we investigate this
issue in depth.
   The second column of Panel B of Table VI performs the same analysis for STT-Futures.
In this case, the coefficients are not statistically significant, indicating that as a group, STT-
Futures do not exhibit any particular pattern of inventory sensitivity to the futures return.
   The third column of Table VI reports the sensitivity of STT-Both inventory with respect
to spot return (Panel A) and futures return (Panel B). We show that in general, STT-Both
have a positive and significant coefficient in the spot market and a negative and significant
coefficient in the futures market – i.e., STT-Both are taking opposite positions in spot and
futures markets consistent with cross-market arbitrage activity. During market drawdown
and recovery, STT-Both become contrarian in the spot market and less contrarian in the
futures market.17 This is consistent with them taking the same positions across both markets
  17
       The result for the spot market is consistent with contemporaneous results of Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi,


                                                     19
(i.e., STT-Both did not seem to engage in cross-market arbitrage activities during the fast
crashes), and thus cross-market arbitrage broke down during the fast crashes.
    The analysis performed following Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017) considers
STTs as a group and does not distinguish between different traders within the STT category.
We open up the STT category and investigate the behavior of each individual trader (i.e.,
whether a trader withdraws from the market during the market drawdown period, and
whether a trader hits her inventory constraints during crash days) in Section IV.C.
    Table VI also reports inventory sensitivity for FIIs and MFs. It is important to emphasize
that FIIs and MFs who trade in the spot and futures markets are different traders (i.e., they
do not trade in both markets). Hence, both FIIs and MFs are not engaging in cross-market
arbitrage. We document that FIIs move with the market during normal times and intensify
such behavior during market drawdown in the spot market, while in the futures market,
FIIs move with the price during normal times and become contrarian during drawdowns and
recoveries.
    We document that MFs inventories seem to be insensitive to the price movement neither
during normal nor during turbulent periods for the spot and futures markets alike. Due to
the nature of MFs’ slow-moving capital, they do not change their inventories as frequently
as one-minute change in returns. Thus, we do not find any significant coefficients for MFs.
Hence, we provide a more detailed analysis on the role of both FIIs and MFs in Section
IV.D.
and Tuzun (2017) for HFTs. Therefore, based on the contemporaneous inventory sensitivity to spot/futures
returns, we do observe a change in STTs’ behavior during market drawdown and recovery periods. Unfor-
tunately, trading activity in our data is not frequent enough to sample at as high frequency as in Kirilenko,
Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017), and thus we are not able to perform a joint test on the changes of inventory
sensitivity to contemporaneous and lagged returns during market drawdown and recovery periods, which is
the main test performed by Kirilenko, Kyle, Samadi, and Tuzun (2017).




                                                     20
C.     The role of STTs during fast crashes

     In this section, we argue that STTs could not prevent fast crashes from happening due
to limited inventory capacity. First, we show that STTs tried to “lean against the wind”
by documenting their cash flows during the crash days, but could not do so (see Section
IV.C.1). Second, we show that STTs indeed were inventory constrained during the crash
days (see Section IV.C.2).


C.1.    Cash flows of STTs

     In this section, we provide evidence of whether STTs “lean against the wind.” Given
that STTs tend to end each day with flat positions, we make a simplifying assumption that
at the end of the day, they do not have any positions to liquidate, and hence, each day,
they start with a zero-inventory position. We note that we compute aggregate cash flows
for the STT category. Hence, we do not exclude the possibility for vast heterogeneity within
the STT category. In particular, for each one-minute interval t on day k with at least one
transaction, we compute cumulative cash flow for STTs, Cash F lowST T kt , which increases
with sell transactions and decreases with buy transactions, and regress it on dummy variables
for market drawdowns (Downkt ) and recovery (U pkt ) periods, day fixed effects (F Ek ), and
half-hour time dummies (T Db ):

                                                     X                X
            Cash F lowST T kt = γDownkt + δU pkt +       α k F Ek +       db T Db + kt   (6)
                                                     k                b

where Downkt (U pkt ) is equal to one for – (+) 30 minutes from the trough of the fast crash
and zero otherwise.

                                INSERT TABLE VII HERE

     Table VII shows the results of the cash flow regression estimation around the two fast
crashes in our sample (on May 19, 2006, and on May 22, 2006) for the spot and futures

                                             21
markets. Panels A and B of Table VII report the results of the cash flow analysis (in
millions of rupees) for the spot and futures markets, respectively. We observe that cash
flows decrease during the market drawdown period and increase during the market recovery
period for both markets alike. Although we lack statistical power for this test, to further
support our hypothesis, we depict the cumulative cash flows of STTs during the two fast
crash days (Figure 7). We find that cumulative cash flows for STTs decrease during market
drawdowns and increase during recovery periods.

                                INSERT FIGURE 7 HERE


C.2.   Inventory capacity of STTs

   In this section, we provide evidence that STTs hit their inventory limits during the
crash days. First, we show summary statistics of STTs’ participation during the crash days.
Second, we present dynamics of the inventory capacity of STTs at daily and intraday level
(the latter for the two crash days only).

                                    INSERT FIGURE 8

   Figure 8 shows the number of STTs that were active either on May 19, May 22, or both
for the spot and futures markets (the latter one is reported in parentheses). We divide STTs
into groups based on whether they belong to the top group of STTs or not, whether they
are active during the market drawdown period or not, and whether they were inventory
constrained or not.
   We define top STTs as those with large trading volume who jointly generate 50% of STT
trading volume. There are only 27 (64) top STTs out of 6,547 (20,524) STTs in the spot
(futures) market (see Appendix B for details). Naturally, having one of the top STTs hitting
its inventory limits is more problematic for the market than one of the smaller STTs hitting
its inventory limits.

                                            22
   We define STTs as inventory-constrained STTs if the trader’s maximum of absolute
value of one-minute median inventory, either on May 19 or on May 22 (or both), is above
this traders’ 95th percentile of the maximum of the absolute value of one-minute median
inventory over the sample period, excluding May 19 and May 22.
   We show that on the two crash days, there were 1,099 STTs on the spot market. Out
of them, 26 traders were from the top group, with 19 of the top traders actively engaging
in cross-market trading. Out of 19 top traders active on both markets, 17 participated
during the crash with 27% of them hitting their inventory constraints. Overall, 22 (17 + 5)
traders from the top group of STTs participated during the market drawdown, with 27% of
them hitting their inventory constraints. Out of the smaller STT group, 20% were active on
both markets, but less than half of the smaller cross-market traders were active during the
crash (86 traders). Moreover, 51 of these 86 traders were constrained during the crash days.
Overall, out of the smaller STT group only 441 (86 + 355) traders participated during the
market drawdown (41%), with 275 (51 + 224) of them hitting their inventory constraints, and
632 (125 + 507) traders preferring to stay away from the market during the crash. Overall,
more than 50% of STTs disappeared from the market during the turbulent periods, and
60% of those STTs who continued to participate in the market during the turbulent periods
hit their inventory constraints. STTs in the futures market exhibited similar participation
patterns. This detailed analysis shows, therefore, that not all STTs behave in the same way
during crashes as they do during normal times.
   Figure 9 plots time-series of the STTs’ inventory capacity for the daily frequency over the
whole sample period (Panels A and B) and intraday inventory capacity on May 19 and May
22 (Panels C and F). At the daily frequency, inventory capacity is defined as follows. First, for
each day, we compute the maximum absolute one-minute median inventory for each trader.
Second, we normalize this number by the maximum for the whole sample period, excluding
May 19 and May 22. Finally, we take the average across all traders. Hence, the larger the
measure, the more constrained STTs are. Panels A and B of Figure 9 show the time series

                                               23
of daily inventory capacity measures for the spot and futures markets, respectively. For
the spot market, the inventory capacity measure reached 80% (100%) on May 19 (May 22),
while for other days in the sample period, it never exceeded 20%. For the futures market,
the picture was similar, although less extreme.
     Though most traders have exhausted their inventory capacity during the crash days, it
might be that they reach their limits during different times of the day. Therefore, Panels
C and F plot STTs’ intraday capacity measure, which is an average ratio of the absolute
value of one-minute median inventory to the whole-sample maximum of the absolute value
of one-minute median inventory, excluding May 19 and May 22, for the spot and futures
markets. We observe that capacity measure increased with the evolution of the crash and
stabilized during the recovery period. On May 19, due to the second event, the capacity
measure continued to increase after recovery had taken place. On May 22, the capacity
measure decreased slowly after the recovery for the spot market and remained constant for
the futures market.

                                  INSERT FIGURE 9 HERE

     Overall, this confirms that STTs tried to “lean against the wind” during the two crashes
in our sample. However, their limited inventory capacity did not allow them to stop the
crash.


D.     The role of MFs and FIIs during fast crashes

     In the earlier sections, we investigated the role of STTs during crashes and recoveries in
the spot and futures markets. We now proceed to examine the role of MFs and FIIs. We
first examine whether MFs and FIIs in our sample are opportunistic buyers and sellers, thus
systematically providing liquidity throughout our sample period. For that purpose, we plot
MFs’ and FIIs’ cumulative end-of-day inventory position since the beginning of our sample


                                               24
period and the minimum and maximum trading price observed during the day. We note that
overnight short-selling was not allowed in the spot market, hence negative inventories in the
spot market should be interpreted as a decrease of the starting inventory position.

                                INSERT FIGURE 10 – 11 HERE

   Panel A of Figures 10 – 11 show that in the spot market, FIIs move with the price,
while MFs in our sample are indeed opportunistic traders:18 they buy when the price goes
down and sell when the price goes up. Panel B of Figures 10 – 11 show that in the futures
market, both FIIs and MFs are opportunistic traders, but their activity is concentrated
around extreme market movements only. Panels C and D of Figure 11 show the end-of-day
cumulative inventory position for MFs that were active on the crash days. We observe that
these MFs were not active before the crash; they bought during the crash and held their
inventory position till the end of our sample period. This behavior suggests that they were
standby liquidity providers and that it took some time for them to deploy their market-
making capital to provide liquidity.
   We now look in more detail at the individual behavior of MFs and FIIs that were active
during the crash days. Tables VIII and IX provide summary statistics for the participation
of different trader categories in the spot and futures markets, respectively, during the crash
days. On the spot market, we show that on the two crash days, there were 9 FIIs and 23
MFs (Panels A and B of Table VIII). FIIs consistently sold during drawdown, recovery, and
normal periods. MFs consistently bought during drawdown, recovery, and normal periods.
We acknowledge that some FIIs bought and some MFs sold during the crash days on the spot
market, but these amounts are negligible relative to FIIs’ and MFs’ total trading volume
during the crash days. FIIs active on the crash days bought 15,000 and sold 650,231 shares on
May 19 and May 22 (i.e., they primarily sold); on other days, in total, they bought 497,817
  18
    Perold and Tierney (1997) document that Numeric Investors behaved in this way when taking positions
based on their fair-value model.


                                                  25
and sold 537,155 shares, therefore buying and selling approximately the same number of
shares. MFs active on the crash days bought (sold) 578,509 (81,269) shares on May 19 and
May 22; on other days, in total, they bought (sold) 83,214 (150,250) shares. Moreover, we
show that during the drawdown period, FIIs sold 142,177 shares and MFs bought 64,880.
During the recovery period, FIIs sold an additional 185,457 shares and MFs bought 171,312.
Finally, it is important to stress that by looking at individual traders’ IDs, we can ensure
that MFs who were the main net buyers during the crash had little trading activity on other
days. This is consistent with slow-moving MF capital.
    Panels C and D of Table VIII show that other LTTs and STTs active on the crash days
buy and sell approximately the same number of shares during the crash, recovery, and normal
periods. The net buying effect of their trading activity is not enough to initiate recovery.
They are also active on other days in our sample period.19
    Table IX provides summary statistics for FIIs’ and MFs’ participation in the futures
market during the crash days. Panels A and B of Table IX show that both FIIs and MFs
mainly bought throughout the crash days. While MFs active in the futures market on the
crash day limited their activity to these two days, FIIs were also active on other days in our
sample period. We show that FIIs have different behavior in the spot and futures markets;
however, these are two different set of traders, and therefore FIIs do not engage in cross-
market arbitrage. Panels C and D of Table IX show that the behavior of OLTTs and STTs
in the futures market is similar to their behavior in the spot market.

                                INSERT TABLES VIII – IX HERE

    In Figures 10 – 11, we showed that MFs in the spot and futures markets and FIIs
in the futures market systematically act as opportunistic traders. There might be multiple
reasons that give rise to such trading patterns. In the following analysis, we test one possible
  19
    Given that most top STTs are active during the crash days, the activity of these traders represents the
majority of STTs’ trading activity on other days as well.


                                                    26
explanation of this behavior. If MFs in the spot and futures markets and FIIs in the futures
market trade as if they had limit prices for buying and selling based on some notion of
“fair-value”, then it should naturally lead to opportunistic trading through patient buying
(selling) at the volume-weighted average price below (above) than the volume-weighted price
of the STTs (i.e., there should be better quality of trade execution).
   To evaluate the quality of trade execution, for each trader l on day k, we compute
the volume-weighted average price of its transactions relative to the daily volume-weighted
average price of all transactions for the buy and sell side separately and regress it on dummy
variables that equal one if a trader belongs to either the FII, MF, or OLTT category; on a
dummy variable that equals one for traders active the crash days, the interaction between
the; and day fixed effects (F Ek ):20



       V W APlk   X
                =   αk F Ek + β1 F IIlk + β2 M Flk + β3 OLT Tlk + β4 F IIlk ∗ Activel +
       V W APk    k                                                                                   (7)
                      + β5 M Flk ∗ Activel + β6 OLT Tlk ∗ Activel + β7 Activel + lk

                                     INSERT TABLE X HERE

   Panel A of Table X shows for the specification, including interaction variables, that MFs
(OLTTs) buy a stock at a price relative to the daily VWAP of all transactions that is 0.22%
(0.14%) lower than the volume-weighted average price of STTs and Small traders in the spot
market, while FIIs active on the crash days buy at a price 0.27% higher than the volume-
weighted average price of STTs and Small traders in the spot market. FIIs also sell stock at
a price the price relative to the daily VWAP of all transactions that is 0.31% lower than the
volume-weighted average price of STTs and Small traders in the spot market. In other words,
MFs and OLTTs are patient buyers, while FIIs are impatient sellers in the spot market, and
  20
      We do not use aggregation for trader categories as within each category, there might be traders with
different strategies.


                                                   27
this effect is not solely driven by those MFs and FIIs active during the crash days; rather,
it is a general characteristic of the traders that belong to these categories during our sample
period. Panel B of Table X presents the same analysis for the futures market. We show that
in the futures market, both MFs and FIIs are patient buyers with a discount of 0.74% and
0.30%, respectively, though FIIs active on crash days got a smaller discount than FIIs that
are not active on the crash days got on their buy transactions. Hence, MFs in the spot and
futures markets and FIIs in the futures market are slow-moving not because they are slow
to react to the market signal, but because they wait till the price hits their buying limit
estimate from the “fair-value” model.
    So far, we show that MFs in the spot and futures markets and FIIs in the futures market
(i) are slow-moving and patient traders (ii) and get a better quality of trade execution.
We next investigate whether MFs in the spot and futures markets and FIIs in the futures
market Granger-cause the recovery versus whether recovery Granger-causes MFs in the spot
and futures markets and FIIs in the futures market to appear on the market. In order to do
that, we estimate the vector-autoregression model on one-minute mid-quote returns and the
marketable order imbalance from different trader groups. We use BIC criterion to decide on
the number of lags, n. We compute the marketable order imbalance for each trader group i
as a ratio of buy volume initiated by trader group i minus sell volume initiated by this trader
group i, and scale it with overall buyer- minus seller-initiated volume in the market during
a one-minute time interval t. In order to determine which order initiates the transaction,
we match trades with respective quotes and compare the timestamps of the two sides of the
transaction. The order with the latest timestamp is the one that initiates the transaction.21

                             Buyer initiated volumei,t − Seller inititated volumei,t
              M OIBi,t =                                                                                  (8)
                              Buyer initiated volumet + Seller inititated volumet
   21
      In case orders on the two sides of the transaction have the same timestamp, we cannot determine which
order is initiating the trade. However, there are very few such unclassified cases: 0.76% and 1.22% of trading
volume for the spot and futures markets, respectively.



                                                     28
                         n
                         X                           n X
                                                     X
            Rett = α +           β0,lag Rett−lag +               βi,lag M OIBi,t−lag + t
                         lag=1                       lag=1   i
                                 n                           n                                      (9)
                                 X                           X       X
            M OIBi,t = α +               β0,lag Rett−lag +               βi,lag M OIBi,t−lag + t
                                 lag=1                       lag=1   i

   Panels A and B of Table XI present the results of Granger-causality tests (for brevity,
we report only those test results that we are interested in) for the spot and futures markets,
respectively. For the spot market, we show that the marketable order imbalance from FIIs
and MFs Granger-cause returns on the crash days at a 10% significance level, while returns
do not Granger-cause the marketable order imbalance of either FIIs or MFs. On the contrary,
during non-crash days, the marketable order imbalance of MFs and FIIs do not Granger-
cause returns, nor vice versa. This is consistent with FIIs in the spot market causing a crash
and MFs in the spot market causing the recovery.
   For the futures market, neither FIIs’ marketable order imbalance nor that of MFs Granger-
cause returns on crash days, while returns Granger-cause FIIs’ marketable order imbalance
on crash days. This is indicative of the crash and recovery starting in the spot market and
the futures market catching up later.
   We find that MFs induce the recovery process in the spot market; however, it takes a while
for them to step in. They act as standby liquidity providers who are slow in deploying their
market-making capital. Our statistical tests confirm that buying by MFs leads to recovery,
but recovery does not lead MFs to buy. Our findings are consistent with Keim (1999), who
expresses the view that MFs are natural liquidity providers in the stocks they hold, and Da,
Gao, and Jagannathan (2010), who find that the Dimensional Fund Advisors Micro Cap
fund added 20.5 basis points per quarter to performance through liquidity provision.
   Finally, we investigate whether the combined behavior of the different traders has a
significant impact on price discovery. Therefore, we perform a vector-autoregression analysis
across the spot and futures markets with number of lags selected by BIC criteria:


                                                     29
                                 n
                                 X                                n
                                                                  X
              Retspot,t = α +           β1,lag Retspot,t−lag +            β2,lag Retf ut,t−lag + t
                                lag=1                            lag=1
                                  n                               n                                   (10)
                                X                                X
              Retf ut,t = α +           β1,lag Retf ut,t−lag +           β2,lag Retspot,t−lag + t
                                lag=1                            lag=1

Panel C of Table XI reports Granger causality test for equation (10). We show that during
normal times, the futures market Granger-causes spot market movement in line with the
trading volume almost five times larger in the futures market than in the spot market.
However, during crash days, returns in both markets Granger-cause each other. This is in
line with the fact that large selling pressure from FIIs occurred only in the spot market,
while both markets experienced fast crashes.



                                        V.      Conclusion
   Stock price crashes, though infrequent, do occur with adverse consequences. The Flash
Crash of May 6, 2010, has drawn the attention of regulators and exchanges to the need
to understand the role of different types of traders during crashes and their recoveries. In
particular, there is an ongoing debate in the literature on the role of high-frequency traders
(HFTs), important traders who contribute to a large fraction of the trading volume and who
are characterized by their superior speed and limited inventory carrying capacity.
   Based on a dataset with unique identifiers for each broker-dealer-trader combination
across the spot and futures markets, along with their legal entity type, we provide a compre-
hensive analysis of the interactions among different types of traders. We examine the role of
short-term traders (STTs), who, like HFTs, carry little intraday and overnight inventories;
cross-market traders (a subset of STTs), who trade across the spot and futures markets; Mu-
tual Funds (MFs), who hold a large inventory of stocks and can tolerate deviations from their
desired inventory positions for a longer period of time; and Foreign Institutional Investors


                                                     30
(FIIs), who trade based on their global perspective.
   We find that MFs and FIIs trade mainly in the spot market or the futures market, but
not in both markets in our sample. We find that STTs are the major liquidity providers in
both the spot and futures markets – they have a major share of the trading volume as well
as the orders on both sides of the book in the proximity to the best bid-offer level. MFs are
patient traders trading much less than STTs, but with better execution quality. In line with
the previous literature where large sell orders initiate crashes, we find that large sell orders
by FIIs put a downward pressure on the stock price. Buying by STTs was not enough to
prevent the fast crashes observed in our sample and their buying slowed down as the crash
progressed. During the first crash, MFs, though slow to move in, started buying in sufficient
quantities to help stop the crash and initiate price recovery. In the second crash, trading
was halted. When trading resumed, MFs once again started buying in sufficient quantities
to promote the subsequent price recovery.
   We show that during normal times, changes in futures price Granger-caused changes in
spot price. This should be expected, since it was easier to take long as well as short positions
in futures; trading costs were higher in the spot market, where overnight short positions were
not allowed; and futures had higher (five times) trading volume than spot. However, both
fast crashes as well as their recoveries originated in the spot market and spilled over into the
futures market. This shift in causality during crashes and recoveries resulted in Granger-
causality going both ways during the two crash days (i.e., spot and futures price movements
Granger-caused each other).
   Our findings emphasize the role of well-capitalized standby liquidity providers like mutual
funds who can redeploy capital into the market when the rewards are sufficient, thereby
providing much needed liquidity. This process takes some time, since such liquidity providers
have to understand the reasons for the crash and may also require a large price concession.
Circuit breakers, while providing the needed time for standby liquidity providers to move
in, may not provide the necessary incentives. To the extent that there are no alternative

                                              31
mechanisms to provide the necessary incentives for attracting standby liquidity providers,
rare crashes may be inevitable in markets where competitive forces have resulted in thinly
capitalized intermediaries (STT) being the de facto liquidity providers. As such our findings
suggest that the ample and cheap liquidity during normal times necessarily comes at the
cost of infrequent crashes and that no obvious regulatory remedy exists that would lead to
a pareto improvement of this trade-off.




                                             32
                                     References
Bellia, M., K. Christensen, A. Kolokolov, L. Pelizzon, and R. Renò (2018). High-frequrncy
  trading during flash crashes: Walk of fame or hall of shame? Working Paper .

Brogaard, J., B. Hagströmer, L. L. Norden, and R. Riordan (2015). Trading fast and slow:
  Colocation and market quality. Review of Financial Studies 28 (12), 3407–3443.

Brogaard, J., T. Hendershott, and R. Riordan (2014). High-frequency trading and price
  discovery. Review of Financial Studies 27 (8), 2267–2306.

Brogaard, J., R. Riordan, A. Shkilko, and K. Sokolov (2014). High-frequency trading and
  extreme price movements. Available at SSRN .

CFTC and SEC (2010). Findings regarding the market events of May 6, 2010. Report of the
 Staffs of the CFTC and SEC to the Joint Advisory Committee on Emerging Regulatory
 Issues.

Christensen, K., R. C. Oomen, and R. Renò (2016). The drift burst hypothesis. Working
 paper .

Comerton-Forde, C., T. Hendershott, C. M. Jones, P. C. Moulton, and M. S. Seasholes
  (2010). Time variation in liquidity: The role of market-maker inventories and revenues.
  The Journal of Finance 65 (1), 295–331.

Da, Z., P. Gao, and R. Jagannathan (2010). Impatient trading, liquidity provision, and stock
 selection by mutual funds. Review of Financial Studies 24 (3), 675–720.

Duffie, D. (2010). Presidential address: Asset price dynamics with slow-moving capital. The
 Journal of finance 65 (4), 1237–1267.

Easley, D., M. M. L. de Prado, and M. O’Hara (2012). Flow toxicity and liquidity in a
  high-frequency world. Review of Financial Studies 25 (5), 1457–1493.

Hendershott, T., C. M. Jones, and A. J. Menkveld (2011). Does algorithmic trading improve
  liquidity? Journal of Finance 66 (1), 1–33.

Hendershott, T. and A. J. Menkveld (2014). Price pressures. Journal of Financial Eco-
  nomics 114 (3), 405–423.

Hendershott, T. and M. S. Seasholes (2007). Market maker inventories and stock prices. The
  American Economic Review 97 (2), 210–214.



                                            33
Johnson, H., B. F. Van Ness, and R. A. Van Ness (2017). Are all odd-lots the same? Odd-lot
  transactions by order submission and trader type. Journal of Banking and Finance 79,
  1–11.

Kahraman, C. and H. E. Tookes (2017). Trader leverage and liquidity. Journal of Finance.

Keim, D. B. (1999). An analysis of mutual fund design: the case of investing in small-cap
  stocks1. Journal of Financial Economics 51 (2), 173–194.

Kirilenko, A. A., A. S. Kyle, M. Samadi, and T. Tuzun (2017). The Flash Crash: The impact
  of high frequency trading on an electronic market. Journal of Finance 72.

Korajczyk, R. A. and D. Murphy (2016). High frequency market making to large institutional
 trades. Working paper .

Kyle, A. and A. Obizhaeva (2016). Large bets and stock market crashes. Working paper .

Levine, R. (2005). Finance and growth: Theory and evidence. Handbook of Economic
  Growth 1, 865–934.

Lyle, M. R. and J. P. Naughton (2015). How does algorithmic trading improve market
  quality? Working paper .

Malinova, K., A. Park, and R. Riordan (2013). Do retail traders suffer from high frequency
 traders? Working paper .

Menkveld, A. J. (2013). High frequency trading and the new market makers. Journal of
 Financial Markets 16 (4), 712–740.

Menkveld, A. J. and T. Wang (2013). How do designated market makers create value for
 small-caps? Journal of Financial Markets 16 (3), 571–603.

Menkveld, A. J. and B. Z. Yueshen (2018). The Flash Crash: A cautionary tale about highly
 fragmented markets. Management Science forthcoming.

Mitchell, M., L. H. Pedersen, and T. Pulvino (2007). Slow moving capital. American
 Exonomic Review 97, 215–220.

Naik, N. Y. and P. K. Yadav (2003). Do dealer firms manage inventory on a stock-by-stock
  or a portfolio basis? Journal of Financial Economics 69 (2), 325–353.

Perold, A. F. and B. J. Tierney (1997). numeric investors lp. Harvard Business Case 9-298-
  012.



                                           34
Raman, V. and P. Yadav (2013). The who, why, and how well of order revisions: An analysis
  of limit order trading. Working paper .

Reiss, P. C. and I. M. Werner (1998). Does risk sharing motivate interdealer trading? The
  Journal of Finance 53 (5), 1657–1703.

SEC (2010). Concept release on equity market structure. Release No. 34-61358, File No.
  S7-02-10 .

Venkataraman, K. and A. C. Waisburd (2007). The value of the designated market maker.
  Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 3 (42), 735–758.




                                           35
                                    Table I Number of traders

This table shows the number and proportion of traders who are active in the spot and futures
markets. We divide traders into those who execute trades on both sides of the market, or on only
one side of the market, or do not execute trades at all, separately for the spot and futures markets.
We also divide traders into those who execute trades in both spot and futures markets, only in the
spot market, only in the futures market, or do not execute trades at all. For the futures market,
we include only those traders who submit orders and/or execute trades for contracts with maturity
dates within the same month as the transaction occurs.

              Panel A: Spot Market      Panel B: Futures Market     Panel C: Spot and Futures Market

Buy & Sell   76,343       70.65%        30,966          86.13%      Spot & Futures    5,362     3.89%
Only Buy      15,317      14.18%          941            2.62%      Only Spot        92,989    67.47%
Only Sell      6,691       6.19%         1,253           3.49%      Only Futures     27,798    20.17%
No Execution 9,701         8.98%         2,791           7.76%      No Execution     11,681     8.47%
Total        108,052      100.00%       35,951          100.00%     Total            137,830   100.00%




                                      Table II Order types

This table shows the number and proportion of new orders, cancellations, and modifications for
the spot and futures markets and for buy and sell sides, respectively. Only regular book orders
are included in the sample (i.e., we exclude stop-loss orders). For the futures market, we include
only those orders for contracts with maturity dates within the same month when the order was
submitted / modified / cancelled.

                       Panel A: Spot Market                           Panel B: Futures Market
                   Buy                           Sell                  Buy                        Sell

 New    1,163,764 70.93%              1,173,244 70.59%            649,907 62.46%           642,629 63.13%
 Cancel  271,342 16.54%                254,006 15.28%             244,271 23.48%           207,005 20.33%
 Modify 205,615 12.53%                 234,905 14.13%             146,309 14.06%           168,388 16.54%




                                                    36
                                                       Table III Trading volume per trader group

     This table shows the number of traders in each trader group, the number of shares bought and sold by each trader group, as well as the
     total trading volume and proportion of trading volume attributable to each trader group (for traders active on one market only and on
     both markets). For the futures market, we include only transactions for the contracts with expiry dates within the same month as the
     transaction occurs. We classify traders into three categories: long-term traders (LTTs), short-term traders (STTs), and small traders
     (Small). We further split the LTT category into: foriegn instituitions (FIIs), domestic mutual funds (MFs), and other long-termtraders
     (OLTTs).

                                                                         Panel A: Spot market
                               Active in spot market only                                         Active on both markets                           Grand Total
              # of traders      Buy          Sell        Total (Buy+Sell)      # of traders      Buy           Sell        Total (Buy+Sell)         (Buy+Sell)

     LTT        1,471        17,578,158   17,764,266     35,342,424   15.6%        219         7,742,075    7,505,290      15,247,365    6.7%    50,589,789   22.3%
37




      FII        107          5,306,538   7,000,068      12,306,606    5.4%         20        1,747,206     1,934,849      3,682,055     1.6%    15,988,661    7.1%
      MF         262         2,873,100    5,028,242       7,901,342    3.5%          6          127,500      158,950        286,450      0.1%    8,187,792     3.6%
      OLTT      1,102         9,398,520   5,735,956      15,134,476    6.7%        193         5,867,369    5,411,491      11,278,860    5.0%    26,413,336   11.7%
     STT        5,597        28,810,041   28,967,762     57,777,803   25.5%        950        40,210,932    40,394,593     80,605,525   35.6%   138,383,328   61.1%
     Small      90,646       18,637,725   18,349,047     36,986,772   16.3%        513          225,301      223,274        448,575      0.2%    37,435,347   16.5%
                                                                                                                                                226,408,464

                                                                       Panel B: Futures market
                              Active on futures market only                                       Active on both markets                           Grand Total
              # of traders      Buy          Sell        Total (Buy+Sell)      # of traders      Buy           Sell        Total (Buy+Sell)         (Buy+Sell)

     LTT         6,613       132,127,500 137,226,750 269,354,250 27.5%             219         21,972,750   16,096,500    38,069,250     3.9%   307,423,500 31.3%
      FII          40         5,871,000   3,303,750    9,174,750  0.9%             20          7,173,000     2,921,250    10,094,250     1.0%    19,269,000 2.0%
      MF           9           668,250     114,000      782,250   0.1%              6           151,500       216,000       367,500      0.0%     1,149,750  0.1%
      OLTT       6,564       125,588,250 133,809,000 259,397,250 26.4%             193        14,648,250    12,959,250    27,607,500     2.8%   287,004,750 29.3%
     STT        19,574       190,495,500 191,208,750 381,704,250 38.9%             950        139,446,000   139,052,250   278,498,250   28.4%   660,202,500 67.3%
     Small      5,628         5,896,500   6,310,500   12,207,000 1.2%              513          635,250       678,750      1,314,000     0.1%   13,521,000 1.4%
                                                                                                                                                981,147,000
                                  Table IV Trading activity

This table shows the average daily trading volume between different categories. For the futures
market, we include only transactions for the contracts with expiry dates within the same month
as the transaction occurs. We classify traders into three categories: long-term traders (LTTs),
short-term traders (STTs), and small traders (Small). Daily averages are reported in 100,000
shares.

                                       Spot Market             Futures Market

                    LTT with LTT          1.45         6.8%         8.47        10.2%
                    LTT with STT          5.64        26.4%        34.41        41.6%
                    LTT with Small        1.00         4.7%         0.67         0.8%
                    STT with STT          7.92        37.1%        37.59        45.4%
                    STT with Small        4.64        21.7%         1.59         1.9%
                    Small with Small      0.71        3.3%          0.01        0.0%

                    Total                 21.36       100.0%       82.74        100.0%




                                                     38
                                           Table V Trading activity regression during fast crashes

     This table shows the average daily trading volume between different trader categories and the results of the trading activity regression
     estimation based on one-minute intervals from 16-May-2006 till 25-May-2006 for the spot (Panel A) and futures (Panel B) markets. We
     regress one-minute trading volume relative to the total daily volume between different trader categories in a particular interval on a set
     of all possible trader-pair dummy variables. We differentiate between buying and selling volumes (see equation (2)). We also include
     interaction with down/up dummy variables defined as -/+ 30 minutes from the trough of the crash. We estimate regression without a
     constant. We use day and time fixed effects. We cluster standard errors by day. ***, **, * denotes significance level at 1%, 5%, and 10%,
     respectively. t-stats are reported in parentheses. “ Down=Up” column contains F -stats and respective p-values for the test of equality of
     the coefficients during drawdown and recovery periods. We classify traders into three categories: long-term traders (LTTs), short-term
     traders (STTs), and small traders (Small). Daily averages are reported in 100,000 shares. Regression coefficients are reported in basis
     points.

                                                        Panel A: Spot market                             Panel B: Futures market
                    Sell           Buy      Mean     Normal     Down        Up       Down=Up   Mean     Normal     Down         Up     Down=Up

                    LTT            LTT      2.233    3.006***    -0.050   7.305***    48.88    11.207  5.069***   -1.283**    3.287       5.4
39




                                                       (4.64)   (-0.09)    (6.68)     [0.00]             (8.97)    (-2.52)    (1.65)    [0.06]
                    LTT            STT      3.295   4.464***    5.341**     5.821      0.01    16.061 6.950***    3.902***    2.153      1.65
                                                       (8.73)    (3.22)    (1.24)     [0.94]            (22.60)    (17.84)    (1.42)    [0.25]
                    LTT            Small    0.604    1.582***    1.548*    1.290*      2.26     0.223  0.940**      -0.251    0.492     14.04
                                                       (5.46)    (2.48)    (2.04)     [0.19]             (2.99)    (-0.58)    (0.96)    [0.01]
                    STT            LTT      3.082   4.381***      0.580   7.813**      8.42    18.421 7.832***       0.493   6.252**     3.01
                                                       (7.16)    (0.67)    (3.95)     [0.03]            (21.40)     (0.42)    (2.84)    [0.13]
                    STT            STT      9.143   11.527***   5.873*      2.631      0.85    28.849 11.541***      4.226    2.139      0.21
                                                      (10.76)    (2.12)    (1.79)     [0.40]            (30.45)     (1.48)    (1.17)    [0.67]
                    STT            Small    2.472    3.897***   2.257*      1.772      5.08     0.510  1.030**      -0.146    0.674     13.25
                                                       (7.32)    (2.04)    (1.50)     [0.07]             (3.16)    (-0.32)    (1.16)    [0.01]
                    Small          LTT      0.534    1.510***    -0.062     2.554       3.4     0.482 1.079***      -0.147    0.600      6.72
                                                       (5.01)   (-0.13)    (1.54)     [0.13]             (3.83)    (-0.39)    (1.03)    [0.04]
                    Small          STT      2.508    4.033***     0.763     0.612      0.16     0.954 1.259***       0.657    0.766      0.31
                                                       (8.47)    (0.71)    (0.86)     [0.71]             (4.87)     (0.99)    (1.21)     [0.6]
                    Small          Small    0.743    1.825***     0.619     1.012       2.9     0.006  0.862**      -0.310    0.381     12.19
                                                       (5.22)    (0.87)    (1.27)     [0.15]             (2.87)    (-0.81)    (0.82)    [0.01]

                    Day FE                                            Yes                                               Yes
                    Time FE                                           Yes                                               Yes
                    Cluster SE                                       By Day                                            By Day
                    Normalize                                        By Day                                            By Day

                    Observations                                      17,289                                           20,259
                    Adjusted R2                                       0.358                                            0.449
     Table VI Inventory sensitivity to price movements during fast crashes

This table shows the results of the inventory-sensitivity regression estimation based on one-minute
intervals from 16-May-2006 till 25-May-2006 for the spot (Panel A) and futures (Panel B) markets
(see equation (5)). We regress changes in inventory in the spot market for STTs, FIIs, and MFs on
concurrent return and control variables omitted for brevity (lagged spot/futures inventory, lagged
changes in spot/futures inventory). We also include interaction with down/up dummy variables
defined as -/+ 30 minutes from the trough of the crash. For the futures inventory computation, we
use only transactions for the contracts with expiry dates within the same month as the transaction
occurs. We use day fixed effects. We use robust standard errors. ***, **, * denotes significance
level at 1%, 5%, and 10%, respectively. We classify traders into three categories: long-term traders
(LTTs), short-term traders (STTs), and small traders (Small).

                                             Panel A: Spot market
                                                          STT
                                                                                   FII       MF
                                          STT -All     STT-Spot     STT-Both

                    Spot Return            69.02**     -80.72***    138.08***    93.78***    24.36
                                            (2.07)       (-3.00)      (3.99)       (3.27)   (1.00)
                    Down*Spot Return      -274.02**       69.91     -346.47***    294.02*    31.52
                                            (-2.53)      (1.32)       (-3.33)      (1.81)   (0.55)
                    Up*Spot Return        -111.07**     87.46**     -174.03***     -55.02   -28.11
                                            (-2.50)      (2.25)       (-2.86)     (-1.18)   (-0.52)
                    Down                    3.26**        1.16        1.58**        -0.36    3.08*
                                            (2.44)       (0.88)       (2.35)      (-0.53)   (1.93)
                    Up                       -0.35        -0.36        0.09      -8.44***     3.61
                                            (-0.33)      (-0.36)      (0.13)      (-2.82)   (1.13)
                    Constant                 -0.57         0.24       -0.50*        0.06     -0.09
                                            (-1.63)      (1.05)       (-1.92)      (0.37)   (-0.62)

                    Observations            1,909        1,909        1,909       1,909     1,909
                    Adjusted R2             0.162        0.089        0.108       0.319     0.186

                                           Panel B: Futures market
                                                          STT
                                                                                   FII       MF
                                          STT-All     STT-Futures   STT-Both

                    Futures Return        -235.59**       42.38     -316.23*** 134.98***    -19.58
                                            (-2.44)      (0.61)       (-5.71)    (3.12)     (-0.55)
                    Down*Futures Return     161.79      -109.11      278.69** -228.72***     23.59
                                            (0.63)      (-0.48)       (2.06)     (-3.13)    (0.64)
                    Up*Futures Return        3.38        -96.71      206.40**   -233.58*     39.53
                                            (0.02)      (-1.00)       (2.54)     (-1.83)    (0.99)
                    Down                    5.95**      2.76**        3.32**      -0.25      -0.20
                                            (1.99)       (2.57)       (2.25)     (-0.57)    (-1.46)
                    Up                     -3.76**        0.76        -2.38*      2.37        0.49
                                            (-2.19)      (0.71)       (-1.71)    (1.52)     (1.37)
                    Constant                 -0.98      -1.28**         0.15    1.29***      -0.06
                                            (-1.22)     (-2.23)       (0.31)     (3.04)     (-0.56)

                    Observations            1,909        1,909        1,909       1,909     1,909
                    Adjusted R2             0.099        0.068        0.111       0.280     0.292

                    Day FE                  Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes
                    Time FE                 Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes
                    Robust SE               Yes           Yes          Yes         Yes       Yes

                                                        40
            Table VII Cash flow regression for STTs during fast crashes

This table shows the results of the cash flow regression estimation based on one-minute intervals
from 16-May-2006 till 25-May-2006 for the spot (Panel A) and futures (Panel B) markets. We
regress cumulative one-minute cash flows for STTs on crash and recovery dummy variables defined
as -/+ 30 minutes from the trough of the crash (see equation (6)). We use day and time fixed
effects. We cluster standard errors by day. ***, **, * denotes significance level at 1%, 5%, and 10%,
respectively. t-stats are reported in parentheses. For the futures market, we use only transactions
for the contracts with maturity dates within the same month as the transaction occurs. We classify
traders into three categories: long-term traders (LTTs), short-term traders (STTs), and small
traders (Small).

                                         Panel A: Spot market   Panel B: Futures market
                                          (1)        (2)         (1)          (2)

                          Down           -0.269     -0.241      -2.089      -2.289
                                         (-0.94)    (-0.71)     (-1.81)     (-1.77)
                          Up              0.296      0.300       2.486       2.446
                                         (1.19)     (1.35)      (1.10)      (1.03)
                          Constant       -0.029     -0.093      0.352*       0.545
                                         (-0.65)    (-0.59)     (2.37)      (1.07)

                          Day FE           No       Yes           No         Yes
                          Time FE          No       Yes           No         Yes
                          Cluster SE     By Day    By Day       By Day      By Day

                          Observations   1,562       1,562      1,562        1,562
                          Adjusted R2    0.002      -0.000      0.015        0.016




                                                           41
                                Table VIII Activity of traders during the two crash days: Spot market

     This table shows the activity of traders during the two crash days in the spot market. We document the number of active traders; buy
     and sell volume for the crash, recovery, and normal periods during either May 19, 2006 or May 22, 2006; and also the trading volume
     on other days in our sample for the traders active on the crash days. Crash/recovery periods are measured as -/+30 minutes from the
     trough of the crash. We split all active traders on the crash days based on their activity during the crash periods.

                                                             May 19 and May 22, 2006                                      Other days
          Active during crash                             Crash             Recovery                 Normal                   Normal
                                    # of traders
                                                    Buy           Sell    Buy       Sell       Buy            Sell      Buy            Sell
                                                                     Panel A: FII
         All                             9            -      142,177         -    185,457     15,000     322,597      497,817      537,155
         No                              4            -          -           -       -        15,000     117,825      334,095      185,850
         Yes                             5            -      142,177         -    185,457        -       204,772      163,722      351,305
                                                                     Panel B: MF
42




         All                            23         64,880      1,429     220,132 22,590      293,506      57,250      83,214       150,250
         No                             18            -          -        48,820 22,590      197,698      55,500      26,000       114,500
         Yes                             5         64,880      1,429     171,312     -        95,808       1,750      57,214       35,750
                                                                   Panel C: OLTT
         All                            218        60,516     77,438     178,833 184,164     580,937     479,794     4,965,863    4,415,356
         No                             158           -          -       153,088 94,827      416,086     170,945     1,622,123    1,367,612
         Yes                            60         60,516    77,438       25,745 89,337      164,851     308,849     3,343,740    3,047,744
                                                                     Panel D: STT
         All                           1,099       482,888   436,390     462,004 473,347     2,468,184 2,535,794     47,166,445 47,416,618
         No                             636           -          -        76,555 73,874       637,397   651,622      10,769,273 10,942,637
         Yes                            463        482,888   436,390     385,449 399,473     1,830,787 1,884,172     36,397,172 36,473,981
                                                                    Panel E: Small
         All                          12,038       150,320   101,170     117,760 113,171     636,518     598,710     4,599,521    4,576,813
         No                            8,723          -          -        70,336 42,170      413,719     372,067     2,624,039    2,610,454
         Yes                           3,315       150,320   101,170      47,424 71,001      222,799     226,643     1,975,482    1,966,359

         Total                        13,387       758,604 758,604       978,729   978,729   3,994,145   3,994,145   57,312,860   57,096,192
                                Table IX Activity of traders during the two crash days: Futures market

     This table shows the activity of traders during the two crash days in the futures market. We document the number of active traders; buy
     and sell volume for the crash, recovery, and normal periods during either May 19, 2006 or May 22, 2006; and also the trading volume
     of the traders active on the crash days on other days in our sample. Crash/recovery periods are measured as -/+30 minutes from the
     trough of the crash. We split all active traders on the crash days based on their activity during the crash periods.

                                                                  May 19 and May 22, 2006                                          Other days
          Active during crash                            Crash                  Recovery                    Normal                      Normal
                                  # of traders
                                                   Buy           Sell        Buy         Sell         Buy            Sell       Buy               Sell
                                                                      Panel A: FII
          All                         11          63,750         6,000   244,500    58,500          291,750      27,750       3,918,750     1,767,750
          No                           5             -             -      99,000    47,250          129,000       750         1,672,500     1,108,500
          Yes                          6          63,750         6,000   145,500    11,250          162,750      27,000       2,246,250      659,250
                                                                      Panel B: MF
43




          All                          5              -         -         32,250       -            499,500           -        41,250            67,500
          No                           5              -         -         32,250       -            499,500           -        41,250            67,500
          Yes                          0              -         -            -         -               -              -           -                 -
                                                                     Panel C: OLTT
          All                        1231         450,000   631,500      711,750   629,250         3,819,750    3,980,250    67,514,250     68,700,750
          No                          897             -         -        429,000   350,250         2,448,750    2,405,250    39,138,750     41,028,000
          Yes                        334          450,000   631,500      282,750   279,000         1,371,000    1,575,000    28,375,500     27,672,750
                                                                      Panel D: STT
          All                        1530        1,208,250 1,031,250    1,046,250 1,314,750        7,023,000    7,457,250    203,295,000 202,553,250
          No                         1032             -         -        201,000   204,000         1,618,500    1,916,250     51,138,750 50,891,250
          Yes                        498         1,208,250 1,031,250     845,250 1,110,750         5,404,500    5,541,000    152,156,250 151,662,000
                                                                     Panel E: Small
          All                         624          21,000    74,250       28,500    60,750          99,000       267,750      1,060,500      773,250
          No                          506             -         -         27,000    56,250          90,000       256,500       851,250       625,500
          Yes                         118          21,000    74,250       1,500      4,500           9,000       11,250        209,250       147,750

          Total                      3401        1,743,000   1,743,000     2,063,250   2,063,250   11,733,000   11,733,000   275,829,750   273,862,500
                              Table X Quality of LTTs’ trade execution

This table shows the regression for the terms of execution faced by LTTs as compared to STTs
and Small traders (see equation (7)) separately for buy and sell volume. As a dependent variable,
we use the volume-weighted average price for each trader relative to the volume-weighted average
price for all traders during the day. We further split the LTT category into: foreign institutions
(FIIs), domestic mutual funds (MFs), and other long-term traders (OLTTs). Active is a dummy
variable that equals one if a trader was active during 19 and/or 22 of May 2006. We use day fixed
effects. We cluster standard errors by day and trader. ***, **, * denotes significance level at 1%,
5%, and 10%, respectively. t-stats are reported in parentheses.

                                 Panel A: Spot market                                   Panel B: Futures market
                           Buy                           Sell                         Buy                          Sell
                    (1)            (2)           (3)              (4)         (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)

 FII               0.11            0.06       -0.34***        -0.31***     -0.21***       -0.30***        -0.04            0.16
                  (0.95)         (0.43)        (-3.60)         (-2.77)      (-2.73)        (-3.08)       (-0.25)         (1.09)
 MF              -0.26**         -0.22*         -0.12           -0.07      -0.92***       -0.74***        -0.23           -0.29
                 (-2.00)         (-1.82)       (-1.19)         (-0.71)      (-2.73)        (-2.68)       (-0.95)        (-1.06)
 OLTT            -0.18**         -0.14*         -0.04           -0.02       -0.06**         -0.03         -0.02           -0.02
                 (-2.35)         (-1.86)       (-1.01)         (-0.47)      (-2.32)        (-0.84)       (-1.20)        (-0.67)
 FII*Active                      0.27**                         -0.23                       0.23*                       -0.59**
                                 (2.04)                        (-0.88)                     (1.89)                       (-2.10)
 MF*Active                        -0.16                         -0.34                       -0.70                          0.31
                                 (-0.30)                       (-1.28)                     (-0.68)                       (1.07)
 OLTT*Active                      -0.08                         -0.06                       -0.06                         -0.01
                                 (-0.91)                       (-0.82)                     (-1.52)                      (-0.37)
 Active                         -0.09***                        -0.02                     -0.08***                        -0.01
                                 (-4.51)                       (-1.43)                     (-3.47)                      (-0.57)
 Constant        99.99***      100.01***      100.05***      100.05***     99.99***      100.00***      100.09***      100.09***
                (57,540.45)   (23,668.04)    (117,955.45)   (36,376.13)   (14,102.95)   (10,952.60)    (21,242.53)    (17,034.93)

 Observations    265,362         265,362       254,224          254,224    119,550          119,550      123,559          123,559
 Adjusted R2      0.018           0.019         0.031            0.031      0.010            0.011        0.010            0.010
 Day FE                                   Yes                                                       Yes
 Clustered SE                      By Trader and Day                                         By Trader and Day




                                                                 44
                                   Table XI Granger-causality

This table shows the results of the Granger-causality tests for a vector-autoregression for one-
minute returns and marketable order imbalances from different trader categories (see equation (9))
for the spot (Panel A) and futures (Panel B) markets. Panel C shows the Granger-causality tests
for a vector-autoregression for one-minute returns in the spot and the futures markets (see equation
(10)). We estimate vector-autoregression for the crash days and for the four non-crash days. We
classify traders into three categories: long-term traders (LTTs), short-term traders (STTs), and
small traders (Small). We further split the LTT category into: foreign institutions (FIIs), domestic
mutual funds (MFs), and other long-term traders (OLTTs). For brevity, we report only those
Granger causality tests that are relevant for our analysis.

                                       19-22 of May                        16-25 of May, excl crash days
                  Equation   Excluded       Chi2      p-value        Equation    Excluded      Chi2    p-value

                                                   Panel A: Spot market

                  Ret        MOIB FII      2.921      0.087          Ret         MOIB FII      0.806       0.369
                  Ret        MOIB MF       10.321     0.001          Ret         MOIB MF       0.110       0.740

                  MOIB FII   Ret            0.080     0.777          MOIB FII    Ret           0.811       0.368
                  MOIB FII   MOIB MF        1.249     0.264          MOIB FII    MOIB MF       0.045       0.833

                  MOIB MF    Ret            2.541     0.111          MOIB MF Ret               1.331       0.249
                  MOIB MF    MOIB FII       0.060     0.806          MOIB MF MOIB FII          1.180       0.277

                                               Panel B: Futures market

                  Ret        MOIB FII       0.048     0.827          Ret         MOIB FII      2.936       0.087
                  Ret        MOIB MF        1.307     0.253          Ret         MOIB MF       0.133       0.715

                  MOIB FII   Ret            4.333     0.037          MOIB FII    Ret           0.292       0.589
                  MOIB FII   MOIB MF        0.295     0.587          MOIB FII    MOIB MF       0.889       0.346

                  MOIB MF    Ret            0.563     0.453          MOIB MF Ret               0.526       0.468
                  MOIB MF    MOIB FII       0.038     0.846          MOIB MF MOIB FII          0.003       0.956

                                         Panel C: Spot and Futures markets

                  Ret Spot   Ret Fut        9.95       0.00          Ret Spot    Ret Fut      235.92       0.00

                  Ret Fut    Ret Spot       15.26      0.00          Ret Fut     Ret Spot      1.30        0.52




                                                                45
                                                          Figure 1. Trader Classification

This figure shows the trader classification scheme used in this paper.
                        All Traders
                            0


                                         Tr
                        75




                                            ad
                        ≤




                                             ing
                   me




                                                 vo
                   lu




                                                    lu
                vo




                                                     me
           ing




                                                         >
           ad




                                                          75
        Tr




                                                              0




 Small Traders                                   Other Traders
                                                     %



                                                                            En
                                                  10




                                                                             d-
                                                                                 of
                                                 ≤




                                                                                  -d
                                            ry




                                                                                   ay
                                             o
                                          nt




                                                                                       In
                                       ve




                                                                                         ve
                                     In




                                                                                            nt
                                 ay




                                                                                               o
                                                                                              ry
                                -d




                                                                                                   >
                                of
                            d-




                                                                                                   10
                        En




                                                                                                           %




 Short-Term Traders (STTs)                                                        Long-Term Traders (LTTs)
                                                                                                                n   ficatio




                                                                                                                              Le
                                                                             on                                                 gal
                                                                      ficati                                                          cla
                                                                  ssi                                                                    ssi
                                                                                                       Legal classi




                                                          l   cla                                                                           fica
                                                                                                                                                 t
                                                     Lega                                                                                         ion




   Foreign Institutions (FIIs)                                                    Mutual Funds (MFs)                                        Other Long-Term Traders (OLTTs)




                                                                                                        46
                                                                                   Figure 2. Fast crashes

This figure shows the dynamics of the mid-quote in the spot and futures markets, together
with NIFTY prices at a one-minute frequency for the two fast crash days: May 19 and May
22, 2006. Mid-quotes and prices are scaled to 100 at the beginning of the trading day.
                                                 Panel A: 19th of May 2006                                                                                  Panel B: 22nd of May 2006
                                           100




                                                                                                                                                      100
     Mid-Quotes and Prices scaled to 100




                                                                                                                Mid-Quotes and Prices scaled to 100
                                                                                                                                                      95
                                           95




                                                                                                                                                      90
                                           90




                                                                                                                                                      85
                                           85




                                                                                                                                                      80




                                            09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20        15:16:40                                               09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20        15:16:40
                                                                        Time                                                                                                       Time
                                                            Spot Mid-Quote      Fut Mid-Quote                                                                          Spot Mid-Quote      Fut Mid-Quote
                                                            NIFTY                                                                                                      NIFTY




                                                                                                           47
    Figure 3. Inventory dynamics for FIIs and MFs during the fast crashes

This figure shows dynamics of the mid-quote and inventory of FIIs and MFs at a one-minute
frequency for the spot and futures markets during the two fast crash days: May 19 and May 22,
2006.
                            Panel A: FIIs 19th of May 2006                                                                             Panel B: MFs 19th of May 2006
              11.35




                                                                                                                             11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                              500
                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                              100 200 300 400
                                                                                      Inventory in thousands




                                                                                                                                                                                              Inventory in thousands
                     11.3




                                                                                                                                    11.3
       log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                      log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                      0
             11.25




                                                                                                                            11.25
                                                                                         -200
     11.2




                                                                                                                    11.2
              11.15




                                                                                                                             11.15
                                                                                      -400




                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                  09:43:20       11:06:40     12:30:00   13:53:20          15:16:40                                              09:43:20   11:06:40     12:30:00    13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                 Time                                                                                                       Time
                                     Spot Mid-Quote        FII Only Spot                                                                     Spot Mid-Quote          M. Fund Only Spot
                                     FII Only Fut          FII Both Spot                                                                     M. Fund Only Fut        M. Fund Both Spot
                                     FII Both Fut                                                                                            M. Fund Both Fut



                        Panel C: FIIs 22nd of May 2006                                                                               Panel D: MFs 22nd of May 2006
              11.25




                                                                                                                             11.25
                                                                                      200




                                                                                                                                                                                              250   100 150 200
                                                                                      Inventory in thousands




                                                                                                                                                                                              Inventory in thousands
                     11.2




                                                                                                                                    11.2
                                                                                                        100
      log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                     log of Mid-Quote
             11.15




                                                                                                                            11.15
                                                                                                 0
     11.1




                                                                                                                    11.1
                                                                                       -100




                                                                                                                                                                                              50
              11.05




                                                                                                                             11.05
                                                                                      -200




                                                                                                                                                                                              0




                  09:43:20       11:06:40     12:30:00   13:53:20          15:16:40                                              09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                 Time                                                                                                        Time
                                     Spot Mid-Quote        FII Only Spot                                                                     Spot Mid-Quote          M. Fund Only Spot
                                     FII Only Fut          FII Both Spot                                                                     M. Fund Only Fut        M. Fund Both Spot
                                     FII Both Fut                                                                                            M. Fund Both Fut




                                                                                                               48
Figure 4. Depth of the limit order book during the fast crashes: Spot market

This figure shows the median number of shares outstanding within 100 bps from the midpoint for
STTs, FIIs, and MFs, respectively, at a one-minute frequency for the spot market during the two
fast crash days: May 19 and May 22, 2006.
        Panel A: STTs on 19th of May 2006                                                                                  Panel B: STTs on 22nd of May 2006




                                                                                          11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.25
                                                                                                                                                 10
                           10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.2
                                                                                          11.3
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                                                                                                                                                 5
                           5




                                                                                                   log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.15
                                                                                          11.25
                           0




                                                                                                                                                 0
                           -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.1
                                                                                          11.2




                                                                                                                                                 -5
                           -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.05
                                                                                          11.15




                                                                                                                                                 -10
                           -15




                            09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Spot STT 100 bps      Ask Spot STT 100 bps                                                                        Bid Spot STT 100 bps      Ask Spot STT 100 bps
                                       Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                        Spot Mid-Quote



                   Panel C: FIIs on 19th of May 2006                                                                                 Panel D: FIIs on 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                         11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.25
                           20




                                                                                                                                                 15
                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.2
                                                                                         11.3
                           15
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                                                                                                  log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                 5




                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.15
                                                                                         11.25
                           10




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.1
                                                                                         11.2
                           5




                                                                                                                                                 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                               11.05
                                                                                         11.15




                                                                                                                                                 -10
                           0




                            09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Spot FII 100 bps       Ask Spot FII 100 bps                                                                       Bid Spot FII 100 bps       Ask Spot FII 100 bps
                                       Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                        Spot Mid-Quote



                            Panel E: MFs 19th of May 2006                                                                                         Panel F: MFs 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                          11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.25
                           20




                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.2
                                                                                          11.3
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                           0




                                                                                                  log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.15
                                                                                          11.25
                           -20




                                                                                                                                                 -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.1
                                                                                          11.2
                           -40




                                                                                                                                                 -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.05
                                                                                          11.15
                           -60




                                                                                                                                                 -25




                            09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20    11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Spot MF 100 bps       Ask Spot MF 100 bps                                                                         Bid Spot MF 100 bps       Ask Spot MF 100 bps
                                       Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                        Spot Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                      49
Figure 5. Depth of the limit order book during the fast crashes: Futures market

This figure shows the median number of shares outstanding within 100 bps from the midpoint for
STTs, FIIs, and MFs, respectively, at a one-minute frequency for the futures market during the
two fast crash days: May 19 and May 22, 2006.
        Panel A: STTs on 19th of May 2006                                                                                  Panel B: STTs on 22nd of May 2006




                                                                                          11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.25
                           40




                                                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.2
                                                                                          11.3
                           20




                                                                                                                                                 10
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                                                                                                   log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.15
                                                                                          11.25
                           0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.1
                                                                                          11.2
                           -20




                                                                                                                                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11.05
                                                                                          11.15
                           -40




                                                                                                                                                 -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                11
                            09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Fut STT 100 bps        Ask Fut STT 100 bps                                                                        Bid Fut STT 100 bps        Ask Fut STT 100 bps
                                       Futures Mid-Quote                                                                                                     Futures Mid-Quote



                   Panel C: FIIs on 19th of May 2006                                                                                 Panel D: FIIs on 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                        11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.25
                                                                                                                                                 5
                           5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.2
                                                                                        11.3
                           0
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                                  log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.15
                           -5




                                                                                        11.25




                                                                                                                                                 -5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.1
                           -10




                                                                                        11.2




                                                                                                                                                 -10




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.05
                           -15




                                                                                        11.15
                           -20




                                                                                                                                                 -15




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11
                            09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Fut FII 100 bps        Ask Fut FII 100 bps                                                                        Bid Fut FII 100 bps        Ask Fut FII 100 bps
                                       Futures Mid-Quote                                                                                                     Futures Mid-Quote



                            Panel E: MFs 19th of May 2006                                                                                        Panel F: MFs 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                        11.35




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.25
                           0




                                                                                                                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.2
                           -20




                                                                                        11.3
     Thousands of shares




                                                                                                                           Thousands of shares
                                                                                                  log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                                                                                 -.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.15
                           -40




                                                                                        11.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.1
                           -60




                                                                                                                                                 -1
                                                                                        11.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11.05
                           -80




                                                                                        11.15
                           -100




                                                                                                                                                 -1.5




                                                                                                                                                                                                              11




                            09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40                                                           09:43:20   11:06:40       12:30:00   13:53:20      15:16:40
                                                         Time                                                                                                                  Time
                                       Bid Fut MF 100 bps         Ask Fut MF 100 bps                                                                         Bid Fut MF 100 bps         Ask Fut MF 100 bps
                                       Futures Mid-Quote                                                                                                     Futures Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                      50
                                                                    Figure 6. Arbitrage proxies

This figure shows the dynamics of the two proxies for arbitrage opportunities (see Menkveld and
Yueshen (2018)) and the mid-quote (median over one minute) during the two fast crash days: May
19 and May 22, 2006.

                 Panel A: Proxy 1 19th of May 2006                                      72000 74000 76000 78000 80000 82000
                                                                                                                                                                 Panel B: Proxy 2 19th of May 2006




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       72000 74000 76000 78000 80000 82000
                               .015




                                                                                                                                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                                              30
       Arbitrage opportunity




                                                                                                                                                      Arbitrage opportunity
                                                                                                                              Log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Log of Mid-Quote
                               .01




                                                                                                                                                                              20
                               .005




                                                                                                                                                                              10
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20     15:16:40                                                                                      09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20     15:16:40
                                                            Time                                                                                                                                           Time
                                             Arbitrage Proxy 1        Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                        Arbitrage Proxy 2        Spot Mid-Quote



              Panel C: Proxy 1 22nd of May 2006                                                                                                             Panel D: Proxy 2 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                                                                                                              1000
                                                                                        75000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       75000
                               .08




                                                                                                                                                                              800
       Arbitrage opportunity




                                                                                                                                                      Arbitrage opportunity
                               .06




                                                                                                                              Log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                        70000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       70000
                                                                                                                                                                              600
                               .04




                                                                                                                                                                              400
                                                                                        65000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       65000
                               .02




                                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                        60000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       60000
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                              0




                                09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20     15:16:40                                                                                      09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00   13:53:20     15:16:40
                                                            Time                                                                                                                                           Time
                                             Arbitrage Proxy 1        Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                        Arbitrage Proxy 2        Spot Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                 51
                          Figure 7. Cumulative cash flows of STTs during the fast crashes

This figure shows cumulative cash flows of STTs at a one-minute frequency for the spot and
futures markets during the two fast crash days: May 19 and May 22, 2006. Cumulative cash
flows are computed as the cumulative sum of + (–) price times the number of shares traded
in case of sell (buy) transaction.
                                Panel A: 19th of May 2006                                                                                                      Panel B: 22nd of May 2006
                        11.35




                                                                                                                                                       11.25
                                                                                 300




                                                                                                                                                                                                                150
                                                                                        Cumulative Cash Flows, in mln rupees




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Cash Flows, in mln rupees
                                                                                                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                                       11.2
                                                                                 200
                        11.3
     log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                    log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                50
                                                                                                                                                       11.15
                                                                                 100
                        11.25




                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                       11.1
                                                                                 0
                        11.2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -50
                                                                                 -100




                                                                                                                                                       11.05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                -100
                        11.15




                         09:43:20   11:06:40    12:30:00   13:53:20       15:16:40                                                                      09:43:20   11:06:40    12:30:00   13:53:20       15:16:40
                                                   Time                                                                                                                           Time
                                         Spot Mid-Quote        STT Spot                                                                                                 Spot Mid-Quote        STT Spot
                                         STT Fut                                                                                                                        STT Fut




                                                                                                                               52
                Figure 8. Activity of STTs during the two crash days

This figure shows shows the activity of STTs during the two crash days in our sample. We
document the number of active traders for the crash, recovery, and normal periods during
either May 19, 2006, or May 22, 2006, for the spot (futures) markets. Crash/recovery periods
are measured as -/+30 minutes from the trough of the crash. We split all active STTs on the
crash days based on their activity during the crash periods, whether they belong to the most
active STTs (STTs that generate 50% of total volume), and whether they were constrained
during the crash days (their maximum one-minute inventory was above 95% percentile of
the maximum inventories on non-crash days).

  Top STT generating
                            Active on both               Active during the          Constrained
 50% of STT’s trading
                               markets                         crash
        volume
                                                                                     YES 4 (6)
                                                              YES 17 (30)         (Constrained)
                                                         (Active during crash)      NO 13 (24)
                               YES 19 (36)                                       (Not constrained)
                         (Active on both markets)                                    YES 0 (0)
                                                               NO 2 (6)           (Constrained)
                                                     (Not active during crash)      NO 2 (6)
          Yes 26 (59)                                                            (Not constrained)
            (Top)                                                                    YES 2 (5)
                                                              YES 5 (17)          (Constrained)
                                                         (Active during crash)      NO 3 (12)
                                NO 7 (23)                                        (Not constrained)
                          (Active on one market)                                     YES 0 (0)
                                                               NO 2 (6)           (Constrained)
                                                     (Not active during crash)      NO 2 (6)
                                                                                 (Not constrained)
                                                                                    YES 51 (28)
                                                              YES 86 (54)          Constrained)
                                                         (Active during crash)      NO 35 (26)
                                 211 (142)                                       (Not constrained)
                         (Active on both markets)                                   YES 68 (47)
                                                              NO 125 (88)         (Constrained)
                                                     (Not active during crash)      NO 57 (41)
        NO 1073 (1471)                                                           (Not constrained)
          (Not top)                                                                YES 224 (300)
                                                             YES 355 (397)        (Constrained)
                                                         (Active during crash)     NO 131 (97)
                              NO 862 (1329)                                      (Not constrained)
                          (Active on one market)                                   YES 314 (703)
                                                             NO 507 (932)         (Constrained)
                                                     (Not active during crash)     NO 193 (229)
                                                                                 (Not constrained)

                                                    53
                                                                   Figure 9. Inventory capacity of STTs

This figure shows the average STTs capacity. Panels A and B show the maximum absolute value of
one-minute median inventory positions during the day relative to the maximum absolute inventory
position in our sample period excluding two crash days (May 19 and May 22, 2006) for the spot
and futures markets, respectively. Panels C and D (Panels E and F) show the absolute value of
one-minute median inventory positions relative to the maximum absolute inventory position in
our sample period excluding two crash days (May 19 and May 22, 2006) for the spot and futures
markets, respectively, for May 19 (22), 2006.
                                      Panel A: Spot market                                                                                                                                    Panel B: Futures market
                               1




                                                                                                                                                                                        .5
                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                        .4
     Average capacity of STT




                                                                                                                                                              Average capacity of STT
                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                        .3
                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                        0



                               01apr2006        01may2006               01jun2006                           01jul2006                                                                   01apr2006          01may2006               01jun2006                           01jul2006
                                                                Date                                                                                                                                                       Date



 Panel C: Spot market, 19th of May 2006                                                                                                                  Panel D: Futures market, 19th of May 2006
                                                                                           72000 74000 76000 78000 80000 82000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        72000 74000 76000 78000 80000 82000
                                                                                                                                                                                        .25
                               .5
                               .4
     Average capacity of STT




                                                                                                                                                              Average capacity of STT
                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                                                                 Log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Log of Mid-Quote
                               .3




                                                                                                                                                                                        .15
                               .2




                                                                                                                                                                                        .1
                               .1




                                                                                                                                                                                        .05
                               0




                               09:43:20    11:06:40     12:30:00       13:53:20     15:16:40                                                                                             09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00        13:53:20     15:16:40
                                                           Time                                                                                                                                                      Time
                                            STT Spot Capacity             Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                            STT Futures Capacity            Futures Mid-Quote




 Panel C: Spot market, 22nd of May 2006                                                                                                                  Panel D: Futures market, 22nd of May 2006
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        75000
                               .8




                                                                                                                                                                                        .2
                                                                                           75000
     Average capacity of STT




                                                                                                                                                              Average capacity of STT
                                                                                                                                                                                        .15
                               .6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        70000
                                                                                                                                 Log of Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Log of Mid-Quote
                                                                                           70000
                               .4




                                                                                                                                                                                        .1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        65000
                                                                                           65000




                                                                                                                                                                                        .05
                               .2




                                                                                           60000




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        60000
                               0




                                                                                                                                                                                        0




                               09:43:20    11:06:40     12:30:00       13:53:20     15:16:40                                                                                             09:43:20   11:06:40      12:30:00        13:53:20     15:16:40
                                                           Time                                                                                                                                                      Time
                                            STT Spot Capacity             Spot Mid-Quote                                                                                                            STT Futures Capacity            Futures Mid-Quote




                                                                                                                                                    54
                                                         Figure 10. Cumulative inventories of FIIs

This figure shows the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of FIIs in the spot and futures
markets. Panels A and B show the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of all FIIs in our
sample, while Panels C and D show the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of FIIs that were
active on the two crash days: May 19 and May 22, 2006. Negative values of cumulative inventories
should be interpreted as a decrease of the starting position as of the beginning of April 2006.
                                             Panel A: Spot market:                                                                                           Panel B: Futures market:
                                                    all FIIs                                                                                                          all FIIs
                                     200




                                                                                                                                                       800
                                                                                                 7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
         Inventory in 10000 shares




                                                                                                                           Inventory in 10000 shares
                                                                                                                                                       600
                                     100




                                                                                                 6.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.8
                                                                                                       Log of Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Log of Price
                                                                                                                                                       400
                                     0




                                                                                                 6.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.6
                                                                                                                                                       200
                                     -100




                                                                                                                                                       0
                                     -200




                                                                                                 6.4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.4
                                     01apr2006      01may2006            01jun2006         01jul2006                                                   01apr2006      01may2006             01jun2006          01jul2006
                                                                  Time                                                                                                               Time
                                                   FII Spot Inventory          Min Spot Price                                                                      FII Futures Inventory          Min Futures Price
                                                   Max Spot Price                                                                                                  Max Futures Price




                                             Panel C: Spot market:                                                                                           Panel D: Futures market:
                                            FIIs active on crash days                                                                                        FIIs active on crash days
                                                                                                                                                       400
                                                                                                 7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      7
                                     20
         Inventory in 10000 shares




                                                                                                                           Inventory in 10000 shares
                                                                                                                                                       300
                                     0




                                                                                                 6.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.8
                                                                                                       Log of Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Log of Price
                                     -20




                                                                                                                                                       200
                                     -40




                                                                                                 6.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.6
                                                                                                                                                       100
                                     -60




                                                                                                 6.4
                                     -80




                                                                                                                                                                                                                      6.4
                                                                                                                                                       0




                                     09apr2006   30apr2006    21may2006     11jun2006      02jul2006                                                   01apr2006      01may2006             01jun2006          01jul2006
                                                                Time                                                                                                                 Time
                                                   FII Spot Inventory          Min Spot Price                                                                      FII Futures Inventory          Min Futures Price
                                                   Max Spot Price                                                                                                  Max Futures Price




                                                                                                                      55
                                                        Figure 11. Cumulative inventories of MFs

This figure shows the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of MFs in the spot and futures
markets. Panels A and B show the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of all MFs in our
sample, while Panels C and D show the cumulative end-of-day inventory position of MFs that were
active on the two crash days: May 19 and May 22, 2006. Negative values of cumulative inventories
should be interpreted as a decrease of the starting position as of the beginning of April 2006.
                                             Panel A: Spot market:                                                                                          Panel B: Futures market:
                                                    all MFs                                                                                                         all MFs

                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                     0
         Inventory in 10000 shares




                                                                                                                          Inventory in 10000 shares
                                     -50




                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                6.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.8
                                                                                                      Log of Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log of Price
                                     -100




                                                                                                                                                      20
                                     -150




                                                                                                6.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.6
                                                                                                                                                      0
                                     -200
                                     -250




                                                                                                6.4




                                                                                                                                                      -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.4
                                     01apr2006      01may2006           01jun2006         01jul2006                                                   01apr2006      01may2006            01jun2006         01jul2006
                                                                 Time                                                                                                              Time
                                                   MF Spot Inventory          Min Spot Price                                                                      MF Futures Inventory          Min Futures Price
                                                   Max Spot Price                                                                                                 Max Futures Price




                                             Panel C: Spot market                                                                                           Panel D: Futures market
                                            MFs active on crash days                                                                                        MFs active on crash days
                                                                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                     40
         Inventory in 10000 shares




                                                                                                                          Inventory in 10000 shares
                                                                                                6.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.8
                                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                      Log of Price




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Log of Price
                                     20




                                                                                                6.6




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.6
                                                                                                                                                      20
                                     0




                                                                                                6.4
                                     -20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6.4
                                                                                                                                                      0




                                     09apr2006   30apr2006    21may2006    11jun2006      02jul2006                                                   01apr2006      01may2006            01jun2006         01jul2006
                                                                Time                                                                                                               Time
                                                   MF Spot Inventory          Min Spot Price                                                                      MF Futures Inventory          Min Futures Price
                                                   Max Spot Price                                                                                                 Max Futures Price




                                                                                                                     56
      Appendix A               Description of the National Stock
                                             Exchange (NSE)
     The National Stock Exchange (NSE) of India Ltd. was incorporated in November 1992,
following the liberalization of the Indian financial market and the official establishment of
the Securities and Exchange Board of India in 1992. The process of financial liberalization
has supported the development of a large group of stock exchanges in India. The NSE and
the Bombay Stock Exchange (BSE) are the largest stock exchanges in the country based
on market capitalization and traded volume, though there are a total of 21 exchanges that
actively operate in India. 97.71% (55.99%) of stocks are traded daily on the NSE (BSE). In
2011, the market capitalization of stocks traded on the NSE was Rs. 67 trillion (USD 1.5
trillion) while the total market capitalization of stocks traded on the BSE was Rs. 68 trillion
(USD 1.5 trillion).
     The NSE is a fully automated screen-based platform that works through an electronic
limit order book in which orders are timestamped and numbered and then matched on price
and time priority. The NSE requires all traders to submit their orders through certified
brokers who are solely entitled to trade on the platform. These brokers are trading members
with exclusive rights to trade, and they can trade on their own account (proprietary trades)
or on behalf of clients. Brokers can trade in equities, derivatives, and debt segments of the
market. The number of active trading members has greatly grown from 940 members in
2005 to 1,373 members in 2012. Most of them trade in all segments of the market. Every
day, more than two million traders actively trade on the platform through several trading
terminals located throughout India. While there are no designated market-makers on the
NSE, a small group of de facto market-makers typically control a large portion of trading.
     Futures contracts have been trading on the NSE since November 2001. These futures
contracts have a three-month trading cycle, with each contract trading for three months
until expiration. Every month, a new contract is issued. So, at any point of time for a given
underlying stock, there are three futures contracts being traded.

                                INSERT FIGURE A1 HERE

   In 2006, trading sessions for both stock and futures markets were between 9:55 a.m. and
15:30 p.m., with a closing session of 20 minutes from 15:40 p.m. till 16:00 p.m. only for the

                                              57
spot market. Figure A1 show the trading day timeline in more details.


                  Appendix B                Persistence of STTs
    On a given day, we classify traders into Small traders, long-term traders (LTTs), and
short-term traders (STTs). To determine the final category of a trader, we look at the mode
of the classification of traders across days and select it as a trader category if the mode is not
equal to “Small” trader. If a mode classification is equal to “Small” trader, we assign it as a
trader category if and only if a trader is classified as Small trader on more than two-thirds
of days; otherwise, we use the next most frequent classification as the trader’s category. The
main focus of our analysis are STTs. Hence, we look at how persistent this trader category
is. Table B1 shows the proportion of active days on which STTs were classified as STTs.
We look separately at the STTs that represent jointly 75% and 50% of the trading volume
of this category (i.e., the most active STTs).

                                  INSERT TABLE B1 HERE




                                               58
                           Figure A1. Trading day timeline

This figure shows the trading day timeline of the National Stock Exchange of India (NSE) as of
2006.




                                             59
                                         Table B1 STTs’ persistence

This table shows summary statistics (number of traders, average number of active days, 5%, 50%,
and 95% percentile of persistence ratio) for STTs in the spot and futures markets. We define
persistence ratio as a proportion of all active days when a trader is classified as an STT. We
present these statistics for all STTs, top STTs responsible jointly for 75% of STTs’ trading volume,
and top STTs responsible jointly for 50% of STTs’ trading volume.

                           Panel A: Spot market                              Panel B: Futures market
            # of traders    # of active days   P5    P50   P95    # of traders   # of active days   P5    P50   P95

All STT        6,547              5.31         33%   71%   100%     20,524             4.38         33%   100% 100%

75% STT         289              26.44         44%   79%   100%       596             27.61         52%   86%   100%

50% STT         27               46.56         60%   81%   100%       64              50.06         65%   92%   100%




                                                           60
