NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
FOOD DESERTS AND THE CAUSES OF NUTRITIONAL INEQUALITY
Hunt Allcott
Rebecca Diamond
Jean-Pierre Dubé
Jessie Handbury
Ilya Rahkovsky
Molly Schnell
Working Paper 24094
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24094
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised November 2018
Previously "The Geography of Poverty and Nutrition: Food Deserts and Food Choices Across the
United States." We thank Prottoy Aman Akbar, Yue Cao, Hae Nim Lee, and Catherine Wright
for exceptional research assistance; Charles Courtemanche, Sungho Park, and Andrea Carlson
for sharing data; and Marianne Bitler, Anne Case, David Cuberes, Amanda Chuan, Janet
Currie, Jan De Loecker, Gilles Duranton, Joe Gyourko, Jakub Kastl, Ephriam Liebtag, Ilyana
Kuziemko, Todd Sinai, Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach, Jesse Shapiro, Tom Vogl, and
David Weinstein for helpful comments. We also thank seminar participants at Amazon, the
2015 and 2017 ASSA Meetings, the Becker Friedman Institute at the University of Chicago,
Brown, Columbia, Duke, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, the Federal Trade
Commission, Microsoft Research, the 2015 and 2016 NBER Summer Institutes, New York
University, the Paris School of Economics, Penn State, Princeton, the Pritzker School of
Medicine, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Stanford, Temple, Toronto, the Tilburg
Christmas Research Camp, the University of New South Wales, the University of Pennsylvania,
USC Marshall, the USDA, the University of Sydney, the 2014 Urban Economics Association
Meeting, Warwick, Wharton, and Yale SOM. We are grateful for funding from the Chicago
Booth Initiative on Global Markets, the Wharton Social Impact Initiative, the Research Sponsors'
Program of the Wharton Zell-Lurie Real Estate Center, and the USDA Economic Research
Service. This paper reflects the researchers' own analyses calculated based in part on data from
The Nielsen Company (US), LLC and marketing databases provided through the Nielsen Datasets
at the Kilts Center for Marketing Data Center at The University of Chicago Booth School of
Business. The conclusions drawn from the Nielsen data are those of the researchers and do not
reflect the views of Nielsen. Nielsen is not responsible for, had no role in, and was not involved
in analyzing and preparing the results reported herein. The findings and conclusions in this
preliminary publication have not been formally disseminated by the USDA and should not be
construed to represent any agency determination or policy. This paper subsumes and replaces our
previous work, Handbury, Rahkovsky and Schnell (2015) and Allcott, Diamond and Dub e
(2017). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Hunt Allcott, Rebecca Diamond, and Jean-Pierre Dubé. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Food Deserts and the Causes of Nutritional Inequality
Hunt Allcott, Rebecca Diamond, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Jessie Handbury, Ilya Rahkovsky, and
Molly Schnell
NBER Working Paper No. 24094
December 2017, Revised November 2018
JEL No. D12,I12,I14,L81,R20
ABSTRACT
We study the causes of “nutritional inequality”: why the wealthy eat more healthfully than the
poor in the United States. Exploiting supermarket entry, household moves to healthier
neighborhoods, and purchasing patterns among households with identical local supply, we reject
that neighborhood environments contribute meaningfully to nutritional inequality. Using a
structural demand model, we find that exposing low-income households to the same products and
prices available to high-income households reduces nutritional inequality by only nine percent,
while the remaining 91 percent is driven by differences in demand. These findings counter the
common notion that policies to reduce supply inequities, such as “food deserts,” could play an
important role in reducing nutritional inequality. By contrast, the structural results predict that
means-tested subsidies for healthy food could eliminate nutritional inequality at a fiscal cost of
about 15 percent of the annual budget for the U.S. Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program.

Hunt Allcott
Department of Economics
New York University
19 W. 4th Street, 6th Floor
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
hunt.allcott@nyu.edu

Jessie Handbury
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
1463 Steinberg-Dietrich Hall
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
handbury@wharton.upenn.edu

Rebecca Diamond
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
diamondr@stanford.edu

Ilya Rahkovsky
Economic Research Service, USDA
355 E Street SW
Washington, DC 20024
irahkovsky@ers.usda.gov

Jean-Pierre Dubé
University of Chicago
Booth School of Business
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jdube@chicagobooth.edu

Molly Schnell
Princeton University
Department of Economics
Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building
Princeton, NJ 08544
mollyks@princeton.edu

An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24094

I

Introduction

A wave of recent studies has drawn increased attention to the causes and consequences of socioeconomic
inequality (Aizer and Currie, 2014; Case and Deaton, 2015; Chetty et al., 2014; Chetty et al., 2016;
Saez and Piketty, 2003). This inequality plays out in many different ways, including educational
opportunities, health outcomes, mass incarceration, and social networks. In this paper, we study
one additional correlate of socioeconomic status—what we eat and drink—and quantify the economic
mechanisms that drive nutritional inequality. As nutritional intake is a key driver of obesity and other
health outcomes, understanding why nutritional inequality exists is crucial for designing policies to
address socioeconomic disparities in health outcomes.
A large body of literature has documented that low-income neighborhoods are more likely to be
“food deserts”—that is, areas with low availability or high prices of healthy foods.1 Many public health
researchers, policymakers, and advocates further argue that food deserts are an important cause of
unhealthy eating.2 Despite limited evidence supporting this causal claim, both the federal government
and local municipalities spend millions of dollars each year on supply-side policies that subsidize and
assist grocers in underserved areas.3
It is certainly possible that differential access to healthy foods is at least partially to blame for
nutritional inequality. For example, Bitler and Haider (2011) discuss how zoning restrictions, crime,
and other factors could raise costs for grocers in low-income areas, and results from the Moving To
Opportunity experiment suggest that moving to lower-poverty neighborhoods reduces obesity (Kling,
Liebman and Katz, 2007; Ludwig et al., 2011). In the presence of market failures such as health
cost externalities and imperfect information about how diet affects health, supply-side policies could
improve economic efficiency in addition to public health and social equity. On the other hand, it is
natural to imagine that the observed supply differences across neighborhoods are simply equilibrium
responses to differences in consumer preferences. Thus, teasing apart supply-side versus demand-side
explanations is crucial for understanding whether and how policymakers should intervene.
1
See, for example, Algert et al. (2006); Alwitt and Donley (1997); Baker et al. (2006); Horowitz et al. (2004); Jetter
and Cassady (2005); Larson et al. (2009); Powell et al. (2007); Sharkey et al. (2010).
2
In an influential review article, Bitler and Haider (2011) write that “it appears that much of the existing research
implicitly assumes that supply-side factors cause any food deserts that exist.” For example, former First Lady Michelle
Obama argues that “it’s not that people don’t know or don’t want to do the right thing; they just have to have access to
the foods that they know will make their families healthier” (Curtis, 2011), and Hilmers, Hilmers and Dave (2012, page
1652) write that “the disproportionate distribution of food sources that contributes to the development of unhealthy
behaviors among these communities and the consequent disease burden deeply affect not only individuals and families,
but also society as a whole.” Economists, meanwhile, have largely ignored the relationship between disparities in supply
and the nutrition-income relationship, focusing instead on the role of differential price elasticities in generating nutritional
inequality (e.g., Bertail and Caillavet, 2008; Beydoun et al., 2008; Jones, 1997; Park et al., 1996).
3
The Healthy Food Financing Initiative has awarded $220 million in subsidies and technical assistance since 2011 to
grocery stores, farmers markets, and other suppliers of healthy foods in underserved areas (TRF 2017); the Agricultural
Act of 2014 appropriated $125 million in federal funds to be spent annually to promote access to healthy foods in
disadvantaged communities (Aussenberg, 2014); and projects aimed at “eliminating food deserts” were eligible for $100
million in Community Transformation Grants under the Affordable Care Act. Many state and local governments have
also introduced programs to improve access to nutritious foods by providing loans, grants, and tax credits to qualifying
businesses operating in underserved neighborhoods (CDC, 2011). In the United Kingdom, the 2001 Food Poverty
Eradication Bill required local and national governments to document and take actions to eliminate food deserts.

2

This paper combines reduced-form analyses with a structural demand model to quantify the relative
importance of local supply and demand factors in generating nutritional inequality. We exploit a rich
combination of datasets, including Nielsen Homescan, a 61,000-household, nationally representative
panel survey of grocery purchases, and Nielsen’s Retail Measurement Services (RMS), a 35,000-store,
national panel of UPC-level sales data covering about 40 percent of all U.S. grocery purchases. We
match the Homescan data to surveys of panelists’ nutrition knowledge, preferences, and health outcomes gathered by Nielsen for Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2018). Finally, we gather data on
the entry dates and exact locations of all 6,721 new supermarkets that opened in the United States
from 2004–2016, along with annual data on retail establishments in each zip code. We thus have an
extraordinarily rich window into households’ choice sets, information sets, local environments, and
resulting consumption and health.
We begin by laying out the two basic facts that motivate the debate on food deserts and the causes
of nutritional inequality. First, there is a meaningful nutrition-income relationship: households in the
top income quartile buy groceries that are 0.56 standard deviations more healthful than the bottom
income quartile, as measured by our version of the Healthy Eating Index, the standard measure of
dietary quality. Second, RMS stores in low-income neighborhoods offer less healthy groceries than
stores in high-income neighborhoods, and low-income neighborhoods have more drug and convenience
stores as well as fewer large supermarkets, which offer wider variety of healthy options.
We then use three reduced-form analyses to test whether the local environment has an economically
significant effect on healthy eating. The first analysis is an event study that looks within households,
before versus after the entry of a new supermarket nearby. In both the full sample and the sample of
households in food deserts, we find effects of supermarket entry on healthy eating that are occasionally
statistically significant but always economically small. We document an intuitive reason for these small
effects: while consumers shift their purchases toward the new entrants, these purchases are primarily
substituted away from other supermarkets, not away from drug stores and convenience stores that
offer less healthy choice sets. Indeed, even households living in zip codes with no supermarkets still
buy 85 percent of their groceries from supermarkets. We can bound the short-run effect of differential
access to supermarkets at no more than about 1.5 percent of the nutrition-income relationship.
Our second analysis tests the hypothesis that a broader set of place-related factors, including peer
effects or supply differences other than supermarket density, contribute to nutritional inequality. To
do this, we exploit the fact that thousands of households move between zip codes or counties while
in the Homescan panel. Before a move, households exhibit no trend in healthy eating. After a move,
households converge toward eating patterns in the new location by an amount that is statistically
significant but economically small. Any endogeneity in moving decisions likely biases these estimates
upward. While the panel is not long enough to study households for more than a few years after a
move, we can bound the medium-term, partial equilibrium effects of place as contributing no more
than two to three percent of the nutrition-income relationship.
Our third reduced-form analysis tests the possibility that improved access to healthy foods could
have larger effects in the long term, as consumers’ tastes and knowledge of healthy eating slowly evolve.

3

To do this, we study people across different income levels who consistently have the same access to
healthy foods: households living in the same locations and shopping in the same stores. If differential
access is entirely to blame for nutritional inequality, then the nutrition-income relationship should
disappear when we compare low- and high-income households facing the same retail environment. In
reality, less than 30 percent of the nutrition-income relationship is explained by fixed effects for zip
code or retail chain. Any endogeneity in where to live and where to shop likely biases this number
upward. Thus, while our long-term bound is looser than our short-term bounds, we can still conclude
that differential local access to healthy foods explains no more than a third of the nutrition-income
relationship.
These reduced form analyses cannot precisely tell us what low-income households would consume
if they had the same supply conditions as high-income households. For example, simply adding a
supermarket changes availability and prices of both healthy and unhealthy foods in ways that may not
replicate conditions in high-income neighborhoods, and moving to a healthy area affects people’s lives
in many ways other than just changing grocery supply. Meanwhile, the within-location and withinstore disparity can only provide a loose upper bound on the counterfactual due to the endogeneity of
residential and store choice. To precisely answer the question of whether unequal supply of healthy
groceries contributes to nutritional inequality, the second half of the paper uses a structural model
to separate supply and demand and then simulates counterfactuals with equal supply. Building on
Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014), we specify a utility function with Constant Elasticity of Substitution
(CES) preferences over individual products, Cobb-Douglas preferences for product groups (milk, bread,
candy, vegetables, etc.), and linear preferences for specific dietary quality characteristics (added sugar,
salt, saturated fat, etc.). We derive a novel empirical specification that relates calorie consumption to
prices and nutrients while accommodating potential unobserved product characteristics.
To separate supply and demand, we introduce a new instrument for prices. The instrument uses the
variation in prices generated by grocery retail chains’ differing comparative advantages in supplying
different product groups combined with chains’ differing geographic presence across markets. To
illustrate, suppose there are two types of foods, apples and pizza, and two grocery chains, Safeway
and Shaw’s. Suppose Safeway is able to supply pizza cheaply, while Shaw’s can supply apples cheaply.
Then, cities dominated by Safeway will have relatively low prices for pizza, while cities dominated by
Shaw’s will have relatively low prices for apples. Our key identifying assumption is that geographic
variation in prices due to the presence of specific chains is independent of geographic variation in
unobserved preferences. Consistent with this assumption, we find that retail chains that offer lower
prices on healthy foods are no more or less likely to be present in higher-income counties. The
instrument has a very strong first stage, and it may be useful for other researchers in similar settings.
The estimates show a striking and systematic relationship between household income and preferences for healthy dietary characteristics. Higher-income households have stronger preferences for six
out of the Healthy Eating Index’s eight “healthy” dietary components (whole fruit, other fruit, whole
grains, green vegetables and beans, other vegetables, and dairy) and two out of four “unhealthy”
components (sodium and added sugar). These preference differences are economically significant:

4

households in the bottom income quartile are willing to pay $0.43 per 1,000 calories to consume the
bundle of dietary components that would receive the maximum Healthy Eating Index score instead
of the minimum, while households in the top income quartile are willing to pay $1.14—almost three
times as much. We find that about 20 percent of the income-related preference differences are econometrically explained by education and another 14 percent are explained by nutrition knowledge.
We use our demand model to simulate policies in which bottom income quartile households are
exposed to the prices and product availability experienced by top income quartile households. Consistent with our reduced-form results, we find only small effects of these supply-side factors on purchases.
Only nine percent of the nutrition-income relationship is driven by differences in supply, while 91
percent of the relationship is driven by differences in demand. Overall, these findings suggest that
supply-side policy initiatives aimed at eliminating food deserts will have limited effects on healthy
eating in disadvantaged neighborhoods.
What policies might work? We use the demand estimates to simulate the effects of means-tested
subsidies for healthy foods, inspired by an active debate about whether the Supplemental Nutrition
Assistance Program (SNAP) should be modified to include such subsidies (Richards and Sindelar,
2013; Shenkin and Jacobson, 2010). We find that the fiscal cost of inducing low-income households
to purchase groceries that are as healthy as high-income households would be only 15 percent of the
current average SNAP benefit.
Our paper’s main contribution to the literature is to bring together a unified set of insights about
why the wealthy and the poor eat differently in the United States. Our results add to findings
on the impacts of proximity to supercenters (Courtemanche and Carden, 2011; Volpe et al., 2013)
and fast food restaurants (Anderson and Matsa, 2011; Currie et al., 2010; Davis and Carpenter,
2009; Dunn, 2010), along with case studies in the public health literature of individual grocery store
entry (e.g. Cummins et al., 2005; Elbel et al., 2015; Song et al., 2009; Weatherspoon et al., 2012;
Wrigley et al., 2003).4 Our household migration event study adds a nutritional aspect to recent
work which uses migration to understand the evolution of brand preferences (Bronnenberg, Dubé and
Gentzkow, 2012), the caloric costs of culture (Atkin, 2016), the effects of urban sprawl on obesity (Eid
et al., 2008), and the drivers of geographic variation in health and health care utilization (Finkelstein,
Gentzkow, and Williams 2016; 2018a; 2018b; Molitor, 2018).5 Recent work by Hut (2018) finds
similarly small short-run effects of migration on healthy eating, but larger associations with local
consumption patterns in the long run. Our structural demand analysis builds on the framework
introduced by Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014), but adds a novel identification strategy and price
instrument. Finally, the decomposition of our preference estimates builds on other work measuring
correlates of health behaviors (Cutler and Lleras-Muney, 2010; Furnee et al., 2008; Grossman, 2015),
4

Although not solely focused on retail environments, recent work further examines how changes in a range of socioenvironmental factors, including restaurant and food store availability and food prices, have contributed to rising obesity
over the last 50 years (Baum and Chou, 2016; Chou et al., 2004; Courtemanche et al., 2016; Cutler et al., 2003; Lakdawalla
et al., 2005; Rashad, 2006; Rashad et al., 2006).
5
Indeed, the debate over health care utilization has many parallels to our current setting, with a public health literature
arguing that geographic disparities are primarily due to differences in providers and insurance coverage. This has provided
support for supply-side policies such as insurance expansions and subsidies for doctors to work in underserved areas.

5

but the new Homescan add-on survey provides a remarkable opportunity to connect large-sample
scanner data to measures of health preferences and nutrition knowledge.
Sections II through VIII, respectively, present data, stylized facts, reduced-form empirical analyses, demand model setup, demand model estimation and results, counterfactual estimates, and the
conclusion.

II

Data

II.A

Nielsen Homescan and Retail Scanner Data

We use the Nielsen Homescan Panel for 2004–2016 to measure household grocery purchases.6 Homescan includes about 169,000 unique households, of which we observe about 39,000 in each year for
2004–2006 and about 61,000 in each year for 2007–2016. Homescan households record UPCs of all
consumer packaged goods they purchase from any outlet. We consider only food and drink purchases,
and we further exclude alcohol and health and beauty products such as vitamins.
We focus on explaining income-related differences in the take-home market (i.e., grocery purchases)
instead of overall diets because Homescan does not include data on away-from-home food purchased in
establishments like restaurants.7 One additional limitation of Homescan is that most households only
record purchases of packaged items with UPCs, not non-packaged groceries such as bulk produce and
grains. For 2004–2006, however, the data also include an 8,000-household “magnet” subsample that
also recorded prices and weights of non-packaged groceries. We use the magnet data for robustness
checks. Appendix Figure A1 shows that about 60 percent of magnet households’ produce calories are
from packaged goods that are observed in the full Homescan sample, and this proportion does not
vary statistically by income.8 This suggests that the focus on packaged groceries does not significantly
detract from our results, both because produce represents a small share of overall grocery purchases and
because packaged produce is a significant and reasonably representative portion of produce purchases.
Homescan households report demographic variables such as household income (in 16 bins), household composition, race, and the age, educational attainment, employment status, and weekly work
hours for male and female household heads. For households with two household heads, we use the
mean of age, education, and employment variables observed for both heads. We combine calorie needs
by age and gender as reported in the U.S. government’s Dietary Guidelines with Homescan household
composition to get each household’s daily calorie need. Our household size variable measures the
number of adult “equivalents” in the household, where children are scaled into adults by their calorie needs. In addition to the standard Homescan data, we observe self-reports of the importance of
6

See Einav, Leibtag and Nevo (2010) for a validation study of Homescan.
The National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) finds that Americans consume 34 percent of
calories away from home, including 25 percent in restaurants (USDA 2014b). For all income groups, the share of healthy
and unhealthy macronutrients (protein, carbohydrates, saturated fat, etc.) consumed away from home is about the same
as the share of calories consumed away from home, so grocery purchases are not a systematically biased measure of
overall diet healthfulness.
8
After excluding canned, frozen, and dried produce, about 40 percent of magnet households’ fresh produce calories
are from packaged items.
7

6

staying healthy, a detailed nutrition knowledge quiz, Body Mass Index (weight/height2 ), and diabetes
status from a Homescan PanelViews add-on survey carried out by Nielsen for Allcott, Lockwood and
Taubinsky (2018) in 2017. Panel A of Table 1 presents descriptive statistics for Homescan households.
Unless otherwise stated, all Homescan results are weighted for national representativeness.
The Nielsen Retail Measurement Services (RMS) data consist of weekly prices and sales volumes
for each UPC sold at approximately 42,000 unique stores from 160 retail chains for 2006–2016, of
which we observe about 35,000 in each year. We exclude liquor stores. RMS includes 53, 32, 55, and 2
percent of sales in the grocery, mass merchandiser, drug, and convenience store channels, respectively.
As with Homescan, RMS does not include sales of bulk produce and other non-packaged items.
We deflate prices and incomes to 2010 dollars using the consumer price index for urban consumers
for all items.

II.B

Grocery Retail Establishments

Studying the effects of retailer entry requires reliable data on store opening dates to avoid attenuation
bias. Some datasets, such as InfoUSA and the National Establishment Time Series, might be useful
for cross-sectional analyses, but they do not record the opening dates of new establishments with
sufficient precision (see Bitler and Haider, 2011, page 162). We measure supermarket entry using
Nielsen’s TDLinx dataset, a geocoded census of all food retailers in the United States, including the
month each store opened and its exact latitude and longitude. In validation checks, we found that
TDLinx data accurately match entry dates and locations for 1,914 supermarkets for which we have
the exact address and opening date from four retailers’ administrative records. We include only club
stores, supercenters, and grocery stores (excluding “superettes”), and we further restrict to entries for
which the retailer could be matched to a retailer code in the Homescan data, which excludes small
“mom and pop” groceries.9 For simplicity, we call the set of included stores “supermarkets.” There
were 6,721 entries of supermarkets in the United States between 2004 and 2016.
We also use Zip Code Business Patterns (ZBP), which gives a count of establishments by NAICS
code and employment size category for every zip code as of March 10th of each year. The ZBP data
are drawn from tax records, the U.S. Census Company Organization Survey, and other administrative
data. Panel B of Table 1 presents ZBP descriptive statistics.

II.C

Nutrition Facts and the Healthy Eating Index

Our nutrition facts are from databases available from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA,
2016; 2018), which we match to UPCs using crosswalks developed by the USDA. The UPC-level
USDA nutrition facts closely match a second database from a marketing data provider that we used
in a previous version of this paper.
9

To measure true changes in grocery availability experienced by consumers, we must use new physical establishments or
stores that significantly improve their grocery selection, such as conversions from standard mass merchants to supercenters
selling a full line of groceries. To implement this, we use a list of specific TDLinx stores transferred through mergers and
acquisitions to exclude spurious “entrants” that were in fact in continuous operation, and we further drop potentially
spurious entries where TDLinx shows a store of the same subtype in the same census block in the previous year.

7

To characterize goods and preferences on a single index of healthfulness per calorie, we use a
slightly modified version of the standard dietary quality measure in the United States: the USDA’s
Healthy Eating Index (Guenther, Reedy and Krebs-Smith, 2008; Volpe and Okrent, 2012). The HEI
scores diets on a scale from 0–100, adding points for consumption of “healthy” components (fruits,
vegetables, whole grains, dairy, and proteins) and subtracting points for consumption of “unhealthy”
components (refined grains, sodium, saturated fats, and added sugars). The HEI is usually used to
score one individual’s full diet, and it is non-linear in its components. For example, added sugar
consumption reduces the HEI linearly at a prescribed “slope” until added sugars reach a threshold
of 26 percent of calories, after which the HEI is unchanged. These non-linearities are debated by
nutritionists and are inappropriate for many of our analyses, in which we observe partial diets for
entire households (in Homescan) or purchases by many consumers (in store-level RMS data). We thus
construct a linearized version of the HEI that continues scoring nutrients with the prescribed slope,
regardless of whether consumption is beyond a minimum or maximum threshold.10 We find that the
linearization makes little difference: the correlation between “true” HEI and linearized HEI is 0.91 in
our household-by-year Homescan data. For ease of interpretation, we normalize our linearized HEI
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. We call this linearized,
normalized HEI the “Health Index.”
Appendix Table A1 shows that the strongest correlates of the Health Index in household-by-year
Homescan data are purchases of fruits and vegetables (with correlation coefficients of ρ ≈ 0.4 to 0.6),
whole grains (ρ ≈ 0.50), sea and plant protein (ρ ≈ 0.64), added sugar (ρ ≈ −0.41), and solid fats
(ρ ≈ −0.44). Appendix Table A2 shows that both the “true” HEI and our linearized HEI are highly
correlated with Homescan panelists’ Body Mass Index and diabetes status.

III

Stylized Facts: Purchases and Supply of Healthful Foods

III.A

Purchase Disparities: The Nutrition-Income Relationship

We begin by using the Homescan data to provide basic facts on socioeconomic disparities in dietary
quality. Even basic stylized facts from these data are important: although a large body of literature
exists on social class and diet quality, most previous work uses datasets that only cover a few states
or municipalities, or national datasets such as NHANES that are an order of magnitude smaller than
Homescan (Darmon and Drewnoski, 2008). For comparability to other work on inequality, we proxy for
socioeconomic status (SES) using household income. Because household income varies with household
size, age, and survey year for reasons unrelated to household SES, we control for these factors in our
analyses.
Figure 1 presents binned scatterplots of how dietary quality varies with household income, residual
of household size and age and year indicators. We use three illustrative measures—grams of added
sugar per 1,000 calories purchased, share of bread calories from whole-grain breads, and share of total
10

We omit the fatty acid ratio from our linearized HEI as it is less obvious how to linearize this ratio and saturated
fats are already counted directly as a moderation component.

8

calories from packaged produce—and a summary measure, the normalized Health Index across all
grocery purchases. These four measures paint a consistent picture: low-income households purchase
less healthful foods. Appendix Figure A3 shows that these results are similar when using the magnet
subsample, which includes bulk purchases as well as packaged items.11
To quantify this nutrition-income relationship, we calculate the difference in overall dietary quality
between households in the highest and the lowest income quartiles. Conditional on household size and
age and year indicators, the top income quartile (households with sample average income above about
$84, 000) buy groceries with a Health Index that is 0.56 standard deviations higher than the bottom
income quartile (households with sample average income below about $28, 000).12 A key objective in
the rest of the paper is to explain this 0.56 standard deviation difference.13
We can benchmark the potential impacts of these differences in dietary quality using relationships
between dietary quality and health outcomes, with the important caveat that these relationships are
from correlation studies and thus may not be causal. For example, Figure 1 illustrates that households
in the bottom income quartile purchase approximately 9.7 more grams of added sugar per 1,000 calories
than households in the top quartile. The estimates in Yang et al. (2014) imply that 9.7 fewer grams
of added sugar per 1,000 calories is conditionally associated with a 26 percent decrease in death rates
from cardiovascular disease. Similarly, the conditional correlations in our Appendix Table A2 imply
that the 0.56 standard deviation difference in the Health Index is conditionally associated with a 0.67
difference in Body Mass Index (0.09 standard deviations) and a 1.9 percentage point difference in
diabetes (11 percent).

III.B

Supply Disparities by Neighborhood Income

Having documented socioeconomic disparities in consumption, we now provide basic facts on how
supply of healthy groceries varies between high- and low-income neighborhoods. The four panels of
Figure 2 present the relationship between zip code median income and the healthfulness of items
offered in RMS stores, again measured by added sugar content, the share of bread UPCs that are
11
Appendix Figure A2 presents analogues to Figure 1 considering each individual component of the Healthy Eating
Index. Consistent with NHANES data, the most economically and statistically significant relationships in Homescan are
that higher-income households tend to get a larger share of calories from fruits, vegetables, and whole grains and a smaller
share from added sugar. Higher-income households also tend to consume more saturated fat and sodium, although these
differences are considerably smaller in percentage terms. Thus, although the Healthy Eating Index imposes specific
weights on the different dietary components, higher-income diets would tend to be classified as “more healthy” unless
the weights change substantially.
12
We have also estimated the short-term association between the Health Index and household income by conditioning
on household-by-location fixed effects and other time-varying household demographics; see Appendix Table A3. The
within-household association is about nine percent the size of the pooled OLS coefficient. Unless measurement error
generates significant attenuation bias in the within-household estimate, this suggests that the bulk of the nutritionincome relationship is explained by long-term effects of income and correlates of income, not by the short-term effects
of a tighter budget constraint. This is consonant with the finding of Hastings, Kessler and Shapiro (2018) that SNAP
enrollment has no effect on healthy purchases.
13
This difference is growing over time, increasing from 0.54 in 2004–2007 to 0.61 in 2012–2016. This finding of growing
nutritional inequality is consistent with results from the NHANES data (Rehm et al., 2016; Wang et al., 2014), although
there is less precision in NHANES due to the smaller sample size. This trend underscores the increasing relevance of the
issues we study.

9

whole grain, the share of all UPCs that are packaged produce, and the mean Health Index of UPCs
offered. The measures used in this figure weight UPCs only by calories in the package and not by
quantity sold so that this figure reflects choice sets, not consumption. All four panels show the same
qualitative result: stores in higher-income zip codes offer healthier items.14
The store types we call “supermarkets”—large grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores—generally
offer a wider variety of healthy items and packaged and bulk produce compared to small grocery stores,
convenience stores, and drug stores.15 Using the Zip Code Business Patterns data, Figure 3 shows
that lower-income neighborhoods tend to have fewer supermarkets and more drug and convenience
stores per capita. While only 24 percent of zip codes (weighted by population) have no supermarket, 55 percent of zip codes with median income below $25,000 (weighted by population) have no
supermarket.16

IV

Reduced-Form Analysis: Effect of Access on Consumption

In the previous section, we documented both that low-income households consume less healthy groceries and that low-income neighborhoods have less local supply of healthy foods. As described in
the introduction, these two stylized facts have raised questions in policy circles about the extent to
which reduced availability of healthy foods causes nutritional inequality. Of course, supply and demand are determined in equilibrium. Neighborhood supply could also be correlated with demand due
to simultaneity (where supply responds to demand, in addition to demand responding to supply) or
due to other unobserved factors that systematically affect both supply and demand in low-income
neighborhoods. To measure the elasticity of healthy grocery demand with respect to local supply, we
need quasi-exogenous variation in local supply.
In this section, we use three reduced-form strategies. We begin with two event studies that look
within households as their local retail environments change in the short and medium terms. In our
third strategy, we look across households within a retail environment to bound the longer-term impact
of retail access on the nutrition-income relationship.

IV.A

Effects of Supermarket Entry

We begin by using an event study framework to measure the effects of supermarket entry on grocery
purchases. Over our sample period, we observe 6,721 supermarket entries. While the ideal experiment
14

This pattern of less-healthy choice sets and store types in low-income neighborhood stores is broadly consistent with
a large body of public health literature (e.g., Larson et al., 2009; Sharkey et al., 2010; Powell et al., 2007). To our
knowledge, however, we are the first to document this in a dataset as comprehensive as RMS.
15
Appendix Table A4 demonstrates this in the RMS data. By definition, supercenters carry a full line of groceries,
including produce. Club stores such as Sam’s Club, BJ’s, and Costco typically also carry a variety of grocery and produce
items.
16
In the working paper versions of this paper (Handbury, Rahkovsky and Schnell 2015; Allcott, Diamond and Dubé
2017), we showed that while healthy food costs more per calorie than unhealthy food, there is essentially no price
difference for categories other than fresh produce. Furthermore, the relative price of healthy versus unhealthy food is
actually slightly lower in low-income areas. Therefore, if price plays a role in the nutrition-income relationship, it would
have to do so through a preference to reduce produce consumption in order to economize on calories.

10

to measure the effects of store entry would randomly assign new supermarkets to different neighborhoods, stores enter for reasons that may create endogeneity concerns. In the analysis that follows, we
include household fixed effects and measure how grocery consumption changes after a supermarket
opens nearby. While supermarkets often open and close in response to long-term changes in neighborhood composition, it seems implausible that supermarkets plan their openings for the exact time
at which households will suddenly change their demand patterns.
We consider the impact of supermarket entries that occur within a 0–10 or 10–15 minute drive of
households’ census tract centroids.17 We compute driving times between each census tract centroid
and the address of each entering supermarket using the Google Maps application program interface
(API) and assuming no congestion delay. In our data, 66 percent of households experience zero entries
and 19 percent of households experience only one entry within a 10 minute drive.
Let Sbct be the count of supermarket entries that have occurred within driving distance band b
(where b = [0, 10) or [10, 15)) of census tract c as of quarter t, and let X it denote the vector of
potentially time-varying household covariates presented in Table 1.18 Letting Yict denote an outcome
for household i in census tract c in quarter t, we run the following regression in household-by-quarter
Homescan data:
X

Yict =

τb Sbct + γX it + µd(c)t + φic + εict ,

(1)

b∈{[0,10),[10,15)}

where µd(c)t is a vector of census division-by-quarter indicators, and φic is a household-by-census tract
fixed effect. As we study in Section IV.B, some Homescan households move while in the sample.
Conditioning on φic isolates variation in supply due to entry, not relocation. Because the set of
households exposed to local entry are not nationally representative, we do not use the Homescan
sample weights for this analysis. When estimating Equations (1) and (2), we use robust standard
errors with two-way clustering by household and census tract.
Before estimating Equation (1), we first show graphical results of the event study. We define Ebcqt
as an indicator variable denoting whether one supermarket had entered in distance band b of census
tract c by q quarters after quarter t. Bbit is an indicator variable for whether observation it is part
of a balanced panel around one supermarket entry in distance band b, meaning that the household is
observed in the same census tract continuously for all four quarters before and all eight quarters after
one supermarket entry and experienced only one entry in distance band b during that window. We
run the following regression in household-by-quarter Homescan data:
"
Yict =

X
b∈{[0,10),[10,15)}

!#
Bbit

X

τbq Ebcqt + αb

+ γX it + µd(c)t + φic + εict .

(2)

q

The interaction with Bbit ensures that we identify τbq and αb using only the households in the balanced
17

According to the 2009 National Household Travel Survey, the median and 75th percentile of shopping travel times
are 10 and 15 minutes, respectively.
18
Specifically, X it includes the natural log of income, natural log of years of education, indicators for each integer
age from 23–90, household size, race indicators, an indicator for whether the household heads are married, employment
status, and weekly work hours.

11

panel, although we include the full sample in the regression to improve the precision on the household
covariates and fixed effects. The omitted category is q = −1, so all coefficients are relative to the
outcome in the last quarter before entry.
Figure 4 presents the τ[0,10)q coefficients and 95 percent confidence intervals. The panel on the left
includes the full sample, while the panel on the right includes only the 23 percent of the sample living
in zip codes with no supermarkets, which we call “food deserts.”19
The top left panel shows that the share of a household’s grocery expenditures that are spent at
any of an entrant retailers’ locations increases by about two percentage points one year after entry.
These effects on total expenditures across all stores owned by the entrant retailer likely understate
expenditures at the specific entering store, as some expenditures may be diverted from the entrant
retailer’s other stores.20 The top right panel shows that the point estimates are larger in food deserts,
rising closer to three percent.21
The middle panels in Figure 4 show households’ expenditure shares at all grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores. We keep the y-axis on the same scale between the top and middle panels
so that the magnitudes can be easily compared. To the extent that supermarket entry simply diverts
sales from other supermarkets that offer a similar variety of healthy groceries, the changes in healthy
grocery availability—and thus the possible effects on healthful purchases—will be limited. Indeed,
total expenditure shares across grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores increase by only a fraction of a percentage point in the full sample, with no statistically detectable effect in the food desert
subsample. Thus, the primary effect of supermarket entry is to divert sales from other supermarkets.22
The bottom panels of Figure 4 presents results with the Health Index of purchased groceries as the
dependent variable. Both panels show no detectable increase in healthy purchases after supermarket
entry. In any given quarter, we can reject Health Index increases of more than about 0.02 (0.05)
standard deviations in the full (food desert) sample.
Table 2 presents estimates of Equation (1) using the same dependent variables as in Figure 4.
Panel (a) considers the effects on expenditure shares, first at entrant retailers and then across all
grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores. Unsurprisingly, all effects are significantly larger for
stores entering within 10 minutes of a household’s census tract centroid than for stores entering 10–15
minutes away. Columns 1 and 2 consider the full Homescan sample, columns 3 and 4 limit the
sample to households in the bottom income quartile, and columns 5 and 6 limit to households in food
deserts.23 Perhaps unsurprisingly, the expenditure share changes are generally larger for low-income
19

Appendix Figure A4 presents the analogous figures for the τ[10,15)q coefficients. The effects are smaller, as would
be expected given that the entering stores are 10–15 minutes away instead of 0–10 minutes away. Appendix Figure A5
presents analogous figures for balanced panel windows including eight (instead of four) quarters before entry. The results
are similar.
20
We cannot look at expenditures at the specific entering establishment, because most Homescan panelists record only
the retail chain where they shop, not the specific store.
21
This gradual adjustment of purchases over the first few quarters after entry is consistent with results in Atkin, Faber
and Gonzalez-Navarro (2016), who study retail expansion in Mexico.
22
These results are consistent with those of Hwang and Park (2016), who look at a subset of Walmart Supercenters
that opened between 2003 and 2006.
23
To match the high- versus low-income quartile differences calculated in Section III.A, we define the “bottom income
quartile” as households in the lowest quartile of residuals from a regression of household average income across all years

12

households and households in food deserts. However, consistent with Figure 4, most or all of entrant
chains’ expenditure share gains consist of diverted sales from other supermarkets.24 Appendix Table
A5 shows that supermarket entry reduces expenditure shares at drug and convenience stores, which
offer fewer healthy UPCs, by only a small fraction of a percentage point—even among households in
food deserts.
Panel (b) of Table 2 presents effects on the Health Index, which is normalized to have a standard
deviation of one across households. All of the six point estimates are positive, and in two cases they
are statistically significant, but the effect sizes are economically small. Appendix Table A5 repeats
these estimates using three alternative definitions of food deserts. Again, we find economically small,
although in one case statistically significant, effects of supermarket entry on healthy eating. The
insignificant effects are not due to limited power: with 60,000 households and all supermarket entries
in the entire United States over a 13-year period, we are able to detect very small effects.
We can use these estimates to determine the share of the nutrition-income relationship that can
be explained by having more local supermarkets. Recall from Section III.A that households in the
top income quartile buy groceries with a Health Index that is 0.56 standard deviations higher than
those in the bottom quartile (conditional on household size and age and year indicators). The upper
bound of the 95 percent confidence interval from column 2 of Panel (b) implies that one supermarket
entry increases a household’s Health Index by no more than about 0.02 standard deviations for bottom
income quartile households. Using ZBP data, we calculate that high-income (low-income) Homescan
households have an average of 2.47 (2.03) supermarkets in their zip code, which implies an average
difference of 0.44 supermarkets. Thus, we can conclude that local access to supermarkets explains
no more than 0.02 × 0.44/0.56 ≈ 1.5% of the Health Index difference between high- and low-income
households. In short, differences in local access to supermarkets do not appear to be driving the
nutrition-income relationship.
Given the academic and policy attention directed towards local access to healthy grocery options,
it is remarkable that supermarket entry seems to matter so little for consumption. However, the
limited impact of supermarket entry is less surprising in light of two key facts. First, using data
from the 2009 National Household Travel Survey (NHTS), a nationally representative survey that
gathers demographics, vehicle ownership, and “trip diaries” from 150,000 households, we find that
the average American travels 5.2 miles to shop, with 90 percent of shopping trips being made by car.
(See Appendix Figures A6 and A7.) While average distances are slightly shorter among low-income
households (4.8 miles) and slightly longer among households living in food deserts (nearly 7 miles), the
take-away remains the same: households are willing to travel long distances to purchase their groceries.
Second, Appendix Figure A8 shows that as a result of this travel, households in food deserts spend
observed in the sample on household size and age and year indicators.
24
Appendix Table A6 presents additional estimates considering only entry by supercenters, i.e. excluding grocery
and club stores. As might be expected from looking at larger stores, the expenditure share effects are larger, but the
effects on the Health Index are again economically small and mostly statistically insignificant. There is one marginally
significant unexpected result at the top right of Table 2, suggesting that entry reduces grocery, supercenter, and club
store expenditures for households in food deserts. We think of this as an anomaly, as there are no similar results in our
prior working papers nor in the supercenter entry study in Appendix Table A6.

13

only about one percent less of their grocery budgets at grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores
than households that are not in food deserts.
Of course, households in food deserts do benefit from more variety and reduced travel costs when
a new supermarket enters nearby. However, because most consumers already travel to shop in supermarkets, local supermarket entry does not significantly change choice sets and thus should not be
expected to affect healthy eating.

IV.B

“Place Effects” Identified by Movers

Although we have shown that supermarket entry has little effect on healthy eating, a related hypothesis
is that a broader class of “place effects” could drive grocery purchases. For instance, peer effects from
the eating habits of friends and neighbors as well as general local knowledge and image concerns related
to healthy eating could drive a household’s choices. To illustrate the possibility of place effects, Figure
5 presents a map of the estimated Health Index of packaged grocery purchases by county using the
2006–2016 RMS data.25 The county-level Health Index is highly correlated with county mean income
(correlation coefficient ρ ≈ 0.42) and with Chetty et al. (2016)’s county-level life expectancy measure
(ρ ≈ 0.61), underscoring both the inequities and the potential implications of what Americans eat and
drink. Of course, this geographic variation could reflect any combination of causal place effects and
geographic sorting of people with similar preferences.
To test for place effects, we measure within-household changes in grocery purchases after the 20,031
cross-zip code moves and 11, 728 cross-county moves that Homescan households made during our sample period. While the ideal experiment to measure place effects would randomly assign households
to different neighborhoods, households in our data move for reasons that may create endogeneity
concerns. For example, Appendix Figure A11 and Appendix Table A7 show that moves to healthier
counties (although not moves to healthier zip codes) are associated with increased household income.
In what follows, we study how the estimates are affected by including controls for observed changes
in income, job responsibilities, household composition, and marriage status that could generate endogeneity. Any remaining endogeneity would bias us toward finding place effects, because unobserved
lifestyle changes and unreported salary increases that cause people to move to healthier places should
also cause healthier eating. We therefore interpret the results in this section as upper bounds on true
place effects.
Define Hm as the estimated local Health Index of packaged groceries purchased in geographic area
m, where m is either a zip code or a county. For county-level Hm , we use the estimates mapped in
Figure 5, and we use the same approach and RMS data to calculate Hm by zip code.26 We estimate
25

Because the RMS data do not contain the complete census of stores, the distribution of store types in the RMS
sample may not match a county’s true distribution. For example, the RMS sample might include most of the grocery
stores in county A, but few of the grocery stores and most of the drug stores in county B. To estimate the county average
Health Index, we thus take the calorie-weighted average Health Index of groceries sold in RMS stores and regressionadjust for the difference between the distribution of store channel types in the RMS data versus the true distribution of
store channel types observed in ZBP data.
26
The average Homescan panelist lives in a zip code with 4.3 RMS stores and a county with 104 RMS stores.

14

the following regression in household-by-year Homescan data:
Yimt = τ Hm + γX it + µt + φi + εimt ,

(3)

where µt denotes year indicators, φi is a household fixed effect, and X it is again a vector of potentially
time-varying household covariates described in Table 1. By conditioning on household fixed effects,
we isolate changes in grocery purchases associated with changes in neighborhood variables generated
by moves. Because most Homescan households are in the sample for only a few years, this withinhousehold design only allows us to estimate place effects over the medium term—that is, a few years
after a move.27 As the set of movers is not nationally representative, we again do not use the Homescan
sample weights for this analysis. When estimating Equations (3) and (4), we use robust standard errors
with two-way clustering by household and geographic area (zip or county).
Before estimating Equation (3), we first show graphical results of the event study. As before, let
Bit be an indicator for whether observation it is part of a balanced panel around a move, meaning that
the household is observed continuously from one year before the move to two years after and at least
50 percent of the household’s trips to RMS stores are to stores located in the household’s end-of-year
county of residence in all three years other than the year of the move.28 These restrictions result in
balanced panels that include 2,869 cross-zip code moves and 2,277 cross-county moves.
Letting ∆i denote the change in the average Health Index between a household’s final and original
location, we estimate the following regression in household-by-year Homescan data:
!
Yit = Bit ·

α∆i +

X

(τy ∆i + ωy )

+ γX it + µt + φi + εit ,

(4)

y

where y indexes years around the move, with the pre-move year y = −1 as the omitted category. The
ωy coefficients are intercepts for each year, α measures the association between the household Health
Index and the change in local environment in the year before the move (y = −1), and τy measures
the difference in that association between y = −1 and each other year in the event study window. As
in Section IV.A, the interaction with Bit means that we identify the coefficients of interest using only
households in the balanced panel, although we include the full sample in the regression to improve the
precision on the demographic associations γ, year effects µt , and household fixed effects φi .
Figure 6 presents this event study analysis for cross-county moves.29 The top left panel shows
27
One way to study longer-term trends is to exploit retrospective data on where Homescan panelists previously lived,
as in Bronnenberg, Dubé and Gentzkow (2012) and Hut (2018). We have collected Homescan panelists’ lifetime histories
of census place of residence, but we did not include this analysis in our paper because of endogeneity concerns that might
be more relevant here than in the Bronnenberg, Dubé and Gentzkow (2012) study of brand choice.
28
Although Homescan panelists may report their moves to Nielsen within a few days or weeks of moving, Nielsen
only reports the household’s county of residence at the end of each year. The 50 percent local shopping restriction
aims to eliminate households that move multiple times within a year or otherwise are less strongly exposed to the retail
environment in the county where they report living.
29
Appendix Figures A9 and A10, respectively, present an analogue of Figure 6 for cross-zip code moves and results
for balanced panel windows that include more years before and after moves. Some of the post-move point estimates
are again positive, but there is no statistically significant evidence that the average household’s Health Index converges
toward the Health Index of the new area after a move, nor is there evidence of potentially problematic pre-move trends.

15

the share of shopping trips to RMS stores that are in the new versus the old county for households
with Bit = 1. For these households, almost all of the trips are in the old county before the move,
and almost all of the trips are in the new county after. The top right panel presents the distribution
across households of the local environment change ∆i in units of the (normalized) Health Index. The
median cross-county mover experiences a local Health Index change of 0.13 standard deviations; this
variation in ∆i is what identifies τy .
The bottom panels of Figure 6 shows the estimated τy coefficients and 95 percent confidence
intervals. The bottom left panel shows results excluding household demographics X it , while the
bottom right panel includes X it . In both cases, there is no statistically significant post-move Health
Index change associated with ∆i , although the point estimates are positive. In other words, the figures
show suggestive but insignificant evidence that households purchase more (less) healthy groceries when
they move to counties where other households purchase more (less) healthy groceries.
Table 3 presents estimates of Equation (3). Columns 1 and 2 consider cross-zip code moves,
while columns 3 and 4 consider cross-county moves. Sample sizes are slightly smaller in columns 1
and 2 because Hm is missing for zip codes with no RMS stores. In all four columns, τ̂ is positive and
statistically significant.30 Columns 2 and 4 include controls for household demographics X it ; including
these demographics has very little impact on the results. However, adding demographic controls only
slightly increases the regression R2 , suggesting that unobserved within-household changes could be
relevant (Oster, 2016).
Using the above results, we can bound the extent to which location explains the nutrition-income
relationship. We consider a partial equilibrium thought experiment in which an individual household
moves from a low- to high-income retail environment, leaving aside general equilibrium effects that
would occur if this happened on a large scale. The average household in the top quartile of income
(residual of household size and age and year indicators) lives in a zip code (county) with a Health
Index 0.11 (0.08) higher than households in the lowest income quartile. The upper bound of the
confidence intervals on τ for zip codes (counties) from Table 3 is about 0.10 (0.22), and the difference
between the high- and low-income Health Index is 0.56 standard deviations. Thus, in combination
with the assumption that any endogeneity would bias τ upward relative to the causal effect of place,
we conclude that medium-term place effects can explain no more than 0.11 × 0.10/0.56 ≈ 2.0% of the
high- versus low-income difference in the Health Index using cross-zip code moves, and no more than
0.08 × 0.22/0.56 ≈ 3.2% using cross-county moves. While we have the power to detect statistically
significant associations, it is clear that place effects do not explain a large share of nutritional inequality.
30
As a point of comparison, Appendix Table A8 uses this same strategy to replicate Bronnenberg, Dubé and Gentzkow
(2012)’s immediate brand choice effect, focusing on Coke versus Pepsi. Specifically, we estimate Equation (3) using
county-level Coke market shares for Hm , where Coke market shares are defined as [Coke calories purchased/(Coke and
Pepsi calories purchased)]. We estimate a highly statistically significant τ̂ ≈ 0.16, which implies that moving to a county
with a 10 percentage point higher Coke market share is associated with a 1.6 percentage point increase in the share of a
household’s Coke and Pepsi purchases that are of Coke.

16

IV.C

The Nutrition-Income Relationship Within Locations and Stores

We showed in Sections IV.A and IV.B that household consumption responds minimally to improvements in access in the short and medium run. It is possible, however, that improved access to healthy
foods has larger effects in the long run, as consumers’ tastes and knowledge of healthy eating slowly
evolve. In the analysis that follows, we bound the long-run impacts of equalizing local supply by studying households with different incomes but the same retail environment. If differential local supply is
entirely to blame for nutritional inequality, then the nutrition-income relationship should disappear
when we compare the purchases of households living in the same neighborhood or shopping in the
same store. It follows that the component of the nutrition-income relationship that persists within
retail environments provides us with an estimate of the fraction of nutritional inequality that cannot
be explained by access.
The ideal experiment to measure the long-run effects of supply would be to randomly assign
households to retail environments and observe them over time. In our data, however, households
select into neighborhoods and stores based on factors that may be correlated with their demand for
healthy groceries. In what follows, we again control for observable household characteristics, but we
expect that households observed in the same retail environments are unobservably more similar than
households in the full cross-section. Thus, our measure of within-location nutritional inequality likely
underestimates the nutrition-income relationship that would persist across the United States if supply
were equalized. We therefore interpret the difference between the nutrition-income relationship in the
full cross-section and the nutrition-income relationship that persists conditional on access as an upper
bound for the share of the nutrition-income relationship that can be explained by supply.
In this section, we measure the nutrition-income relationship within two types of markets: residential zip codes and retail chains. As households living in the same location have access to the same
stores, we first measure the nutrition-income relationship that remains among households who live in
the same zip code in a given year. Even within a zip code, however, distance to retail outlets varies
depending on the location of the household, and factors such as car ownership or proximity to public
transportation may yield differences in the ability of households to travel to stores. To control for the
possibility that households living in the same neighborhood may still have differential access, we then
measure the nutrition-income relationship that persists among households that shop in the same retail
chain in a given year.31
We estimate the within-market nutrition-income relationship with the following regression specification in household-by-year Homescan data:
Yimt =

X

τb Ibi + γX it + µt (+φmt ) + εimt ,

(5)

b

where {Ibi | b ∈ [1, 15]} is a set of indicators denoting into which of 15 bins household i’s sample
31

The results are very similar when looking at households that shop in the same retail chain in a given year and reside
in the same county. This is consistent with findings that product pricing is fairly uniform across establishments within
the same chain (DellaVigna and Gentzkow, 2017).

17

average real income falls, X it is either household size and age indicators or the full vector of household
covariates presented in Table 1, and µt are year fixed effects. For the analysis examining the nutritionincome relationship within zip codes, Yimt is the Health Index of all purchases made by household i
living in zip code m in year t, and φmt are residential zip code-by-year fixed effects. For the analysis
examining the nutrition-income relationship within retail chains, Yimt is the Health Index of purchases
made by household i in retail chain m in year t, φmt are retail chain-by-year fixed effects, and we
limit the sample to bundles accounting for over 50 percent of a household’s annual calories purchased,
which implies that there is no more than one observation per household-year.32
We estimate Equation (5) both with and without market-by-year fixed effects and plot the resulting
estimates of τb against mean bin income to examine how the nutrition-income relationship changes
when we compare households in the same retail environment. The within-market nutrition-income
relationship is only identified in markets composed of multiple income bins. To compare the estimates
with and without the market fixed effects, we thus restrict the sample to observations in market-year
cells in which more than one income bin is represented.

33

Figure 7 presents the results. The panels on the left present estimates with X it including only
household size and age controls, while the panels on the right present estimates controlling for the
full vector of household demographics X it . The top panels present results with φmt representing zip
code-by-year fixed effects, while the bottom panels present results with φmt representing retail chainby-county-by-year fixed effects. In both cases, the majority of the nutrition-income relationship persists
even when looking within a local market. In the sample used for the top panels, the Health Index
difference between the top and bottom income quartiles drops from 0.55 to 0.45 standard deviations
when adding zip code-by-year fixed effects. In the sample used for the bottom panels, that Health
Index difference drops from 0.59 to 0.41 standard deviations when looking within retail chain and
year. In combination with the assumption that any endogeneity in household location or shopping
decisions would bias our estimates upward, these results demonstrate that differences in local supply
can explain no more than a third of nutritional inequality in the long run.

V

A Model of Grocery Demand

From the model-free analyses in the previous section, we know that supermarket entry and moving
to areas with healthier eating patterns both have limited effects on healthy eating. While compelling,
these event studies are conceptually imprecise, because store entry and migration have many effects.
For example, supermarket entry changes both pricing and access to healthy and unhealthy foods and
may not replicate the grocery supply conditions of a wealthy area. Similarly, moving to different
neighborhoods can affect healthy eating in many ways beyond changing the retail environment.
32

We limit the sample to bundles reflecting over 50 percent of a household’s annual calories purchased to mitigate
the concern that our within-chain nutrition-income relationship is biased by the presence of small, chain-specific bundles
that fail to reflect a households’ overall consumption.
33
These within-market identifying samples contain 91 percent of household-year observations that were used to estimate
the nutrition-income gradient in Figure 1 and nearly 100 percent of the household-chain-year observations that account
for over 50 percent of the household’s annual calories purchased.

18

The only way to isolate precisely the effect of changing only grocery supply conditions from conditions in poor neighborhoods to conditions in wealthy neighborhoods, holding other factors constant,
is to estimate a structural model and simulate specific counterfactuals. In addition, the model will
allow us to explore the effectiveness of means-tested healthy food subsidies as an alternative policy to
reduce nutritional inequality.

V.A

Model Setup

We build our structural approach on the framework introduced by Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014),
though some of our notational conventions differ to accommodate differences in our estimation strategy.
Let S denote the set of stores in a household’s choice set. We assume the household has full information
about the prices and availability of products across all the stores in S. In a given week, the household
visits a subset s ∈ P (S) of the stores and incurs shopping costs αd (s), where α is a travel cost per
hour and d (s) is the total travel time.
Each week, the household jointly decides which stores to visit and what bundle of goods to purchase
to determine its total consumption of calories and dietary characteristics. Let y = (y1 , ..., yN ) denote
the quantities purchased (measured in calories) of each of the N food products (UPCs) available
across all the stores, and let p = (p1 , ..., pN ) denote the corresponding prices paid per calorie. Let
Ψ = (Ψ1 , ..., ΨN ) denote the perceived qualities of each of the goods. Finally, let x denote the
composite good capturing all the other weekly expenditures, with price normalized to px = 1 and
perceived quality Ψx = 1.
Each of the n = 1, ..., N products is characterized by C characteristics {an1 , ..., anC }, which could


a
,
...,
a


11
1C


include taste, health implications, shelf life, etc. Define the N × C matrix A =
,
...




an1 , ..., anC
which measures the content per calorie of each of the C characteristics in each of the N different
goods. The C × 1 vector z = A0 y denotes the total characteristic consumption associated with the
household’s bundle of purchases.
Each week, the household optimizes its calories and characteristics purchased subject to its budget
constraint w and the opportunity cost of time spent shopping αd (s). Let Θ denote a vector of
preference parameters. The household’s weekly utility maximization problem is:

max U (x, z, y; Θ, Ψ) − αd (s)
sP(S),x,y

s.t.

(6)
N
X

yn pn + x ≤ w.

n=1

We assume that the utility function U (x, z, y; Θ, Ψ) is continuous, increasing, and strictly quasiconcave. Since U is increasing, the household will spend its entire budget (the budget constraint will
19

bind), and at least one good will always be consumed. We assume that an interior quantity of the
composite good is always consumed.

V.B

A CES Model of Utility

To formulate a tractable model, we use the Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014) utility framework with
constant elasticity of substitution (CES) preferences over calories from each of Kj products within
each product group j, Cobb-Douglas preferences over J product groups, and linear preferences over
characteristics:
U (x, z, y; Θ, Ψ) =

J
X



Kj
C
X
X
θ
µj ln 
Ψkj y j  +
βc zc + λx.
kj

j=1

k=1

(7)

c=1

The J product groups, such as carbonated soft drinks, bread, and milk, include all N products available
across all S stores. Each group contains k = 1, ..., Kj products. µj captures a household’s satiation rate
over calories consumed in group j. θj determines the household’s satiation rate over calories consumed
through product k in group j. Ψkj allows for perceived product differentiation, so that the household’s
marginal benefit of calories can differ across products within a group. λ represents the marginal utility
of consuming the outside good. Finally, βc represents the marginal utility of consuming characteristic
c.
Let Kj denote the number of products that the household actually purchases in group j. The
first-order conditions from maximizing Equation (7) can be summed over all products purchased in
group j and re-written as follows:
Kj
X

∗
=
pkj ykj

k=1

Kj
C
X
βc X
c=1

λ

∗
+
akjc ykj

k=1

µj θj
, j = 1, ..., J.
λ

(8)

µj θj
λ

represents what the household would spend on product group j if products in that
P
βc PKj
∗
group had zero characteristics. The term C
c=1 λ
k=1 akjc yjk captures the household’s additional

The term

expenditures in group j due to the products’ characteristics. A household will spend more in group j
(the left-hand side will be larger) if it satiates more slowly in that group (µj and θj are larger) or if
it gets more characteristics that it values from that group (akjc is larger for characteristics with more
positive βc ). Higher marginal utility of outside good consumption λ reduces grocery expenditures.

VI
VI.A

Estimation and Results
Empirical Model

To apply the model to data, let i = 1, ..., I index households, let t = 1, ..., T index years, and let
τ index subperiods (such as weeks or shopping trips) within year t. The first-order conditions from
Equation (8) can be aggregated over τ to the household-by-year level:

20

Kj
XX
τ t k=1

pkjτ yikjτ =

Kj
C
X
βc X X
c=1

λi

akjc yikjτ +

X µijτ θijτ
τ t

k=1 τ t

λi

.

(9)

Equation (9) illustrates the appeal of the model, in that it allows for estimation of characteristic and
product group preferences from data aggregated to the level of household-by-product group-by-year.
While the model is precisely microfounded, this aggregation allows us to avoid dealing with parameters
driving UPC-level preferences and weekly dynamics such as stockpiling. The model potentially allows
for considerable heterogeneity across households and time. As described below, we will estimate
separate parameters for each of four household income groups, assuming homogeneous βc parameters
within each group.
To economize on notation, define total calories purchased by household i in product group j in
P P
year t as Yijt = τ t kJ yikjτ . Define p̃ijt and ãijct , respectively, as the calorie-weighted average
price paid and average amount of characteristic c for household i’s purchases in group j in year t.
P µ θ
Define δ̃ijt = τ t ijτλi ijτ as the strength of household i’s preferences for group j in year t. Finally,
define β̃c =

βc
λi ,

the money-metric marginal utility of each characteristic. Equation (9) can now be

written more compactly as:
p̃ijt Yijt =

C
X

β̃c ãijct Yijt + δ̃ijt .

(10)

c=1

As in the existing literature that uses the characteristics approach to demand, we allow for a
product characteristic that is unobserved to the econometrician (Berry, 1994). Let characteristic
c = 1 be unobserved, and let characteristics c = 2, ..., C be observed. We denote ξ = β̃1 ãij1t as the
unobserved characteristic, which again is assumed to be constant within each income group.
We now depart from the empirical strategy in Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014).34 Instead of
estimating Equation (10) directly, we solve for total calories Yijt and take logs of both sides. We
also separate the household’s product group preferences ln δ̃ijt into a product group fixed effect δj , a
geographic market fixed effect φm (which in practice will be a county), a year fixed effect φt , and the
household-specific deviation εijt , so ln δ̃ijt = δj + φm + φt + εijt . Our final estimating equation for each
income group is thus

ln Yijt = − ln p̃ijt −

C
X

!
β̃c ãijct − ξ

+ δj + φm + φt + εijt .

(12)

c=2

Equation (12) uses intuitive variation to estimate the preference parameters. The independent
34
Dubois, Griffith and Nevo (2014) directly estimate the average nutrient preference parameters βc using a version of
Equation (10):
C
X
p̃ijt Yijt =
β̃c ãijct Yijt + ijt ,
(11)
c=2

including additional fixed effects and instrumenting for ãijct Yijt using variation in local product availability. Unfortunately, the error term in this regression contains purchases of the unobserved nutrient: ijt = ξYijt + δ̃ijt . Thus, if the
instrument affects consumption Yijt , it mechanically is also correlated with the error term. No instrument can address
this mechanical endogeneity problem.

21

variable inside the parentheses is an “implicit price”: the actual price adjusted for the utility value of
the characteristics in product group j. As this implicit price increases, quantity purchased decreases.
Despite using a Cobb-Douglas function form that typically restricts product group price elasticities to
one, variation in the level of the unobserved characteristic will lead to variation in price elasticities.
Specifically, an income group’s price elasticity is determined by the absolute magnitudes of β̃c and ξ:
larger (smaller) β̃c and ξ parameters scale down (up) the importance of price variation in determining
quantity purchased Yijt . By allowing these preference parameters to vary by income group, we allow
different income groups to differentially value both characteristics and price.

VI.B

Identifying Characteristic Preferences

In Section VI.D, we detail a method of moments estimator of Equation (12). A key moment condition
for identifying characteristic preferences β̃c will be
E ((δj + εijt )ãijct ) = 0.

(13)

This moment condition generates two types of variation with which to identify characteristic preferences β̃c . First, we use the variation between product groups: we infer that β̃c for sodium is high if
consumers spend more on product groups with high sodium. Second, we use variation across households within product groups: we also infer that β̃c for sodium is high if consumers who purchase
especially salty products within a group purchase more calories in that group.
We face a standard econometric challenge with the characteristics approach to demand: characteristics are not randomly assigned to products, and valid instruments for characteristics are unavailable.35
Because unobserved product characteristics could be correlated with ãijct , we should not necessarily
interpret β̃c as the causal effect of characteristic c on demand. For example, because salt acts as a
preservative, preferences for salt could also capture preferences for longer shelf life. This could be
problematic if we were, for example, predicting how demand would respond to product reformulations that change specific characteristics in isolation. This issue is less problematic for our analyses,
in which we simply want to interpret how preferences for groceries including healthy or unhealthy
characteristics vary by income and then simulate how demand would respond to changes in prices or
overall bundles of products available.
35
To interpret β̃c as the causal effect of characteristics on demand, the identifying assumption in Equation (13) has two
economic implications, which parallel these two types of identifying variation. First, we must assume that product group
preferences δj are uncorrelated with characteristic contents ãijct . Second, individual households’ idiosyncratic tastes εijt
must be uncorrelated with the variation in ãijct across households but within product groups. In the context of the model,
∗
households’ idiosyncratic perceptions of product kj’s quality Ψikj influence yikjt
, the quantities of individual products
purchased within the group, and hence affect calorie-weighted average characteristics ãijct . Thus, for the identifying
assumption to hold, Ψikj must be independent of the terms that make up εijt : households’ idiosyncratic preference
parameters µijt and θijt .

22

VI.C

Price Endogeneity

A more worrisome source of endogeneity arises from a potential correlation between a household’s
idiosyncratic product group preferences εijt and the household’s average price paid p̃ijt :
E (εijt p̃ijt ) 6= 0.

(14)

Such endogeneity could arise if households endogenously shop at stores offering lower prices for product
groups on which they spend more, if households seek out systematically different quality levels (and
thus price levels) in groups on which they spend more, or through standard simultaneity bias, in which
retailers set higher markups in response to higher demand.
To address the possibility of price endogeneity, we develop a new instrument for prices. The underlying intuition for our instrument is that retail chains differ in their sourcing and distribution costs
across products, giving different chains heterogeneous comparative advantages in supplying different
products. Then, because different chains are present in different geographic areas, the relative prices
of different products also vary across areas. To illustrate, consider a simple example in which there are
two types of foods, apples and pizza, and two grocery chains, Safeway and Shaw’s. Suppose Safeway
is able to supply pizza cheaply, while Shaw’s can supply apples cheaply. Then, areas dominated by
Safeway will have relatively low pizza prices, while areas dominated by Shaw’s will have relatively low
apple prices.
We construct our instrument as follows. For retail chain r in market (i.e. county) m during time
period t, let ln(pkrt,−m ) denote the average log price of UPC k in stores from the same chain but in
all markets excluding market m, denoted by −m. Let ln(pkt,−m ) denote the national average log price
of UPC k in period t in all markets excluding m. We exclude market m to ensure that the IV reflects
a chain’s comparative advantages in supplying product k based on other markets, not local demand
conditions in market m. Retail chain r’s cost advantage in supplying UPC k relative to the national
average is thus ∆ ln(pkrt,−m ) = ln(pkrt,−m ) − ln(pkt,−m ).
Let Nrmt denote retailer r’s number of establishments in market m, let Njrt denote retailer r’s
nationwide unit sales in product group j, and let Nkt denote the total nationwide unit sales of product
k in year t. The price instrument Pjmt is the weighted average cost advantage that chains in market
m have for UPCs in product group j:
P
Pjmt =

r∈m Nrmt Njrt

·

PKj

k=1 Nkt ∆ ln(pkrt,−m )
.
PKj
r∈m Nrmt Njrt ·
k=1 Nkt

P

(15)

Our identifying assumption is that household i’s idiosyncratic preferences for product group j are
uncorrelated with the price instrument Pjmt for group j in household i’s market:
E (εijt Pjmt ) = 0.

(16)

The variation in our instrument reflects geographic variation in different retailers’ presence across

23

markets. Because our model includes product group and market fixed effects, our instrument relies on
variation in the relative prices across product groups within a market.36 The key economic content
of our identifying assumption is that chains do not have comparative pricing advantages in product
groups where their customers have stronger tastes.
A suggestive test of our identifying assumption is whether there is a correlation between county
income and the instrument’s predicted relative price for healthy product categories. Although not
fully dispositive in either direction, such a correlation would suggest that chains located in places
with higher demand for healthy foods tend to have a comparative advantage in supplying healthy
food, which would violate the identifying assumption. To test this, we regress our price instrument on
the interaction of product group j’s average Health Index Hj with a dummy for whether the county
average income in 2010 is above the nationwide median, conditional on the same product group and
county fixed effects from Equation (12):
Pjmt = γ · 1(Incomem > N ational median income) ∗ H j + δj + φm + jmt .

(17)

γ measures whether healthier product groups are differentially priced in higher-income counties
than lower-income counties. Figure 8 presents a binned scatterplot of this regression after partialling
out the fixed effects. We see zero correlation between a product group’s Health Index and our price
instrument in higher-income counties versus lower-income counties, reducing concerns that our price
IV is driven by demand-side variation.
Appendix Figure A12 presents maps illustrating the geographic presence of several large retail
chains in RMS. There is substantial variation within and between regions of the country. Appendix
Figure A13 presents maps illustrating the resulting variation in Pjmt across U.S. counties for example
product groups. Produce is predicted to be cheap on the west coast and expensive on the east coast,
likely because so much produce is grown in California. Yogurt is predicted to be cheap for a dispersed
set of counties in the midwest. Cookies are predicted to be relatively cheap in Massachusetts and
West Texas. The figures make clear that there is substantial national and within-region variation,
that this variation is not closely related to county income, and that there are substantial differences
in the spatial patterns across product groups.
Our conversations with insiders from the grocery industry suggest that several factors contribute
to differences in comparative advantage across retail chains. First, different products are produced
in different parts of the country, generating transportation costs that vary across retail chains in
different regions. Second, some retailers are larger than others, and economies of scale vary across
product groups. Third, although the Robinson-Patman Act prohibits wholesale price discrimination,
the Act is increasingly unenforced (Lipman, 2012), and producers often offer more subtle contractual
incentives that generate variation in effective marginal cost across retailers.
Appendix Figure A14 plots the standard deviation in our instrument for the six product “depart36

DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2017) show that retail chains whose stores are in markets with more inelastic demand
tend to charge higher prices than other retail chains whose stores are in markets with more elastic demand. Our market
fixed effects are designed to address this form of endogeneity in response to overall market demand patterns.

24

ments” (broadly aggregated product categories as defined by Nielsen), after residualizing against year,
market, and product group fixed effects. Fresh produce has the most variation, followed in order
by dairy, frozen foods, packaged meats and deli items, and dry grocery. This ordering is consistent
with how costs vary across chains. Because produce is grown more in certain areas of the country,
transportation costs differ considerably across chains in different regions. Furthermore, fresh produce
and dairy require refrigeration and are highly perishable, making their cost quite sensitive to a chain’s
distribution network. By contrast, dry grocery items require no refrigeration and have long shelf lives,
and are thus easy to transport.
The instrument is very powerful. Appendix Figure A15 shows that there is a robust linear relationship between log prices and the instrument, controlling for market and product group fixed effects.
A linear version of our IV procedure has first stage F-statistics ranging from 243 to 260 in the four
income groups.
This instrument is novel in the literature, and it can be used in situations in which other instruments do not generate identification or fail the exclusion restriction. DellaVigna and Gentzkow (2017),
for example, use price variation from individual stores’ short-term promotions. This variation is useful
in identifying a store’s residual demand elasticity; it may be less useful for identifying households’
preferences, especially if households substitute across stores or stockpile goods bought on sale. Hausman (1996) uses variation in prices over time in other markets, which is valid under the assumption
that demand shocks are uncorrelated across markets. By contrast, our instrument generates crosssectional identification, while relying on an exclusion restriction that could be more plausible in many
applications.

VI.D

Method of Moments Estimation

For estimation, we construct separate datasets for each of four household income quartiles, where
income is residual of household size and age and year indicators to be consistent with the earlier parts
of the paper. Data are at the household-by-product group-by-year level. We define J = 45 product
groups using a slight modification of Nielsen’s original “product group” variable, combining a handful
of groups with infrequent purchases so as to minimize observations with zero purchases. We drop
any remaining observations with zero purchases, as the first-order condition does not hold for these
observations.37 We define C − 1 = 12 observed product characteristics for the 12 dietary components
that enter the Health Index: grams of sodium per 1,000 calories, ounces of whole grains per 1,000
calories, etc. For each income group, we estimate four parameter vectors: the (C − 1) × 1 vector β̃
of preferences for observed characteristics, the scalar ξ representing the unobserved characteristic, the
J × 1 vector δ of product group fixed effects, and the M × 1 vector φ of market fixed effects.
To specify the moment conditions, let D j be a J × 1 vector of dummy variables for whether the
observation is in product group j, and let D m be an M × 1 vector of dummy variables for whether
37
We drop 10.6% of observations at the household-by-product group-by-year level because they have zero purchases.
“Baby food” is the product group with the most missing observations. The differences across income groups in a
product group’s share of missing observations are not correlated with the product group’s average characteristic contents,
suggesting that these dropped observations do not affect our estimated preference heterogeneity across income groups.

25

household i is in market m. The model estimation relies on the following set of (C + J + M ) identifying
moments that just identify our model parameters:
E ((δj + εijt )ãijct ) = 0 , c = 1, ..., C
E (εijt Pjmt )

=0
.

E (εijt Dijt )

= 0 , j = 1, ..., J

E (εijt Dim )

= 0 , m = 1, ..., M

(18)

Loosely, the first set of moments identifies the β̃ parameters, the second identifies ξ, the third
set identifies δ, and the fourth set identifies φ. We construct the sample analogue of the moment

conditions from Equation (18) in the following (C + J + M ) × 1 vector: g ijt = g ijt δ, φ, β̃, ξ . We
can then write the method of moments estimator as:
0 




X
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
ˆ
δ̂, φ̂, β̃, ξˆ = arg min 
g ijt  
g ijt  .
IJT
(δ,φ,β̃,ξ) IJT i j t
t
i
j

(19)

Appendix D.A presents details of the estimator and its standard errors.

VI.E

Estimation Results

ˆ
Table 4 reports the estimated characteristic preference parameters β̃c for each of the four income
quartiles. The units on each parameter are those originally specified by the Healthy Eating Index.
ˆ
For example, produce is measured in cups, while protein is measured in ounces. The estimated β̃c
measures the average willingness to pay (WTP) to have a unit of characteristic c instead of a calorie
containing no healthy or unhealthy characteristics—for example, a calorie of unsaturated fat. This
normalization also removes differences in λ, the marginal utility of a dollar, across income groups.
Among the eight “healthy” dietary components, six of them (whole fruit, other fruit, whole grains,
greens and beans, vegetables other than greens and beans, and dairy) display a strong and almost
uniformly monotonic increase in willingness to pay as household income increases. The only healthy
characteristic not fitting this pattern is protein from fish and plants. All households dislike this
type of protein, especially high-income households. Meat protein is valued similarly across the income
distribution. Among the four “unhealthy” dietary components, two of them (sodium and added sugar)
are are more strongly disliked by high-income households. The estimated WTP for added sugar is
especially striking: bottom income quartile households are willing to pay $0.0002 to consume a gram of
added sugar, while top income quartile households are willing to pay $0.004 to avoid consuming a gram
of added sugar. Added sugar is the only component for which high- and low-income households have
opposite-signed preferences, highlighting substantial differences in preferences for added sugar across
the income distribution. High-income households have stronger preferences for the remaining two
26

unhealthy components, refined grains and solid fats. The magnitudes of some preference differences
are large: the highest-income quartile dislikes sodium nearly three times as much as the lowest-income
quartile, and likes dairy about twice as much. We also find that higher-income households have the
lowest estimated unobserved characteristic. Accordingly, higher-income households are less sensitive
to prices.
ˆ
To derive a summary statistic for overall preferences for healthy eating, we sum the β̃c , weighting
by the healthfulness of a unit of each dietary component. To implement this, recall that the Healthy
Eating Index grants points for consuming more of “healthy” components and less of “unhealthy”
components, with a minimum component score of zero and a maximum score of five or ten achieved at
minimum and maximum thresholds. If sc ∈ {5, 10} is the maximum HEI score for dietary component c
and rc is the difference in consumption of component c to receive the maximum instead of the minimum
score (with rc > 0 for “healthy” components and rc < 0 for “unhealthy” components), column 14
P ˆ
reports c β̃c sc rc . All income groups value healthy groceries, but the highest-income group is willing
to pay the most, making healthy eating a normal good. The lowest-income quartile is willing to pay
$0.43 per 1,000 calories to consume the maximum-scoring bundle, while the highest-income quartile
is willing to pay $1.14 per 1,000 calories.
ˆ
As discussed in Section VI.B, the β̃c parameters are most safely interpreted as preferences for
dietary component c and any unmeasured correlates. For example, foods differ in shelf life and
preparation time, and these characteristics could both be correlated with dietary components and be
valued differently by low- versus high-income households. To consider this possibility, we collected data
on each UPC’s shelf life (from the U.S. government’s FoodKeeper app (HHS 2015)) and convenience
of preparation (from Okrent and Kumcu (2016)). Appendix Table A9 reports the model estimates
including these two additional characteristics. Higher-income households have stronger preferences
for convenience and fresher foods with shorter shelf lives, but the patterns of preferences for dietary
components across the income distribution are similar to the primary estimates. Willingness to pay
to consume the maximum-scoring bundle of dietary components is now lower for all income quartiles:
$0.20 per 1000 calories for the lowest-income quartile, and $0.63 for the highest-income quartile. Even
though these dollar values are lower, the ratio of the high-income WTP to the low-income WTP is
now larger: 0.63/0.20 ≈ 3.15, compared to $1.14/$0.43 ≈ 2.65 in the primary specification.

VII
VII.A

Explaining and Reducing Nutritional Inequality
Decomposing Consumption Differences into Supply versus Demand Factors

Using the model estimates from Section VI.E, we decompose the observed differences in healthy eating
across income groups into underlying supply-side factors (prices and availability) and demand-side
factors (preferences for product groups and characteristics). Because our model is estimated at the
product group level, our counterfactuals only allow households to re-optimize their calorie demand
across product groups. We do not analyze how households would change their relative quantities
across UPCs within product groups.
27

For this section, we index parameters for each of the four household income groups (residual
of household size and age and year indicators) by g ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4}. For a given set of prices p̃gj ,
observed and unobserved characteristics ãgjc and ξ g , product group preferences δgj , and characteristic
preferences β̃gc , we can predict Ŷgj , the total calories that income group g consumes within product
group j:
Ŷgj =

p̃gj

exp(δgj )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃gc ãgjc − ξg

(20)

For simplicity, this equation excludes the market fixed effect φm . This omission just scales consumption
up or down for all product groups within an income group, which does not affect our calculation of
the overall Health Index.
For each income group, we construct a representative product for each product group, and we
calculate the resulting representative price p̃gj , observed characteristics ãgjc , and Health Index Hgj .
This representative product is the weighted average of products available in RMS stores where each
income group shops, weighting stores by their share of nationwide trips and weighting UPCs by their
share of nationwide calorie consumption. Specifically, let Qkj denote the total nationwide quantity of
calories sold of UPC k in product group j, let Nge denote the number of trips made by Homescan
households of income group g to store e, and let 1(kj ∈ e) denote the indicator function for whether
product kj is stocked in store e. The Health Index of the representative product is the weighted
average of the Health Index for each UPC within the product group:
Hgj

P
P
Qkj s Nge 1(kj ∈ e)Hkj
k
P
= P
.
s Nge 1(kj ∈ e)
k Qkj

(21)

The representative price and observed characteristics are calculated analogously, substituting p̃gj and
ãgjc for Hjk .
To evaluate the bundle of goods characterized by predicted group-level consumption Ŷgj , we then
calculate the overall Health Index:
Ĥg =

X

Ŷgj Hgj .

(22)

j

For this subsection, we re-normalize the Health Index so that the initial difference between the highest
and lowest income groups equals one. The left-most points on Figure 9 display each income group’s
initial Health Index level, calculated by substituting the predictions of Equation (20) into Equation
(22).
We can now simulate the changes in healthy eating that would occur under different counterfactual
scenarios for supply- and demand-side factors. We begin with the supply side, motivated by the arguments that food deserts are a key cause of the nutrition-income relationship. Our first counterfactual
explores one aspect of the food desert policy discussion by assessing the role of product group prices
in healthy eating differences across the income groups. For each income group, we set product group
prices p̃gj to the levels observed in the highest income group, g = 4. Thus, for each income group g,

28

we calculate the product group calorie demand as:
Ŷgj =

p̃4j

exp(δgj )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃gc ãgjc − ξg

(23)

We then compute the corresponding Health Index by substituting the quantities in Equation (23) into
Equation (22). Figure 9 shows that prices do not appear to explain much of the difference in the
Health Index across income groups.
Our second counterfactual explores the part of the food desert discussion related to availability,
by setting the characteristic levels ãgjc in each product group equal to those observed in the highest
income group. We make this change in addition to equating the price level across income groups. We
now recompute each income group’s total calorie demand in product group j as follows:38
Ŷgj =

p̃4j

exp(δgj )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃gc ã4jc − ξg

(24)

Figure 9 shows that equalizing the availability of nutrients decreases the Health Index difference
between the highest and lowest income groups. In combination, equalizing prices and availability
decreases the difference by nine percent. The combined effect of equalizing prices and availability
decreases the difference by nine percent. These first two counterfactuals confirm our findings from
Section IV: differences in supply do not explain very much of the nutrition-income relationship.
Contrary to the view of some advocates and policymakers, even fully equating availability and prices
of healthy foods for all households would reduce nutritional inequality by only nine percent.
We now explore the role of demand-side differences. In addition to the changes in prices and
availability of characteristics, we now also set the characteristic preferences β̃gc in each income group
to those of the highest-income group, generating calorie demand
Ŷgj =

p̃4j

exp(δgj )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃4c ã4jc − ξ4

(25)

Figure 9 shows that equalizing the nutrient preferences closes most of the gap in healthy eating.
While the bundles chosen by the highest-income group are still healthier than those of the lower
income groups, the gap between the highest and lowest income groups has declined by 46 percent
relative to the baseline.
Finally, in addition to prices, characteristic availability, and characteristic preferences, we also set
the product group preferences δj equal to those of the highest income group, generating total calorie
demand:
Ŷgj =

p̃4j

exp(δ4j )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃4c ã4jc − ξ4

38

(26)

The unobserved characteristic ξ represents a combination of the amount of the unobserved characteristic and the
income group’s preference for it. While this is a mix of supply and demand forces, we will attribute it to demand because
it primarily determines the consumer’s demand elasticity with respect to price, a demand side force.

29

By construction, this last counterfactual mechanically equalizes the observed purchases across each of
the income groups, as seen in Figure 9.
In summary, over 90 percent of the nutrition-income relationship is due to demand-side factors
related to preferences, while less than 10 percent is explained by the supply side. Consistent with our
model-free analyses in Section IV, this finding counters arguments that food deserts are important
contributors to nutritional inequality.

VII.B

Using Observables to Explain Demand for Healthy Groceries

The results of the previous section highlight that demand-side factors, not supply, are central to
explaining the nutrition-income relationship. But what explains the differences in demand across
income levels? In this section, we first show which household-level observable characteristics predict
demand for healthy groceries. Then, we show which household observables explain the correlation
between income and healthy grocery demand.
The structural model allows us to implement a key distinction: instead of analyzing equilibrium
purchases of healthy groceries, we isolate each household’s demand for healthy groceries, while holding
supply conditions constant. To do this, we compute the sample average prices and observed characteristics for each product group, denoted p̄j and ājc . As in the decomposition in Section VII.A, we
interpret these two parameters as reflecting “supply.” Using the parameter estimates, we also back
out each observation’s fitted error term, εijt , which captures heterogeneity in preferences within an
income group. For household i in year t, we then compute the total calorie demand in all product
groups at the sample average supply parameters:
Ŷijt =

exp(δgj + φgm + εijt )
.
P
p̄j − C
c=2 β̃gc ājc − ξg

(27)

We then insert Ŷijt into an analogue of Equation (22) to calculate HitD , the Health Index of household
i’s grocery demand at sample average supply, and normalize HitD to have a standard deviation of one.
To determine the correlates of demand for healthy groceries, we run the following regression:
HitD = α ln wi + γ 1 X 1it + γ 0 X 0it + µt + εi ,

(28)

where wi denotes household i’s sample average income, µt are year indicators, X 0it denotes household
size and age indicators (the same controls used in Figure 1), and X 1it denotes the remaining demographics from Section IV (natural log of years of education, race indicators, an indicator for whether
the household heads are married, employment status, and weekly work hours), plus two additional
variables from the Homescan add-on survey carried out by Nielsen for Allcott, Lockwood and Taubinsky (2018): the self-reported importance of staying healthy and nutrition knowledge, both normalized
to have a standard deviation of one.39 As discussed in Section III.A, we control for X 0it so as to inter39
The health importance variable is from the question, “In general, how important is it to you to stay healthy, for
example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease, etc.?” Original responses were on a scale
from 0 to 10. Nutrition knowledge is the score on 28 questions from the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire,

30

pret wi as a rough measure of the household’s socioeconomic status, while we think of X 1it as possible
mediators of the relationship between socioeconomic status and healthy grocery demand. The sample
sizes are smaller than in previous tables because we restrict the sample to only those households that
responded to the survey. Standard errors are clustered by household, and observations are weighted
by the Homescan sample weights.
Column 1 of Table 5 presents results. Education is strongly correlated with healthy grocery
demand: the coefficient on the natural log of years of education is 0.685, meaning that at the sample
mean education level, a one-year increase in education is associated with a 0.05 standard deviation
increase in demand for healthy groceries. A one standard deviation increase in nutrition knowledge
is associated with a 0.13 standard deviation increase in demand for healthy groceries. In separate
regressions in which we exclude nutrition knowledge, the education coefficient rises by about 20 percent,
suggesting that health knowledge is one mechanism through which education may influence healthy
behavior.40
The second goal of this section is to determine which observables explain the relationship between
income and demand for healthy groceries. We use the approach of Gelbach (2016), which is to think
of covariates X 1it as “omitted variables” in the relationship between healthy grocery demand HitD and
household income ln wi , conditional on X 0it , and then calculate the “omitted variables bias” from excluding each specific covariate. Column 2 presents the relationship between HitD and ln wi , conditional
on X 0it , giving a coefficient we denote as α̃. The income coefficient in column 1 is 0.134/0.267 ≈ 0.50
of the coefficient in column 2. Therefore, these observables explain about one-half of the relationship
between income and healthy grocery demand.
Column 3 of Table 5 presents estimates of eight separate auxiliary regressions, ln wi = ΓXvit +
γ 0 X 0it

+ i , which give Γ̂, the conditional covariance between the natural log of income and the

individual variable Xv . Following Gelbach (2016), we can then estimate variable Xv ’s contribution
to the relationship between income and demand for healthy groceries by using the omitted variable
bias formula: π̂v = Γ̂v γ̂v . As with standard omitted variable bias, a covariate will explain more of the
relationship if it is more strongly associated with healthy grocery demand or with income. Finally,
dividing by α̃ gives variable Xv ’s estimated contribution as a share of the unconditional relationship:
π̃v =

Γ̂v γ̂v
.
α̃

(29)

As shown in Gelbach (2016), these contributions can be aggregated to consider vectors of indicator
variables jointly, and we do this for the vector of census division indicators. Figure 10 presents the
estimated π̃v parameters and 95 percent confidence intervals. Education explains the largest share
of the relationship between demand for healthy groceries and income, at about 20 percent. Nutriwhich is standard in the public health literature (Kliemann et al., 2016). One example question is, “If a person wanted
to buy a yogurt at the supermarket, which would have the least sugar/sweetener?” The possible responses are “0% fat
cherry yogurt,” “Plain yogurt,” “Creamy fruit yogurt,” and “Not sure”; the correct answer is “Plain yogurt.”
40
This is consistent with literature showing that education is highly predictive of health behaviors and outcomes (e.g.,
Grossman (2015) and Furnee et al. (2008)), and with the Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) finding that knowledge explains
10–20 percent of the relationship between education and drinking and smoking.

31

tion knowledge explains the second-largest share, at about 14 percent. These results are correlations,
so they do not reflect the causal effect of additional education or nutrition knowledge interventions.
Notwithstanding, they are certainly suggestive of how improved educational opportunities and nutrition information could play a role in reducing nutritional inequality.

VII.C

Using Subsidies to Reduce Nutritional Inequality

Our analyses suggest that supply-side policies such as encouraging supermarket entry will have limited
effects on healthy eating. In this section, we study an alternative policy: subsidies for healthy foods.
There are many types of taxes and subsidies that could affect healthy eating. To ease interpretation,
we focus on a simple subsidy that scales in a product’s healthfulness and is available only to the bottom
quartile of income distribution, again conditional on household size and age and year indicators. While
the exact setup of these counterfactuals is developed to fit with our previous analyses, we think of
this as a stylized implementation of a healthy food subsidy within SNAP, the U.S. government’s
means-tested nutritional support program.
Specifically, we consider an ad valorem subsidy for each product that is proportional to its Health
Index. In order to target only healthy foods, we set the subsidy to zero for all foods with a belowaverage Health Index. Because our demand estimates focus on between-product group demand, we
continue analyzing composite products representing the calorie-weighted average product sold within
product group j among the products purchased by income group g. The percent subsidy for product
j for households in the bottom income quartile (g = 1) is

s1j


min{s(H − H̄), 0.95}
1j
=
0

if (H1j − H̄) > 0

(30)

otherwise.

We limit the subsidy to a maximum of 95 percent of the product group’s price, which binds in a few
cases at the highest subsidy considered below.
Income quartile g = 1’s subsidized price for product group j is p̃s1j = p̃1j (1 − s1j ), where p̃1j is the
calorie-weighted average price paid among bottom income quartile households in the data. Bottomquartile households would have the following subsidized demand for each product group:
Ŷ1j =

p̃s1j

exp(δ1j )
.
PC
− c=2 β̃1c ã1jc − ξ1

(31)

By construction, the subsidy is not available to the top three income quartiles, so their demand is
unchanged. We numerically solve for the subsidy s that increases the bottom income quartile’s Health
Index by a given amount.
Table 6 presents results. Column 1 presents the subsidy that reduces the Health Index gap between
top-quartile and bottom-quartile households by 0.9 percent—the point estimate of the impact of
supermarket entry from Section IV.A.41 Column 2 presents the subsidy that reduces the Health Index
41

Our point estimate from Table 2, panel (b), column 2 is that one supermarket entry within 10 minutes’ drive of a

32

gap by nine percent—the effect of equating supply estimated in Section VII.A. Column 3 presents the
subsidy that brings bottom quartile households’ Health Index to the level of the top quartile.
The first two rows present the subsidy parameter s and the mean percent subsidy for products with
an above-median Health Index, which are the products receiving non-zero subsidies. The third row
presents the average subsidy payment per bottom-quartile household. The bottom row presents the
total subsidy payment, aggregating over all 31.45 million households in the bottom income quartile.
The results in column 1 show that an annual subsidy of $84 million would increase healthy eating by
the same amount as one additional supermarket entry within a 10-minute drive of all bottom-quartile
households. In comparison, the Healthy Food Financing Initiative has spent about $220 million of
its $400 million budget on store subsidies (TRF 2017), and various state programs have spent tens of
millions (CDC, 2011). Of course, government expenditures are far from a complete measure of social
costs; the impacts of these supply-side programs on store entry are unclear. What we can conclude
is that a supermarket entry subsidy of more than $2.62 per year per household within a 10-minute
drive would be less cost-effective than this means-tested subsidy at increasing the Health Index of
bottom-quartile households’ grocery purchases.
Column 2 shows that an annual subsidy of $830 million would increase healthy eating by the
same amount as providing bottom-quartile households the same supply conditions as top-quartile
households. From this, we can similarly conclude that even a suite of supply-side policies that are
somehow able to achieve this full equalization of supply will only be cost effective if they cost less than
$830 million per year.
Column 3 shows that a subsidy of $11 billion per year could raise bottom-quartile households’
Health Index all the way to the level of top-quartile households. In comparison, the annual SNAP
budget in 2016 was $71 billion (CBPP 2018). Thus, a healthy food subsidy within SNAP could
eliminate this measure of nutritional inequality at a cost of only about 15 percent of the SNAP budget.
Of course, SNAP has many objectives, and there are many economic and political considerations
around modifying the SNAP program to encourage healthy eating (Richards and Sindelar, 2013;
Schanzenbach, 2017; Shenkin and Jacobson, 2010). But this result on the cost effectiveness of healthy
eating subsidies, combined with our earlier results on the lack of efficacy of supply-side policies, suggests
that policymakers interested in reducing nutritional inequality might redirect efforts from supply-side
policies toward means-tested subsidies.

VIII

Conclusion

We study the causes of “nutritional inequality”: why the wealthy tend to eat more healthfully than
the poor in the United States. The public health literature has documented that lower-income neighborhoods suffer from lower availability of healthy groceries and that lower-income households tend to
eat less healthfully. In public policy circles and in government, this relationship has been taken as
causal, with significant policy attention devoted to improving access to healthy groceries in low-income
bottom income quartile household reduces top minus bottom quartile Health Index difference by 0.005/0.56 ≈ 0.9%.

33

neighborhoods.
We test this hypothesis using several complementary empirical strategies. Entry of a new supermarket has economically small effects on healthy grocery purchases, and we can conclude that differential
local supermarket density explains no more than about 1.5 percent of the difference in healthy eating
between high- and low-income households. The data clearly show why this is the case: Americans
travel a long way for shopping, so even people who live in “food deserts” with no supermarkets get
most of their groceries from supermarkets. Entry of a new supermarket nearby therefore mostly diverts
purchases from other supermarkets. This analysis reframes the discussion of food deserts in two ways.
First, the notion of a “food desert” is misleading if it is based on a market definition that understates
consumers’ willingness-to-travel. Second, any benefits of “combatting” food deserts derive less from
healthy eating and more from reducing travel costs.
In a second event study analysis, we find that moving to an area where other people eat more or
less healthfully does not affect households’ own healthy eating patterns, at least over the several year
time horizon that the data allow. In combination with the assumption that any endogeneity would
generate upward bias in our estimated “place effects,” we can conclude that the partial equilibrium
place effects explain no more than three percent of differences in healthy eating between high- and lowincome households. In our third reduced-form analysis, we find that even when we look at households
living in the same zip codes or shopping at the same retailers, the nutrition-income relationship
decreases by no more than one-third. Because of endogenous sorting into neighborhoods and stores,
we think of this as an upper bound on the long-run effects of equalizing supply.
Our formal demand model estimates allow us to simulate precise counterfactuals in which lowincome households are afforded the product availability and relative prices available to higher-income
households. Consistent with the reduced form event study analyses, we find that equalizing supply
would close the gap in healthy eating between low- and high-income households by less than 10 percent. By contrast, a means-tested subsidy for healthy groceries could increase low-income households’
healthy eating to the level of high-income households at about 15 percent of the cost of the SNAP
program. Although it would be crucial to carry out a full analysis of what market failures justify
such subsidies, this result suggests that policymakers focused on reducing nutritional inequality might
redirect efforts from supply-side policies toward means-tested subsidies.

References
Aizer, Anna and Janet Currie, “The Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality: Maternal Disadvantage
and Health at Birth,” Science, 2014, 344 (6186), 856–861.
Algert, Susan J., Aditya Agrawal, and Douglas S. Lewis, “Disparities in Access to Fresh Produce in
Low-Income Neighborhoods in Los Angeles,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2006, 30 (5), 365–370.
Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky, “Regressive Sin Taxes, with an Application
to the Optimal Soda Tax,” Working Paper, NYU, 2018.

34

, Rebecca Diamond, and Jean-Pierre Dubé, “The Geography of Poverty and Nutrition: Food Deserts
and Food Choices Across the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 24094,
2017.
Alwitt, Linda F. and Thomas D. Donley, “Retail Stores in Poor Urban Neighborhoods,” The Journal of
Consumer Affairs, 1997, 31 (1), 139–164.
Anderson, Michael and David Matsa, “Are Restaurants Really Supersizing America?,” American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics, 2011, 3 (1), 152–188.
Atkin, David, “The Caloric Costs of Culture: Evidence from Indian Migrants,” American Economic Review,
2016, 106 (4), 1144–1181.
, Benjamin Faber, and Marco Gonzalez-Navarro, “Retail Globalization and Household Welfare: Evidence from Mexico,” Journal of Political Economy (forthcoming), 2016.
Aussenberg, Randy Alison, “SNAP and Related Nutrition Provisions of the 2014 Farm Bill (P.L. 113-79),”
Congressional Research Service Report, 2014.
Baker, EA, M. Schootman, E. Barnidge, and C. Kelly, “The Role of Race and Poverty in Access to
Foods that Enable Individuals to Adhere to Dietary Guidelines,” Preventing Chronic Disease, 2006, 3 (3),
A76.
Baum, Charles and Shin-Yi Chou, “Why Has the Prevalence of Obesity Doubled?,” Review of Economics
of the Household, 2016, 14 (2), 251–267.
Berry, Steven T., “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,” Rand Journal of Economics, 1994, 25 (2), 242–262.
Bertail, Patrice and France Caillavet, “Fruit and Vegetable Consumption Patterns: A Segmentation
Approach,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2008, 90 (3), 827–842.
Beydoun, May A., Lisa M. Powell, and Youfa Wang, “The Association of Fast Food, Fruit and Vegetable
Prices with Dietary Intakes Among US Adults: Is There a Modification by Family Income?,” Social Science
& Medicine, 2008, 66 (11), 2218–2229.
Bitler, Marianne and Steven Haider, “An Economic View of Food Deserts in the United States,” Journal
of Policy Analysis and Management, 2011, 30 (1), 153–176.
Bronnenberg, Bart J., Jean-Pierre Dubé, and Matthew Gentzkow, “The Evolution of Brand Preferences: Evidence from Consumer Migration,” American Economic Review, 2012, 102 (6), 2472–2508.
Case, Anne and Angus Deaton, “Rising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife Among White Non-Hispanic
Americans in the 21st Century,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2015, 112 (49), 15078–
15083.
CDC, “State Initiatives Supporting Healthier Food Retail: An Overview of the National Landscape,” 2011.
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler, “The Association Between Income and Life Expectancy in the
United States, 2001–2014,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 2016, 315 (16), 1750–1766.
, Nathan Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, “Where is the Land of Opportunity? The
Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2014, 129
(3), 1553–1623.
Chou, Shin-Yi, Michael Grossman, and Henry Saffer, “An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity: Results
from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System,” Journal of Health Economics, 2004, 23 (3), 565–587.

35

Courtemanche, Charles J. and Art Carden, “Competing with Costco and Sam’s Club: Warehouse Club
Entry and Grocery Prices,” NBER Working Paper 17220, 2011.
, Joshua C. Pinkston, Christopher J. Ruhm, and George L. Wehby, “Can Changing Economic
Factors Explain the Rise in Obesity?,” Southern Economic Journal, 2016, 82 (4), 1266–1310.
Cummins, Steven, Anne Findlay, Mark Petticrew, and Leigh Sparks, “Healthy Cities: The Impact of
Food Retail-led Regeneration on Food Access, Choice, and Retail Structure,” Built Environment, 2005, 31
(4), 288–301.
Currie, Janet, Stefano DellaVigna, Enrico Moretti, and Vikram Pathania, “The Effect of Fast Food
Restaurants on Obesity and Weight Gain,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2010, 2 (3),
32–63.
Curtis, Colleen, “First Lady Michelle Obama on Making a Difference in Cities with Food Deserts,” The White
House, 2011.
Cutler, David and Adriana Lleras-Muney, “Understanding Differences in Health Behaviors by Education,”
Journal of Health Economics, 2010, 29 (1), 1–28.
Cutler, David M., Edward L. Glaeser, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “Why Have Americans Become More
Obese?,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 2003, 17 (3), 93–118.
Darmon, Nicole and Adam Drewnoski, “Does Social Class Predict Diet Quality?,” American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 2008, 87 (5), 1107–1117.
Davis, Brennan and Christopher Carpenter, “Proximity of Fast-Food Restaurants to Schools and Adolescent Obesity,” American Journal of Public Health, 2009, 99 (3), 505–510.
DellaVigna, Stefano and Matthew Gentzkow, “Uniform Pricing in US Retail Chains,” Working Paper,
2017.
Dubois, Pierre, Rachel Griffith, and Aviv Nevo, “Do Prices and Attributes Explain International Differences in Food Purchases?,” American Economic Review, 2014, 2014 (3), 832–867.
Dunn, Richard A, “The Effect of Fast-Food Availability on Obesity: An Analysis by Gender, Race, and
Residential Location,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2010, 92 (4), 1149–1164.
Eid, Jean, Henry G. Overman, Diego Puga, and Matthew A. Turner, “Fat City: Questioning the
Relationship Between Urban Sprawl and Obesity,” Journal of Urban Economics, 2008, 63 (2), 385–404.
Einav, Liran, Ephraim Leibtag, and Aviv Nevo, “Recording Discrepancies in Nielsen Homescan Data:
Are They Present and Do They Matter?,” Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 2010, 8 (2), 207–239.
Elbel, Brian, Alyssa Moran, L. Beth Dixon, Kamila Kiszko, Jonathan Cantor, Courtney Abrams,
and Tod Mijanovich, “Assessment of a Government-Subsidized Supermarket in a High-Need Area on
Household Food Availability and Children’s Dietary Intakes,” Public Health Nutrition, February 2015, 26,
1–10.
Finkelstein, Amy, Matthew Gentzkow, and Heidi Williams, “Sources of Geographic Variation in Health
Care: Evidence From Patient Migration,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2016, 131 (4), 1681–1726.
,

, and

, “Place-Based Drivers of Mortality: Evidence from Migration,” Working Paper, 2018.

,

, and

, “What Drives Prescription Opioid Abuse? Evidence from Migration,” Working Paper, 2018.

Furnee, CA, W Groot, and HM van den Brink, “The Health Effects of Education: A Meta-Analysis,”
European Journal of Public Health, 2008, 18 (4), 417–421.

36

Gelbach, Jonah B, “When Do Covariates Matter? And Which Ones, and How Much?,” Journal of Labor
Economics, 2016, 34 (2), 509–543.
Grossman, Gene, “The Relationship Between Health and Schooling: What’s New?,” NBER Working Paper
21609, 2015.
Guenther, P.M., J. Reedy, and S.M. Krebs-Smith, “Development of the Healthy Eating Index,” Journal
of the American Dietetic Association, 2008, 108 (11), 1896–1901.
Handbury, Jessie, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Molly Schnell, “What Drives Nutritional Disparities? Retail
Access and Food Purchases across the Socioeconomic Spectrum,” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper 21126, 2015.
Hastings, Justine, Ryan Kessler, and Jesse M. Shapiro, “The Effect of SNAP on the Composition of
Purchased Foods: Evidence and Implications,” Working Paper, Brown University, 2018.
Hausman, Jerry, “Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect Competition,” in Timothy Bresnahan
and Robert J. Gordon, eds., The Economics of New Goods, University of Chicago Press, 1996, pp. 207–248.
Hilmers, Angela, David C. Hilmers, and Jayna Dave, “Neighborhood Disparities in Access to Healthy
Foods and Their Effects on Environmental Justice,” American Journal of Public Health, 2012, 102 (9), 1644–
1654.
Horowitz, Carol R., Kathryn A. Colson, Paul L. Hebert, and Kristie Lancaster, “Barriers to Buying
Healthy Foods for People With Diabetes: Evidence of Environmental Disparities,” American Journal of
Public Health, 2004, 94 (9), 1549–1554.
Hut, Stefan, “Determinants of Dietary Choice in the US: Evidence from Consumer Migration,” Working
Paper, Brown University, 2018.
Hwang, Minha and Sungho Park, “The Impact of Walmart Supercenter Conversion on Consumer Shopping
Behavior,” Management Science, 2016, 62 (3), 817–828.
Jetter, Karen M. and Diana L. Cassady, “The Availability and Cost of Healthier Food Alternatives,”
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2005, 30 (1), 38–44.
Jones, Eugene, “An Analysis of Consumer Food Shopping Behavior Using Supermarket Scanner Data: Differences by Income and Location,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 1997, pp. 1437–1443.
Kliemann, N, J Wardle, F Johnson, and H Croker, “Reliability and Validity of a Revised Version of
the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire,” European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2016, 70 (10),
1174–1180.
Kling, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood
Effects,” Econometrica, 2007, 75 (1), 83–119.
Lakdawalla, Darius, Tomas Philipson, and Jay Bhattacharya, “Welfare-Enhancing Technological
Change and the Growth of Obesity,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, 2005, 95 (2),
253–257.
Larson, Nicole, Mary Story, and Melissa Nelson, “Neighborhood Environments: Disparities in Access to
Healthy Foods in the U.S.,” American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 2009, 36 (1), 74–81.
Lipman, Melissa, “FTC May Waste Time Updating Price-Bias Guide, Attys Say,” 2012.
Ludwig, Jens, Lisa Sanbonmatsu, Lisa Gennetian, Emma Adam, Greg J. Duncan, Lawrence F.
Katz, Ronald C. Kessler, Jeffrey R. Kling, Stacy Tessler Lindau, Robert C. Whitaker, , and
Thomas W. McDade, “Neighborhoods, Obesity, and Diabetes—A Randomized Social Experiment,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 2011, 365, 1509–1519.

37

Molitor, David, “The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist Migration,” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 2018, 10 (1), 326–356.
Okrent, Abigail and Aylin Kumcu, “U.S. Households’ Demand for Convenience Foods,” USDA Economic
Research Report, 2016, (211).
Oster, Emily, “Unobservable Selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Business
and Economic Statistics (forthcoming), 2016.
Park, John L., Rodney B. Holcomb, Kellie Curry Raper, and Oral Capps, “A Demand Systems
Analysis of Food Commodities by U.S. Households Segmented by Income,” American Journal of Agricultural
Economics, 1996, 78 (2), 290–300.
Powell, Lisa M., Sandy Slater, Donka Mirtcheva, Yanjun Bao, and Frank J. Chaloupka, “Food
Store Availability and Neighborhood Characteristics in the United States,” Preventive Medicine, 2007, 44,
189–195.
Rashad, Inas, “Structural Estimation of Caloric Intake, Exercise, Smoking, and Obesity,” Quarterly Review
of Economics and Finance, 2006, 46 (2), 268–283.
, Michael Grossman, and Shin-Yi Chou, “The Super Size of America: An Economic Estimation of Body
Mass Index and Obesity in Adults,” Eastern Economic Journal, 2006, 32 (1), 133–148.
Rehm, Colin D., Jose L. Penalvo, Ashkan Afshin, and Dariush Mozaffarian, “Dietary Intake Among
U.S. Adults, 1999–2012,” Journal of the American Medical Association, 2016, 315 (23), 2542–2553.
CBPP (Center for Budget and Policy Priorities), “A Quick Guide to SNAP Eligibility and Benefits,”
2018.
HHS
(U.S.
Department
of
Health
and
Human
https://www.foodsafety.gov/keep/foodkeeperapp/index.html 2015.

Services),

“FoodKeeper

App,”

TRF
(The
Reinvestment
Fund),
“The
Healthy
Food
Financing
Initiative,”
http://www.healthyfoodaccess.org/resources/library/healthy-food-financing-initiative-hffi 2017.
USDA (U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service), “Away from Home:
Percentages of Selected Nutrients Contributed by Food and Beverages Consumed Away from Home,
by Family Income (in Dollars) and Age.” What We Eat in America, NHANES 2011-2012,”
http://www.ars.usda.gov/Services/docs.htm?docid=18349 2014b.
, “USDA Food and Nutrient Database for Dietary Studies 2015-2016,” https://www.ars.usda.gov/northeastarea/beltsville-md-bhnrc/beltsville-human-nutrition-research-center/food-surveys-researchgroup/docs/fndds-download-databases/ 2016.
,
“USDA
National
Nutrient
Database
http://www.ars.usda.gov/ba/bhnrc/ndl 2018.

for

Standard

Reference,

Release

28,”

Richards, Michael R. and Jody L. Sindelar, “Rewarding Healthy Food Choices in SNAP: Behavioral
Economic Applications,” Milbank Quarterly, 2013, 91 (2), 395–412.
Saez, Emmanuel and Thomas Piketty, “Income Inequality in the United States, 1913–1998,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 2003, 118 (1), 1–39.
Schanzenbach, Diane Whitmore, “Pros and Cons of Restricting SNAP Purchases,” 2017.
Sharkey, Joseph R., Scott Horel, and Wesley R. Dean, “Neighborhood Deprivation, Vehicle Ownership, and Potential Spatial Access to a Variety of Fruits and Vegetables in a Large Rural Area in Texas,”
International Journal of Health Geographics, 2010, 9 (26), 1–27.

38

Shenkin, Jonathan D. and Michael F. Jacobson, “Using the Food Stamp Program and Other Methods
to Promote Healthy Diets for Low-Income Consumers,” American Journal of Public Health, 2010, 100 (9),
1562–1564.
Song, Hee-Jung, Joel Gittelsohn, Miyong Kim, Sonali Suratkar, Sangita Sharma, and Jean Anliker, “A Corner Store Intervention in a Low-Income Urban Community is Associated with Increased Availability and Sales of Some Healthy Foods,” Public Health Nutrition, 2009, 12 (11), 2060–2067.
Volpe, Richard, Abigail Okrent, and Ephraim Leibtag, “The Effect of Supercenter-Format Stores on
the Healthfulness of Consumers’ Grocery Purchases,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 2013, 95
(3), 568–589.
and
, “Assessing the Healthfulness of Consumers’ Grocery Purchases,” USDA Economic Information
Bulletin, 2012, (EIB-102).
Wang, Dong D., Cindy W. Leung, Yanping Li, Eric L. Ding, Stephanie E. Chiuve, Frank B. Hu,
and Walter C. Willett, “Trends in Dietary Quality Among Adults in the United States, 1999 Through
2010,” JAMA Internal Medicine, 2014, 174 (10), 1587–1595.
Weatherspoon, Dave, James Oehmke, Assa Dembele, Marcus Coleman, Thasanee Satimanon, and
Lorraine Weatherspoon, “Price and Expenditure Elasticities for Fresh Fruits in an Urban Food Desert,”
Urban Studies, 2012, 50 (1), 88–106.
Wrigley, Neil, Daniel Warm, and Barrie Margetts, “Deprivation, Diet, and Food Retail Access: Findings
From the Leeds ‘Food Deserts’ Study,” Environment and Planning A, 2003, 35, 151–188.
Yang, Quanhe, Zefeng Zhang, Edward Gregg, Dana Flanders, Robert Merritt, and Frank Hu,
“Added Sugar Intake and Cardiovascular Diseases Mortality Among US Adults,” Journal of the American
Medical Association Internal Medicine, 2014, 174 (4), 516–524.

39

Tables
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics
Standard
Variable
Mean
deviation
Panel (a): Nielsen Homescan Households
Household income ($000s)
61.0
43.3
Years education
13.9
2.06
Age
52.3
14.4
Household size
2.38
1.33
White
0.77
0.42
Black
0.12
0.32
Married
0.50
0.50
Employed
0.61
0.44
Weekly work hours
22.9
16.7
Household daily calorie need
5192
2959
Health importance
0
1
Nutrition knowledge
0
1
Body Mass Index (kg/m2 )
29.5
7.0
Diabetic
0.19
0.38
Panel (b): Zip Code Establishment Counts
Grocery
1.67
4.07
Large grocery (>50 employees)
0.46
1.05
Supercenters/club stores
0.11
0.40
Drug stores
1.10
2.31
Convenience stores
3.14
5.25
Meat/fish/produce stores
0.27
0.96
Notes: Homescan data include 731,994 household-by-year observations for 2004–2016 and are weighted for
national representativeness. The U.S. government Dietary Guidelines include calorie needs by age and gender;
we combine that with Homescan household composition to get each household’s daily calorie need. Household
size is the number of household heads plus the total calorie needs of all other household members divided by the
nationwide average calorie need of household heads. Health importance, nutrition knowledge, Body Mass Index,
and the diabetic indicator are from Homescan add-on surveys carried out by Nielsen for Allcott, Lockwood and
Taubinsky (2018); the former two variables are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of
one. Health importance is the response to the question, “In general, how important is it to you to stay healthy,
for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease, etc.?” Nutrition knowledge
is from a battery of 28 questions drawn from the General Nutrition Knowledge Questionnaire (Kliemann et
al., 2016). If two household members responded to the PanelViews survey, we take the mean of each survey
variable across the two respondents. Zip code establishment counts are from Zip Code Business Patterns data
for 2004–2016, with 508,951 zip code-by-year observations.

40

Table 2: Effects of Supermarket Entry
(a) Effects on Expenditure Shares

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations
Dependent var. mean

Full sample
(1)
(2)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
1.496∗∗∗
0.037
(0.098)
(0.051)
0.543∗∗∗
-0.057
(0.059)
(0.035)
2,874,514
2,874,365
9.9
88.2

Bottom quartile
(3)
(4)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
1.966∗∗∗
-0.034
(0.243)
(0.145)
0.433∗∗∗
-0.029
(0.144)
(0.094)
538,041
537,998
7.5
86.2

Food deserts
(5)
(6)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
1.914∗∗∗
-0.269∗
(0.303)
(0.159)
0.762∗∗∗
-0.038
(0.166)
(0.119)
646,223
646,181
6.1
87.7

(b) Effects on Health Index

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations

Full sample
(1)
0.004
(0.003)
0.006∗∗∗
(0.002)
2,874,514

Bottom quartile
(2)
0.005
(0.007)
0.001
(0.005)
538,041

Food deserts
(3)
0.007
(0.008)
0.014∗∗∗
(0.005)
646,223

Notes: This table uses 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-quarter level. The “food desert”
subsample comprises observations with no grocery stores with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club
stores in the zip code in the first year the household is observed there. Expenditure shares are in units of
percentage points. Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases, normalized
to mean zero, standard deviation one across households. Reported independent variables are the count of
supermarkets that have entered within a 0–10 or 10–15 minute drive from the household’s census tract centroid.
All regressions control for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age
indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours),
census division-by-quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-census tract fixed effects. Observations are
not weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by household and census tract,
are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

41

Table 3: Association of Health Index with Local Area Health Index Using Movers

Zip code average Health Index

(1)
0.0511∗∗
(0.0247)

(2)
0.0487∗∗
(0.0245)

County average Health Index
Household demographics
Observations
95% confidence interval upper bound

No
564,944
0.100

Yes
564,944
0.097

(3)

(4)

0.1067∗
(0.0565)
No
570,279
0.217

0.1100∗∗
(0.0560)
Yes
570,279
0.220

Notes: This table uses 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-year level. The sample excludes
observations where less than 50 percent of trips to RMS stores are not in the household’s end-of-year county of
residence. The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Household demographics are natural log
of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator,
employment status, and weekly work hours. All regressions also control for year indicators and household fixed
effects. Observations are not weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by
household and local area (zip code or county), are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10,
5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

42

Table 4: Preferences for Nutrients by Household Income
(1)
Income quartile
Income Q1
Income Q2
Income Q3
Income Q4

Income Q1
Income Q2
Income Q3
Income Q4

Sodium
-0.242***
(0.009)
-0.351***
(0.011)
-0.432***
(0.012)
-0.634***
(0.022)
(8)
Dairy
0.144***
(0.001)
0.163***
(0.001)
0.189***
(0.001)
0.245***
(0.002)

(2)
Whole
fruit
-0.252***
(0.017)
-0.092***
(0.012)
-0.057***
(0.011)
-0.006
(0.014)
(9)
Sea, plant
protein
-0.275***
(0.008)
-0.313***
(0.009)
-0.359***
(0.009)
-0.450***
(0.014)

(3)
Other
fruit
0.177***
(0.004)
0.215***
(0.002)
0.261***
(0.001)
0.331***
(0.001)
(10)
Meat
protein
0.061***
(0.001)
0.055***
(0.001)
0.057***
(0.001)
0.059***
(0.001)

(4)
Whole
grains
0.252***
(0.004)
0.312***
(0.006)
0.363***
(0.006)
0.477***
(0.012)
(11)
Added
sugar
0.0002***
(0.0001)
-0.0007***
(0.0001)
-0.0018***
(0.0001)
-0.004***
(0.0002)

(5)
Refined
grains
0.022***
(0.001)
0.036***
(0.001)
0.045***
(0.001)
0.073***
(0.003)
(12)
Solid
fats
0.0005***
(0.00001)
0.0009***
(0.00002)
0.001***
(0.00002)
0.001***
(0.00003)

(6)
Greens,
beans
0.965***
(0.009)
1.02***
(0.009)
1.16***
(0.011)
1.49***
(0.021)
(13)
Unobserved
characteristic
-0.00076***
(0.00003)
-0.0010***
(0.00004)
-0.0013***
(0.00004)
-0.021***
(0.00008)

(7)
Other
veg
-0.438***
(0.014)
-0.307***
(0.010)
-0.319***
(0.010)
-0.337***
(0.014)
(14)
WTP for
Health Index
0.429***
(0.011)
0.631***
(0.006)
0.820***
(0.003)
1.141***
(0.003)

Notes: This table presents GMM estimates of the nutrient preference parameters β̃c from Equation (12). Magnitudes represent willingness to pay for a unit of the nutrient, where the units are those used in the Healthy
Eating Index. Sodium is in grams; whole fruit, other fruit and dairy are in cups; whole grains, refined grains,
and both types of protein are in ounces, added sugar is in teaspoons; solid fats are in calories. “WTP for Health
P ˆ
Index” in column 14 equals c β̃c sc rc , where sc is the maximum possible score on the Healthy Eating Index for
dietary component c, and rc is the difference in consumption of component c to receive the maximum instead
of the minimum score. Standard errors, clustered by household, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

43

Table 5: Decomposition of Nutrition-Income Relationship by Household Demographics

ln(Income)
ln(Years education)
1(White)
1(Black)
1(Married)
Employed
Weekly work hours
Health importance
Nutrition knowledge
Household size
Census division indicators
Age indicators
Year indicators
Observations

(1)
Full
model
0.134
(0.0209)***
0.685
(0.0939)***
-0.247
(0.0474)***
-0.291
(0.0574)***
0.0435
(0.0256)*
0.0701
(0.0802)
-0.0000934
(0.00225)
0.102
(0.0119)***
0.132
(0.0128)***
-0.103
(0.0116)***
Yes
Yes
Yes
81,839

(2)
Unconditional
relationship
0.267
(0.0178)***

(3)
Auxiliary
regressions

1.922
(0.0688)***
0.0588
(0.0283)**
-0.155
(0.0342)***
0.431
(0.0209)***
0.635
(0.0234)***
0.0193
(0.000611)***
0.0691
(0.0109)***
0.155
(0.0118)***
-0.119
(0.0111)***
No
Yes
Yes
81,839

No
Yes
Yes
81,839

Notes: These regressions use 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-year level, using only
the subsample that responded to the Homescan add-on survey carried out by Nielsen for Allcott, Lockwood
and Taubinsky (2018). Health importance is the response to the question, “In general, how important is it
to you to stay healthy, for example by maintaining a healthy weight, avoiding diabetes and heart disease,
etc.?” Nutrition knowledge is from a battery of 28 questions drawn from the General Nutrition Knowledge
Questionnaire (Kliemann et al., 2016). Health importance and nutrition knowledge are both normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. Columns 1 and 2 present estimates of Equation (28),
a regression of the Health Index of demand-only consumption predictions on covariates. Each row of column
3 presents the coefficient from a regression of natural log of household income on the variable listed in each
row, controlling for age and year indicators and household size. Observations are weighted using the Homescan
sample weights. Robust standard errors, clustered by household, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

44

Table 6: Impacts of Means-Tested Healthy Grocery Subsidies

Subsidy parameter s
Mean subsidy for subsidized products
Average subsidy payment per household
Total subsidy, all bottom-quartile households

(1)
Subsidy to close
gap by 0.9%
(estimated
supermarket entry
effect)
0.000067
0.60%
$2.62
$84 million

(2)
Subsidy to close
gap by 9%
(structural
estimate of equal
supply conditions)
0.000657
5.8%
$26.35
$830 million

(3)
Subsidy to close
gap by 100%

0.00601
48.7%
$336.10
$10.57 billion

Notes: This table presents the amounts of healthy grocery subsidies required to reduce the difference in the
Health Index between top and bottom income quartile households by given percentages. The subsidies are
available to bottom income quartile households in proportion to a product’s Health Index, conditional on the
Health Index being above the median product’s Health Index. “Mean subsidy” is the percent discount among
products receiving strictly positive subsidies. “Total subsidy, all bottom-quartile households” is the average
subsidy payment per household multiplied by 31.45 million, the number of households in the bottom income
quartile.

45

Figures

Added sugar

Whole grain
Share whole grain bread
.12 .14 .16 .18 .2

Grams added sugar per 1,000 calories
40
45
50
55

Figure 1: Healthfulness of Grocery Purchases by Household Income

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

0

150

Health Index

-.4

Health Index
-.2
0
.2

.4

Produce calorie share
.035
.04
.045
.05

Produce

50
100
Household income ($000s)

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

Notes: This figure presents Nielsen Homescan data for 2004–2016. Each panel presents a binned scatterplot of
a grocery healthfulness measure against average household income across all years the household is observed in
Homescan, residual of age and year indicators and household size. Added sugar is the grams of added sugar per
1,000 calories purchased; whole grain is the calorie-weighted average share of bread, buns, and rolls purchases
that are whole grain; produce is the share of calories from fresh, canned, dried, and frozen fruits and vegetables;
and the Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Observations are weighted for national
representativeness.

46

Whole grain
Share whole grain bread
.12 .14 .16 .18 .2

Added sugar

20

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

20

Produce

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

Health Index

-.2

Health Index
-.15

-.1

Produce calorie share
.014 .016 .018 .02 .022

Grams added sugar per 1,000 calories
68 70 72 74 76

Figure 2: Store Average Healthfulness and Size by Zip Code Median Income

20

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

20

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

Notes: This figure uses Nielsen RMS data for 2006–2016. To measure store healthfulness, we construct the
following across all UPCs offered in each store: average grams of added sugar per 1,000 calories; the calorieweighted share of bread, buns, and rolls UPCs that are whole grain; the calorie-weighted share of UPCs that
are produce; and the calorie-weighted mean Health Index. This figure presents the means of these variables
across stores within categories of zip code median income.

47

Figure 3: Store Counts by Zip Code Median Income
Drug and convenience

.4

.04

Zip code store count per 1,000 residents
.6
.8

Zip code store count per 1,000 residents
.05
.06
.07

.08

1

Supercenter, club, and large grocery

20

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

20

40
60
80
Zip median income ($000s)

100

Notes: This figure presents counts of stores per 1,000 residents for the average zip code in each income category,
using 2004–2016 Zip Code Business Patterns data. Large (small) grocers are defined as those with 50 or more
(fewer than 50) employees.

48

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant share

8

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Figure 4: Event Study of Supermarket Entry

Groc/super/club share

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Entrant share (deserts)

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Groc/super/club share (deserts)

-4

8

Health Index (deserts)
Health Index
-.05 0 .05

Health Index
-.05
0
.05

Health Index

0
4
Quarters after entry

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Notes: This figure presents the τ[0,10)q parameters and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimates of Equation
(2)—the effects of supermarket entry—using 2004–2016 household-by-quarter Homescan data. All regressions
control for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators,
household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours), census divisionby-quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-census tract fixed effects. The top two panels present effects
on expenditure shares (in units of percentage points) across all retailers with stores that have entered within a
15-minute drive of the household. The middle two panels present effects on the combined expenditure share of
grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores. We keep the y-axis on the same scale between the top and middle
panels so that the magnitudes can be compared easily. The bottom two panels present effects on the Health
Index, our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases which is normalized to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one across households. The left panels include the full sample, while the right
panels include only the “food desert” subsample: observations with no grocery stores with 50 or more employees,
supercenters, or club stores in the zip code in the first year the household is observed there. Observations are
not weighted for national representativeness.

49

Figure 5: Average Health Index of Store Purchases by County

0.019 - 0.673
-0.071 - 0.019
-0.129 - -0.071
-0.164 - -0.129
-0.194 - -0.164
-0.252 - -0.194
-0.320 - -0.252
-0.398 - -0.320
-0.514 - -0.398
-0.995 - -0.514
No data

Notes: This figure presents the calorie-weighted average normalized Health Index of packaged grocery purchases
by county, using 2006–2016 Nielsen RMS data. The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of
grocery purchases and is normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households.
Note that purchases in RMS are less healthful than in Homescan, so the average normalized Health Index on
this map is less than zero.

50

Figure 6: Event Study of Moves Across Counties

Trips in New vs. Old County

.5

Density
1
1.5

2

Share of trips
0 .2 .4 .6 .8 1

Distribution of New-Old Differences

Coefficient on local environment difference
-.1
0
.1
.2
.3

Old county

2
0

0
1
Years after move

-1

New county
Coefficient on local environment difference
-.1 0
.1 .2 .3

-1

No Demographic Controls

-1

0
1
Years after move

2

-.5
0
.5
Difference in Health Index

1

With Demographic Controls

-1

0
1
Years after move

2

Notes: Using 2004–2016 Homescan data, these figures present results for the event study of moves across
counties. The top left panel presents the share of shopping trips that are in the new versus old county. The
top right panel presents the distribution across balanced panel households of the difference in the Health Index
between the new and old county. The bottom panels present the τy parameters and 95 percent confidence
intervals from estimates of Equation (4): associations between the household-level Health Index and the
difference in the average local Health Index between post-move and pre-move locations. The bottom right
panel includes controls for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education,
age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work
hours). The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Observations are not weighted for
national representativeness.

51

Figure 7: Healthfulness of Grocery Purchases by Household Income Within Markets
Within Zip Code x Year

Health Index
-.2
0
.2
-.4

-.4

Health Index
-.2
0
.2

.4

All Demographic Controls

.4

Household Size and Age Controls

0

25

50
75
100
Household income ($000s)

125

0

25

50
75
100
Household income ($000s)

125

Within Chain x Year

Health Index
-.2
0
.2
-.4

-.4

Health Index
-.2
0
.2

.4

All Demographic Controls

.4

Household Size and Age Controls

0

25

50
75
100
Household income ($000s)

Raw

125

0

25

50
75
100
Household income ($000s)

125

Residualized from Market FE

Notes: This figure presents Nielsen Homescan data for 2004–2016. Each panel presents a binned scatterplot of
a grocery healthfulness measure against average household income across all years the household is observed in
Homescan. The data are aggregated to the household-year level for the top two panels and to the householdretail chain-year level for the bottom two panels, where the sample is restricted to observations that reflect more
than half of a household’s reported calories purchased in a given year (such that there is only one observation
per household-year reflecting the household’s purchases in their primary store for that year). Each point depicts
the mean Health Index across observations in each income bin controlling for a set of demographic and/or
location controls. The circles depict the mean estimated in a regression of the household-year-level Health
Index against income-bin fixed effects as well as household size, age, and panel year controls in the left-hand
panel and with a full set of demographic and panel year controls in the right-hand panels. The crosses depict
the mean estimated in a regression of the household-year-level health index against income-bin fixed effects, zip
code-year fixed effects for the top panels and retail chain-year fixed effects for the bottom panels. The sample
is limited to those sets of households that identify the within-location means (that is, households that reside in
zip codes with observations from panelists in more than one income bin or households shopping in retail chains
with observations from panelists in more than one income bin).

52

-.01

-.005

Price IV
0

.005

.01

Figure 8: Correlation of Price Instrument with Product Health Index: Differential between High- and Low-Income Counties

-10

0
10
Health Index x Above median income county

20

Notes: This figure presents a binned scatterplot of Equation (17) showing the relationship between our price
instrument and the interaction between product group Health Index and an indicator for whether the county
average income in 2010 was above the national median, residual of product group and county fixed effects. Data
are at the product group-by-county-by-year level. The estimated slope of the regression plotted is -0.0000639,
with a standard error of 0.0000553.

0

Re-normalized Health Index
.2
.4
.6
.8
1

Figure 9: Predicted Health Index for Each Income Group

es

se

Ba

om
-inc
igh

e

re
sto

+H

pric

s
me

eris

tore

ct
ara

ch

ig

+H

ac

har

c
me

p
stic
teri

i
+H

inc
gh-

Income Q1
Income Q3

inc
gh-

refs

pp

ro

om

o

o

c
h-in

refs

tics

ep

ou
t gr
duc

i
+H

Income Q2
Income Q4

Notes: Each category on the x-axis represents a separate counterfactual calculation. Income groups are quartiles
of income, residual of household size and age and year indicators. The base category measures the Health Index
for each income group when each group retains their own preferences and faces their own local supply conditions.
The second category sets all prices to those observed for the high-income group. The third category sets all
prices and product nutrient characteristics to those in the high-income group. The fourth and fifth categories,
respectively, set nutrient preferences and product group preferences equal to those for the high-income group.
The Health Index presented on the y-axis is re-normalized so that the base difference between the highest- and
lowest-income groups equals one.

53

Figure 10: Explaining the Relationship Between Income and Healthy Grocery Demand

ln(Years education)
White
Black
Married
Employed
Weekly work hours
Health importance
Nutrition knowledge
Census division
-.1
0
.1
.2
Contribution to income-health demand relationship

.3

Notes: This figure presents the π̃v parameters and 95 percent confidence intervals from Equation (29), representing the share of the correlation between income and demand for healthy groceries that is explained by each
variable.

54

Online Appendix: Not for Publication

Food Deserts and the Causes of Nutritional Inequality
Hunt Allcott, Rebecca Diamond, Jean-Pierre Dubé, Jessie Handbury, Ilya Rahkovsky, and Molly
Schnell

55

Online Appendix

A
A.A

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Appendix to Data Section
Magnet Calorie Shares

.3

Share of calories from items with UPCs
.4
.5
.6

Figure A1: Magnet Data: Share of Produce from Packaged Items

0

25

50
75
100
Household income ($000s)
Produce

125

Fresh Produce

Notes: This figure uses the Nielsen Homescan “magnet” subsample for 2004–2006 to show the share of produce
and fresh produce calories coming from packaged items with UPCs, which are the items that we observe outside
the magnet subsample. The x-axis presents bins of average household income across all years the household is
observed in Homescan. “Produce” includes fresh, dried, canned, and frozen produce. Observations are weighted
for national representativeness.

56

Online Appendix

A.B

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Health Index

Table A1: Correlations Between Health Index and Its Components in Homescan
Correlation with
Component
Health Index
Adequacy (“healthy”) components
Total fruits
0.56
Whole fruits
0.57
Vegetables
0.41
Greens and beans
0.47
Whole grains
0.50
Dairy
0.25
Total protein
0.42
Sea and plant protein
0.64
Monounsaturated fat
0.11
Polyunsaturated fat
0.07
Moderation (“unhealthy”) components
Refined grains
-0.33
Sodium
-0.09
Added sugar
-0.41
Saturated fat
-0.21
Solid fats
-0.44
Notes: Using Homescan household-by-year data for 2004–2016, this table presents the correlation coefficients
between the Health Index and its components, using components in units per 1,000 calories consumed. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.

57

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Table A2: Associations Between Health Outcomes and Dietary Quality Measures
(a) Predicting Body Mass Index

Healthy Eating Index (standard)

(1)
-1.272∗∗∗
(0.066)

(2)
-1.251∗∗∗
(0.400)

Health Index (linearized)
Controls
R2
N
Dependent var. mean

No
0.029
10,993
29.47

Yes
0.882
10,993
29.47

(3)

(4)

-1.230∗∗∗
(0.065)
No
0.032
10,993
29.47

-1.149∗∗∗
(0.365)
Yes
0.882
10,993
29.47

(b) Predicting Diabetes Status

Healthy Eating Index (standard)

(1)
-0.0265∗∗∗
(0.0032)

(2)
-0.0298
(0.0196)

Health Index (linearized)
Controls
R2
N
Dependent var. mean

No
0.005
11,067
0.17

Yes
0.891
11,067
0.17

(3)

(4)

-0.0297∗∗∗
(0.0029)
No
0.007
11,067
0.17

-0.0323∗
(0.0173)
Yes
0.891
11,067
0.17

Notes: This table presents regressions of health outcomes on dietary quality measures, using household-level
Nielsen Homescan data. Body Mass Index is weight (in kilograms) divided by the square of height (in meters).
Diabetic takes value 1 if the panelist reported that she had been diagnosed with diabetes, and 0 otherwise. If
two household members responded to the PanelViews survey, we take the mean of each survey variable across
the two respondents. Dietary quality measures are normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one across households; we then take the calorie-weighted average across all years the household was observed
in the Homescan sample. “Controls” are household-by-census tract fixed effects and household demographics
(natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators, household size, race indicators, a
married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours). Observations are not weighted for national
representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by household, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically
significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

58

Online Appendix

B

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Appendix to Stylized Facts Section

B.A

Additional Figures and Tables
Figure A2: Healthy Eating Index Components by Household Income

Cups/1,000 cals
.4
.6

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

0

Polyunsaturated fat

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

g/1,000 cals
40
60

Added sugar

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Total protein

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Refined grains

0

Saturated fat

g/1,000 cals
12.5 13 13.5

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Sea & plant protein

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Sodium

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Solid fats
g/1,000 cals
160
170

g/1,000 cals
14
15

g/1,000 cals
9.7 9.8 9.9

Monounsaturated fat

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

0

Ounces/1,000 cals
.6
.8
1

Dairy
Cups/1,000 cals
.7 .75 .8

Whole grains

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

mg/1,000 cals
1400 1420 1440

0

Ounces/1,000 cals
1.4
1.6
1.8

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Greens and beans
Cups/1,000 cals
.05
.1
.15

Vegetables

Ounces/1,000 cals
2.4
2.6

Cups/1,000 cals
.2
.4
0

Ounces/1,000 cals
.4
.6

Whole fruit
Cups/1,000 cals
.1
.15
.2

Total fruit

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

0

50
100
150
Household income ($000s)

Notes: This figure presents Nielsen Homescan data for 2004–2016. Each panel presents a binned scatterplot
of a dietary quality measure against average household income across all years the household is observed in
Homescan, residual of age and year indicators and household size. The first 10 panels present the “healthy”
dietary components of the Healthy Eating Index, while the final five panels present the “unhealthy” components.
Observations are weighted for national representativeness.

59

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Added sugar

Whole grain
Share whole grain bread
.08 .1 .12 .14 .16

Grams added sugar per 1,000 calories
40
45
50
55

Figure A3: Magnet Subsample: Healthful Purchases by Household Income

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

0

150

Health Index

-.4

Health Index
-.2
0
.2

Produce calorie share
.055 .06 .065 .07 .075

.4

Produce

50
100
Household income ($000s)

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)

150

Notes: This parallels Figure 1, except it uses the 2004–2006 magnet subsample, which also records purchases
of non-UPC items such as bulk produce. Each panel presents a binned scatterplot of a grocery healthfulness
measure against average household income across all years the household is observed in Homescan, residual
of age and year indicators and household size. Added sugar is the grams of added sugar per 1,000 calories
purchased; whole grain is the calorie-weighted average share of bread, buns, and rolls purchases that are whole
grain; produce is the share of calories from fresh, canned, dried, and frozen fruits and vegetables; and the Health
Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to have a mean of zero
and a standard deviation of one across households. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.

60

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Table A3: Pooled OLS versus Within-Household Income Variation

ln(Household income)
Household-by-Census tract fixed effects
Household demographics
Observations
Income coefficient/column 1 coefficient

(1)
0.1556∗∗∗
(0.0052)
No
No
659,456
1.00

(2)
0.0131∗∗
(0.0051)
Yes
No
659,456
0.08

(3)
0.0134∗∗
(0.0055)
Yes
Yes
659,456
0.09

Notes: This table presents regressions of the Health Index on the natural log of household income and year
indicators using Nielsen Homescan data for 2004–2016. Columns 2 and 3 also include household-by-census
tract fixed effects, and column 3 also includes household demographics (natural log of years of education, age
indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours).
The sample is restricted to households observed in two or more years. The Health Index is our overall measure of
the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one
across households. Observations are weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered
by household, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence,
respectively.

Table A4: Correlates of the Count of Produce UPCs Available in RMS Stores

ln(Zip median income)

(1)
0.405∗∗∗
(0.009)

ln(Annual revenue)

(2)
0.000
(0.005)
0.366∗∗∗
(0.001)

1(Large grocery)
1(Small grocery)
1(Supercenter/club)
1(Convenience store)
1(Drug store)
Observations
R2

369,903
0.04

369,903
0.80

(3)
0.094∗∗∗
(0.003)

1.488∗∗∗
(0.004)
1.036∗∗∗
(0.008)
0.883∗∗∗
(0.012)
-0.143∗∗∗
(0.002)
-0.083∗∗∗
(0.002)
369,903
0.92

Notes: This table presents regressions of the count of produce UPCs available in RMS stores on store characteristics, using 2006–2016 Nielsen RMS data at the store-by-year level. ln(Annual revenue) is revenue from
packaged grocery items with UPCs. “Large” (“small”) grocery stores are those with at least (less than) $5 million in annual revenue. Mass merchants other than supercenters and club stores are the omitted store type in
column 3. Robust standard errors, clustered by zip code, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant
with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

61

Online Appendix

C
C.A

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Appendix to Reduced-Form Event Studies
Additional Figures and Tables for Entry Event Study

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant share

8

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Figure A4: Event Study of Supermarket Entry Between 10 and 15 Minutes from Home

Groc/super/club share

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Entrant share (deserts)

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Groc/super/club share (deserts)

-4

8

Health Index (deserts)
Health Index
-.05 0
.05

Health Index
-.05
0
.05

Health Index

0
4
Quarters after entry

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

-4

0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Notes: This figure presents the τ[10,15)q parameters and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimates of Equation (2): the effects of supermarket entry, using 2004–2016 household-by-quarter Homescan data. All regressions
control for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators,
household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours), census divisionby-quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-census tract fixed effects. The top two panels present effects
on expenditure shares (in units of percentage points) across all retailers with stores that have entered within a
15-minute drive of the household. The middle two panels present effects on the combined expenditure share of
grocery stores, supercenters, and club stores. We keep the y-axis on the same scale between the top and middle
panels so that the magnitudes can be easily compared. The bottom two panels present effects on the Health
Index, our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases which is normalized to have a mean of
zero and a standard deviation of one across households. The left panels include the full sample, while the right
panels include only the “food desert” subsample: observations with no grocery stores with 50 or more employees,
supercenters, or club stores in the zip code in the first year the household is observed there. Observations are
not weighted for national representativeness.

62

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

-8

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant share

8

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Groc/super/club exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Entrant exp. share (%)
-1 0 1 2 3

Figure A5: Event Study of Supermarket Entry with Additional Leads

Groc/super/club share

-8

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Entrant share (deserts)

-8

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Groc/super/club share (deserts)

-8

8

Health Index (deserts)
Health Index
-.05 0 .05

Health Index
-.05
0
.05

Health Index

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

-8

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

8

-8

-4
0
4
Quarters after entry

8

Notes: This figure presents the τ[0,10)q parameters and 95 percent confidence intervals from estimates of Equation
(2): the effects of supermarket entry, using 2004–2016 household-by-quarter Homescan data. The figure parallels
Figure 4, except with additional leads of the entry. All regressions control for household demographics (natural
log of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married
indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours), census division-by-quarter of sample indicators, and
household-by-census tract fixed effects. The top two panels present effects on expenditure shares (in units of
percentage points) across all retailers with stores that have entered within a 15-minute drive of the household.
The middle two panels present effects on the combined expenditure share of grocery stores, supercenters, and
club stores. We keep the y-axis on the same scale between the top and middle panels so that the magnitudes
can be easily compared. The bottom two panels present effects on the Health Index, our overall measure of
the healthfulness of grocery purchases which is normalized to have a mean zero and a standard deviation of
one across households. The left panels include the full sample, while the right panels include only the “food
desert” subsample: observations with no grocery stores with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club stores
in the zip code in the first year the household is observed there. Observations are not weighted for national
representativeness.

63

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Table A5: Effects of Supermarket Entry
(a) Effects on Expenditure Shares at Drug and Convenience Stores

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations
Dependent var. mean

Full sample
(1)
-0.015
(0.022)
-0.033∗
(0.017)
2,874,365
2.6

Bottom quartile
(2)
-0.048
(0.065)
-0.053
(0.047)
537,998
3.1

Food deserts
(3)
0.058
(0.067)
-0.112∗
(0.064)
646,181
2.4

(b) Effects on Health Index Using Alternative Food Desert Definitions

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations

<1000 produce UPCs
(1)
0.004
(0.011)
0.006
(0.007)
411,654

No medium groceries
(2)
0.013
(0.012)
0.004
(0.007)
378,682

Three-mile radius
(3)
0.017
(0.014)
0.019∗
(0.010)
490,551

Notes: This table uses 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-quarter level. The table parallels
Table 2, except Panel (a) presents effects on expenditure shares at drug and convenience stores, and Panel (b)
uses alternative definitions of a “food desert.” In Panel (b), column 1 defines food deserts as zip codes with
fewer than 1,000 produce UPCs, as predicted by projecting produce UPC counts in RMS stores from column 3
of Table A4 onto Zip Code Business Patterns store count data; column 2 uses the primary food desert definition
but also excludes any zip codes with grocery stores employing between 10 and 49 employees; and column 3
defines a zip code as a food desert only if all zip codes with centroids within three miles have no grocery stores
with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club stores. Expenditure shares are in units of percentage points.
The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to have a
mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Reported independent variables are the count of
supermarkets that have entered within a 0–10 or 10–15 minute drive from the household’s census tract centroid.
All regressions control for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age
indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours),
census division-by-quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-census tract fixed effects. Observations are
not weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by household and census tract,
are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.

64

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Table A6: Effects of Supercenter Entry
(a) Effects on Expenditure Shares

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations
Dependent var. mean

Full sample
(1)
(2)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
3.786∗∗∗
0.439∗∗∗
(0.226)
(0.107)
1.601∗∗∗
0.033
(0.114)
(0.071)
2,874,514
2,874,365
3.7
88.2

Bottom quartile
(3)
(4)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
5.224∗∗∗
0.535∗
(0.629)
(0.314)
1.902∗∗∗
0.238
(0.345)
(0.209)
538,041
537,998
3.4
86.2

Food deserts
(5)
(6)
Grocery/
Entrants super/club
3.629∗∗∗
0.227
(0.624)
(0.302)
1.976∗∗∗
0.205
(0.292)
(0.183)
646,223
646,181
2.6
87.7

(b) Effects on Health Index

Post entry: 0-10 minutes
Post entry: 10-15 minutes
Observations

Full sample
(1)
0.008
(0.006)
0.006
(0.004)
2,874,514

Bottom quartile
(2)
0.019
(0.015)
-0.002
(0.011)
538,041

Food deserts
(3)
0.018
(0.016)
0.020∗
(0.011)
646,223

Notes: This table uses 2004-2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-quarter level. It parallels Table
2, except it considers entry by supercenters only, excluding other types of grocery stores. The “food desert”
subsample comprises observations with no grocery stores with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club stores
in the zip code in the first year the household is observed there. Expenditure shares are in units of percentage
points. The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized
to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Reported independent variables
are the count of supermarkets that have entered within a 0–10 or 10–15 minute drive from the household’s
census tract centroid. All regressions control for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log
of years of education, age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status,
and weekly work hours), census division-by-quarter of sample indicators, and household-by-census tract fixed
effects. Observations are not weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by
household and census tract, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and 1 percent
confidence, respectively.

65

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

7
0

0

.2

Share of population
.4
.6
.8

1
2
3
4
5
6
Mean one-way trip distance (miles)

1

Figure A6: Shopping Trip Distances by Household Income

All

Poor

Food
desert

Urban

Population share

Urban & Urban & Poor,
poor
food food desert,
desert & no car
Distance

Notes: Data are from the 2009 National Household Travel Survey. Diamonds represent the mean one-way trip
distance for trips beginning or ending in “buying goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store.” “Poor” means
households in the bottom income quartile. “Food desert” means that the household is in a zip code with no
grocery stores with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club stores. “Urban” includes urbanized areas or
urban clusters of at least 2500 people, using the U.S. Census Bureau definition. “No car” means that the
household does not own a car.

4
0

0

Share of trips made by car
.2
.4
.6
.8

1
2
3
Median one-way trip distance (miles)

1

Figure A7: Median Shopping Trip Distances by Household Income

All

Poor

Food
desert

Urban

Auto share

Urban & Urban & Poor,
poor
food food desert,
desert & no car
Distance

Notes: Data are from the 2009 National Household Travel Survey. Diamonds represent the median one-way
trip distance for trips beginning or ending in “buying goods: groceries/clothing/hardware store.” “Poor” means
households in the bottom income quartile. “Food desert” means that the household is in a zip code with no
grocery stores with 50 or more employees, supercenters, or club stores. “Urban” includes urbanized areas or
urban clusters of at least 2500 people, using the U.S. Census Bureau definition. “No car” means that the
household does not own a car.

66

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Grocery/supercenter/club store expenditure share
.82
.84
.86
.88
.9

Figure A8: Supermarket Expenditure Shares by Household Income

0

50
100
Household income ($000s)
Non-food deserts

150

Food deserts

Notes: This figure presents the share of grocery expenditures that are made at grocery stores, supercenters, and
club stores against average household income across all years the household is observed in Homescan, residual of
age and year indicators and household size, using Nielsen Homescan data for 2004–2016. A household-by-year
observation is in a “food desert” if its zip code does not have any grocery stores with 50 or more employees,
supercenters, or club stores in that year. Observations are weighted for national representativeness.

67

Online Appendix

C.B

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Appendix to Movers Event Study
Figure A9: Event Study of Moves Across Zip Codes

Trips in New vs. Old County

.5

.2

Density
1
1.5

2

Share of trips
.4 .6 .8 1

Distribution of New-Old Differences

Coefficient on local environment difference
-.1
0
.1
.2

Old county

2
0

0
1
Years after move

-1.5

New county
Coefficient on local environment difference
-.1
0
.1
.2

-1

No Demographic Controls

-1

0
1
Years after move

2

-1
-.5
0
.5
Difference in Health Index

1

With Demographic Controls

-1

0
1
Years after move

2

Notes: Using 2004–2016 Homescan data, these figures present results for the event study of moves across zip
codes. The top left panel presents the share of shopping trips that are in the new versus old county. The top
right panel presents the distribution across balanced panel households of the difference in the Health Index
between the new and old zip code. The bottom panels present the τy parameters and 95 percent confidence
intervals from estimates of Equation (4): associations between the household-level Health Index and the
difference in the average local Health Index between post-move and pre-move locations. The bottom right
panel includes controls for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of education,
age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work
hours). The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to
have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Observations are not weighted for
national representativeness.

68

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

-.4

Coefficient on local environment difference
-.2
0
.2

.4

Figure A10: Event Study of Movers with Different Balanced Panel Windows

-3

-2

-1

0
Years after move

1

2

3

1

2

3

-.4

Coefficient on local environment difference
-.2
0
.2

.4

(a) Without Controls

-3

-2

-1

0
Years after move

(b) With Controls

Notes: Using 2004–2016 Homescan data, these figures present the τy parameters and 95 percent confidence
intervals from estimates of Equation (4): associations between the household-level Health Index and the
difference in the average local Health Index between post-move and pre-move locations. Each figure
superimposes three different estimates identified off of balanced panels for different windows around the move.
Panel (b) includes controls for household demographics (natural log of income, natural log of years of
education, age indicators, household size, race indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly
work hours). The Health Index is our overall measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is
normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one across households. Observations are not
weighted for national representativeness.

69

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

-.2

Coefficient on local environment difference
0
.2

.4

Figure A11: Event Study: Income Changes in Mover Households

-3

-2

-1

0
Years after move

1

2

3

2

3

-.2

Coefficient on local environment difference
-.1
0
.1

.2

(a) Moves Across Counties

-3

-2

-1

0
Years after move

1

(b) Moves Across Zip Codes

Notes: Using 2004–2016 Homescan data, these figures present the τy parameters and 95 percent confidence
intervals from estimates of Equation (4): associations between natural log of household income and the
difference in the average local Health Index between post-move and pre-move locations. All regressions control
for year indicators and household fixed effects. Each figure superimposes three different estimates identified off
of balanced panels for different windows around the move. The Health Index is our overall measure of the
healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one
across households. Observations are not weighted for national representativeness. The regressions are the
same as in Figure 6, except with natural log of household income as the dependent variable and no controls for
household demographics.

70

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Table A7: Association of Income with Local Area Health Index Using Movers

Zip code average Health Index

(1)
0.00590
(0.36)

0.125∗∗∗
(3.25)

County average Health Index
Household demographics
Observations
95% confidence interval upper bound

(2)

564,944
0.038

570,279
0.200

Notes: This table uses 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-year level. The sample excludes
observations where less than 50 percent of trips to RMS stores are not in the household’s end-of-year county
of residence. The dependent variable is the natural log of household income. The Health Index is our overall
measure of the healthfulness of grocery purchases and is normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard
deviation of one across households. All regressions control for year indicators and household fixed effects.
Observations are not weighted for national representativeness. Robust standard errors, clustered by household
and local area (zip code or county), are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and 1
percent confidence, respectively.

Table A8: Association of Coke Market Share with Local Area Coke Market Share Using
Movers
(1)
(2)
0.1620∗∗∗ 0.1613∗∗∗
(0.0418)
(0.0417)
Household demographics
No
Yes
Observations
306,714
306,714
Notes: This table uses 2004–2016 Nielsen Homescan data at the household-by-year level. The sample excludes
observations where less than 50 percent of trips to RMS stores are not in the household’s end-of-year county of
residence. Coke market share equals Coke calories purchased / (Coke + Pepsi calories purchased). Household
demographics are natural log of income, natural log of years of education, age indicators, household size, race
indicators, a married indicator, employment status, and weekly work hours. All regressions also control for year
indicators and household fixed effects. Observations are not weighted for national representativeness. Robust
standard errors, clustered by household and county, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with
10, 5, and 1 percent confidence, respectively.
County average Coke market share

71

Online Appendix

D
D.A

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Appendix to Demand Model Estimation
Method of Moments Estimation

Our method of moments estimator is defined as follows:
0 




X
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
ˆ
g ijt  
g ijt  .
δ̂, φ̂, β̃, ξˆ = arg min 
IJT
IJT
(δ,φ,β̃,ξ)
t
t
i

j

i

j



Define Y as the vector of product group calorie consumption Yijt , F β̃, ξ as the vector of implicit


P
prices Fijt = p̃ijt − C
β̃
ã
−
ξ
, D as a stacked matrix of the two dummy variable matrices
c
ijct
c=2
(D j and D m ), Z as a matrix with all of our vectors of instruments (D, the nutrient content ã, and
the price instruments P ), and P r D = (D 0 ZZ 0 D)

−1

D 0 ZZ 0 as a projection matrix. We can simplify

the estimation problem by solving for our vectors of linear coefficients, δ and φ, as analytic functions
of β̃ and ξ:



(δ, φ) = P r D ln (Y ) − F β̃, ξ .

(32)

Substituting Equation (32) back into Equation (19), we can re-write the MOM estimator in terms
ˆ
of β̃ and ξ:



0 






X
X
X
X
X
X
1
1
ˆ
gijt β̃, ξ  
gijt β̃, ξ  .
β̃, ξˆ = arg min 
IJT
IJT
(β̃,ξ)
t
t
i

j

i

j

At the true value, the gradient for this problem is:

0 

−2G β̃, ξ G β̃, ξ = 0


where the Jacobian of the moments, G β̃, ξ , is


ã0 (I − DP r D )



1 
 P 0 (I − D m P r D )
G β̃, ξ =
m
IJT 


D 0 (I − DP r D )










 ∇β F p̃, ã; β̃ .




(33)

In the above equation, I is the identity matrix, and P r Dm is a projection
matrix
 using D m .


ˆˆ
M OM
The covariance matrix of our full MOM estimator, Θ
≡ δ̂, φ̂, β̃, ξ , is cov ΘM OM =

72

Online Appendix
−1

(G0 G)

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

G0 ΩG (G0 G)

−1

, with Jacobian matrix
→
−0
0J



G=

1
IJT

0
−ãijt Dm

0
−ãijt ∇β Fijt




 −Pjmt D0 −Pjmt D0 −Pjmt ∇β F 0
m
j
ijt
P P P 


i
j
t
0
0
 −Dj D0
−Dj Dm
−Dj ∇β Fijt
j



0
0
0
−Dm Dijt
−Dm Dm
−Dm ∇β Fijt

and covariance matrix


0 
Ω = E g ijt ΘM OM g ijt ΘM OM
.
When computing our standard errors, we cluster by household as follows:
Ω̂ =




0
1 XXX
ˆ
ˆ
g ijt β̃, ξˆ g ij 0 t0 β̃, ξˆ .
IJT
0
0
i

j,j

t,t

73















Online Appendix

D.B

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Additional Tables and Figures
Table A9: Preferences for Nutrients by Household Income
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

Whole

Other

Whole

Refined

Greens,

Other

Sodium

fruit

fruit

grains

grains

beans

veg

Dairy

-0.178***

-0.324***

-0.064***

0.177***

-0.014***

0.840***

-0.290***

0.084***

(0.009)

(0.020)

(0.008)

(0.003)

(0.0004)

(0.007)

(0.016)

(0.003)

-0.299***

-0.225***

-0.086***

0.228***

-0.010***

0.861***

-0.382***

0.063***

(0.012)

(0.015)

(0.007)

(0.005)

(0.0005)

(0.007)

(0.017)

(0.003)

Income Q3

-0.384***

-0.233***

-0.093***

0.269***

-0.0096***

0.970***

-0.436***

0.068***

(0.014)

(0.015)

(0.007)

(0.006)

(0.001)

(0.009)

(0.019)

(0.003)

Income Q4

-0.585***

-0.246***

-0.115***

0.365***

0.0031*

1.216***

-0.605***

0.084***

(0.025)

(0.020)

(0.010)

(0.011)

(0.0017)

(0.018)

(0.031)

(0.004)

(9)

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

(16)

Sea, plant

Meat

Added

Solid

Unobserved

Shelf

Con-

WTP for

protein

protein

sugar

fats

characteristic

life

venience

Health Index

Income Q1

-0.240***

0.027***

0.0003***

-0.0005***

0.0002***

-0.109***

0.270***

0.202***

(0.009)

(0.002)

(0.00005)

(0.00002)

(0.00001)

(0.003)

(0.001)

(0.021)

Income Q2

-0.294***

0.0021

-0.0009***

-0.0004***

0.00001

-0.150***

0.316***

0.267***

(0.009)

(0.002)

(0.0001)

(0.00001)

(0.00001)

(0.003)

(0.001)

(0.017)

Income Q3

-0.342***

-0.0056**

-0.0024***

-0.0005***

-0.0002***

-0.175***

0.400***

0.402***

(0.011)

(0.003)

(0.0001)

(0.00002)

(0.00002)

(0.004)

(0.002)

(0.015)

-0.433***

-0.021***

-0.005***

-0.0005***

-0.0007***

-0.223***

0.542***

0.630***

(0.017)

(0.004)

(0.0002)

(0.00002)

(0.00004)

(0.006)

(0.005)

(0.013)

Income quartile
Income Q1
Income Q2

Income Q4

(8)

Notes: This table presents GMM estimates of the preference parameters β̃c from Equation (12), adding convenience and shelf life as additional product characteristics. Shelf life is measured in months per 1,000 calories
and top-coded at one year. Convenience is a score per 1,000 calories ranging from 0 to 3, defined as follows.
0: basic ingredients. These are raw or minimally processed foods used in producing a meal or snack that are
generally composed of a single ingredient, such as milk, dried beans, rice, grains, butter, cream, fresh meat,
poultry, and seafood. 1: complex ingredients, such as bread, pasta, sour cream, sauce, canned vegetables,
canned beans, pickles, cereal, frozen meat/poultry/seafood, canned meat/poultry/seafood, and lunch meat. 2:
ready-to-cook meals and stacks. These are foods that require minimal preparation involving heating, cooking,
or adding hot water, such as frozen entrees, frozen pizzas, dry meal mixes, pudding mixes, soup, chili, and
powdered drinks. 3: ready-to-eat meals and snacks. These are foods that are intended to be consumed as is and
require no preparation beyond opening a container, including refrigerated entrees and sides, canned and fresh
fruit, yogurt, candy, snacks, liquid drinks, and flavored milk. Shelf life data are from Okrent and Kumcu (2016),
while convenience data are from the U.S. government’s FoodKeeper app (HHS 2015). Magnitudes represent
willingness to pay for a unit of the nutrient, where the units are those used in the Health Index. Sodium is in
grams; whole fruit, other fruit and dairy are in cups; whole grains, refined grains, and both types of protein
are in ounces, added sugar is in teaspoons; solid fats are in calories. “WTP for Health Index” in column 16
P ˆ
equals c β̃c sc rc , where sc is the maximum possible score on the Healthy Eating Index for dietary component c,
and rc is the difference in consumption of component c to receive the maximum instead of the minimum score.
Standard errors, clustered by household, are in parentheses. *, **, ***: statistically significant with 10, 5, and
1 percent confidence, respectively.

74

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Figure A12: Geographic Variation in Presence of Large Retail Chains

Retailers present:
Retailer 1
Retailer 2
Retailer 3
Retailer 4
Multiple
None

Notes: This figure shows the counties where four large retail chains in RMS had stores in 2015.

75

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

Figure A13: Geographic Variation in the Price Instrument
(b) Fresh Produce

(a) Yogurt

0.330 − 0.357
0.247 − 0.330
0.106 − 0.247
0.039 − 0.106
0.013 − 0.039
0.000 − 0.013
-0.013 − 0.000
-0.029 − -0.013
-0.043 − -0.029
-0.239 − -0.043
No data

(c) Frozen Pizza

0.057 − 0.357
0.036 − 0.057
0.020 − 0.036
0.005 − 0.020
-0.005 − 0.005
-0.025 − -0.005
-0.040 − -0.025
-0.061 − -0.040
-0.090 − -0.061
-0.239 − -0.090
No data

(d) Cookies

0.178 − 0.357
0.161 − 0.178
0.109 − 0.161
0.070 − 0.109
0.037 − 0.070
0.014 − 0.037
-0.007 − 0.014
-0.023 − -0.007
-0.047 − -0.023
-0.166 − -0.047
No data

0.067 − 0.342
0.030 − 0.067
0.013 − 0.030
-0.001 − 0.013
-0.012 − -0.001
-0.020 − -0.012
-0.028 − -0.020
-0.039 − -0.028
-0.051 − -0.039
-0.148 − -0.051
No data

Notes: These figures present the county averages (over the years of our sample) of the price instrument Pjmt
for example product groups.

76

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

ce
od
u

ai
ry
es
h

pr

Fr

D

oz

en

de
li
ed
ck
ag

Fr

Pa

ed
ck
ag
Pa

D
ry

gr

oc

m

ea

er
y

t

Standard deviation of residualized instrument
0
.05
.1
.15
.2

Figure A14: Standard Deviation of Price Instrument by Product Department

Notes: This figure presents the standard deviation of our price instrument Pjmt , after residualizing against
year, product group, and county fixed effects. The instrument is in units of log price per calorie.

77

Online Appendix

Allcott, Diamond, Dubé, Handbury, Rahkovsky, and Schnell

-.04

Demeaned ln(price per calorie)
-.02
0
.02

.04

Figure A15: Binned Scatterplot of First Stage Price Regression

-.2

-.1
0
.1
Expected ln(price) deviation due to local chains

.2

Notes: This figure presents a binned scatterplot of a regression of natural log price per calorie on our price
instrument Pjmt , using Homescan data at the household-by-product group-by-year level. County-income
quartile and product group-income quartile fixed effects are residualized out before plotting. There are 20
equally sized bins, and all income groups are included.

78

