                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE EFFECT OF PRIMARY CARE VISITS ON HEALTH CARE UTILIZATION: FINDINGS
                 FROM A RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL

                                       Cathy J. Bradley
                                        David Neumark
                                      Lauryn Saxe Walker

                                      Working Paper 24100
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24100


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                           December 2017, Revised July 2018




Bradley, Saxe and Neumark’s research was supported by AHRQ grant number R01-HS022534,
“Incentives for Primary Care Use: A Randomized Controlled Trial in a Safety Net Setting.” The
authors are grateful to Ms. Heather Saunders for project coordination, Drs. Chun-Chieh Hu and
Bassam Dahman for statistical and programming support, Ms. Megan Eguchi for assistance with
programming, Dr. Dexiang Gao for statistical consultation, the interviewers who collected and
coded the data, the many subjects who generously donated their time to the project, and the
Virginia Coordinated Care program that allowed us to enroll their patients and provided access to
medical claim files. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Lauryn Saxe Walker. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Primary Care Visits on Health Care Utilization: Findings from a Randomized
Controlled Trial
Cathy J. Bradley, David Neumark, and Lauryn Saxe Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 24100
December 2017, Revised July 2018
JEL No. I12,I14,I18

                                          ABSTRACT

We conducted a randomized controlled trial, enrolling low-income uninsured adults in Virginia
(United States), to determine whether cash incentives are effective at encouraging a primary care
provider (PCP) visit, and at lowering utilization and costs. Subjects were randomized to four
groups: untreated controls, and one of three incentive arms with incentives of $0, $25, or $50 for
visiting a PCP within six months of group assignment. We used the exogenous variation
generated by the experiment to obtain causal evidence on the effects of a PCP visit. We observed
modest reductions in non-urgent emergency department use and increased outpatient use, but no
reductions in overall costs. These findings in utilization are consistent with the expectation that
PCPs offer an alternative to the emergency department for non-emergent conditions. Total costs
did not decline because any savings from avoiding the emergency department were offset by
increased outpatient utilization.

Cathy J. Bradley                                 Lauryn Saxe Walker
University of Colorado-Denver                    Virginia Commonwealth University
13001 E. 17th Place, B119                        School of Medicine Health Behavior and Policy
Bldg. 500, Rm N6203L                             830 East Main St.
Aurora, CO 80045                                 Richmond, VA 23219
CATHY.BRADLEY@ucdenver.edu                       saxel@mymail.vcu.edu

David Neumark
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3151 Social Science Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697
and NBER
dneumark@uci.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT02922855)
           Increasing access of the low-income population to good quality and lower-cost health

care is a priority of the United States (U.S.) Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

(https://www.ahrq.gov/workingforquality/about/index.html). Low-income adults below age 65

who neither have access to employer-based health insurance nor qualify for Medicaid rely on the

safety net system to meet their health care needs. 1 Often, patients seen in the safety net system

have preventable health conditions that escalate to a crisis, requiring high-cost emergency

department visits and inpatient care. These health care settings are associated with expensive

utilization, poor coordination and follow-up care, and reduced well-being (Asplin et al. 2005,

Johnson et al. 2015). In contrast, the primary care setting is viewed as an efficient means to

diagnose and treat conditions before they reach a severity level requiring expensive procedures

and hospitalization (Peterson et al. 2011). Historically, however, low-income patients have

limited access to PCPs and do not routinely seek preventive care (Sommers et al. 2017, Pitts et

al. 2010). Partly in response to this problem, the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid

Services spend millions each year on demonstration projects, managed care arrangements, case

managers, and patient-centered homes—all of which are aimed at improved service delivery and

cost reduction (https://innovation.cms.gov).

           In a prior study, we compared the effect of cash incentives to low-income uninsured

patients, treated in a safety net setting, to seek initial primary care visits. Incentives may be

substitutes for or complements to programs that improve care coordination and reduce costs. In

our study, all patients were assigned to a community-based PCP and provided free or low-cost

health care. The trial found that small cash incentives (i.e., $25, $50) encouraged primary care

visits, and that subjects were more responsive to higher incentives. Relative to the group that



1
    Medicaid is an insurance program in the United States for certain categories of low-income uninsured adults.


                                                           1
received no cash incentive, the odds of a PCP visit increased by 36% for the $25 incentive group

and 56% for the $50 incentive group. This study is described in more detail elsewhere (Bradley

and Neumark 2017). The study did not address whether healthcare utilization subsequent to the

initial PCP visit was reduced relative to those who did not see a PCP.

        In the present paper, we explore whether the initial PCP visit changes utilization and

costs, using the random assignment from the experiment to provide exogenous variation in PCP

visits. This exogenous source of variation is important because otherwise correlations between

unobserved determinants of health care utilization and costs and whether one visited a PCP could

drive the relationship between PCP visits and utilization and costs. We also estimate the direct

effect of incentives on health care utilization and costs (presuming that PCP visits are the

mechanism through which incentives work). These reduced form estimations provide insight into

the different levels of incentives that result in the largest changes in utilization and costs.

        We study utilization (e.g., emergency department, outpatient) and total health care costs

within 12 months after study enrollment, broken up into the six-month period in which the

incentives apply, and the subsequent six months. We thus provide new evidence on whether

primary care alters utilization patterns and reduces high-cost care in a low-income safety net

population. This study is relevant given the financial strain on the U.S. safety net system to

provide care, and a low-income population that has considerable health care needs (Gold, Pitrelli,

et al. 2014, Bazzoli, Fareed, and Waters 2014, Pickens et al. 2017). In addition, there is a

strongly held belief that primary care can reduce health care costs through improved

coordination of care and better management of chronic conditions (Heintzman et al. 2014). By

capitalizing on a randomized controlled trial, the study provides a more convincing test of this

hypothesis than has been obtained from observational studies.




                                                   2
       Our findings suggest that cash incentives encourage the desired behavior of PCP

utilization but may also have unintended consequences for other types of health care

utilization—outpatient care in particular. We conclude that although an initial PCP visit can be

effectively incentivized, and many patients continued to have subsequent visits with the PCP,

overall health care utilization may not be reduced, and may even increase in the short-run.

1. Utilization following health insurance coverage

       The best method for controlling costs once insurance coverage is provided, particularly

for low-income previously uninsured adults in the United States, is vigorously debated among

policymakers, insurers, and health care providers. Often, primary care is touted as the solution

for cost control, but our assessment of the available U.S.-based studies suggests that we need to

learn more about this relationship, and we need more rigorous evidence. Corresponding to the

outcomes in our study, in reviewing this U.S.-based literature we focus on utilization and costs;

we do not address potential health benefits, quality of life improvements, or improvements in

satisfaction with health care providers.

       Many studies find that, in the first year of health insurance coverage following a period of

uninsurance, health care utilization increases (Cunningham, Sabik, and Bonakdar Tehrani 2016,

Finkelstein et al. 2016, Finkelstein et al. 2012, O'Malley et al. 2016). In the United States,

following Oregon’s 2008 Medicaid expansion to low-income uninsured childless adults, for

example, overall health care encounters increased by 35% and PCP encounters increased by 22%

for those newly insured (Gold et al. 2014). Likewise, those newly insured following health care

reform in Massachusetts increased utilization during the first year of coverage, including

emergency care (Lee et al. 2015). Enrollees with no prior public insurance had 12% higher odds

of an emergency department visit within 12 months following enrollment in the Massachusetts




                                                  3
Medicaid program. Increased utilization following insurance coverage was also reported in

patients newly insured by private health insurance plans (Franks, Cameron, and Bertakis 2003).

Some researchers hypothesize that higher utilization following coverage is attributable to pent-up

demand for health care services, suggesting that the newly insured make up for forgone health

services once insured (Heintzman et al. 2014, Buchmueller et al. 2005).

           Researchers propose that primary care may be a way to reduce overall utilization

(Heintzman et al. 2014)once a population obtains health insurance coverage (Heintzman et al.

2014), as PCPs provide preventive care and treat chronic conditions, and thereby help patients

avoid the emergency department (Hadley 2007, Hadley and Cunningham 2004). This hypothesis

has received considerable attention from U.S. safety net providers that care for low-income

uninsured adults—often uncompensated. In the absence of insurance options, many safety net

providers devised their own coverage programs based on managed care principles to improve

health and reduce costs in the populations they serve. During the 1990s and early 2000s, prior to

the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), these programs were widespread in the United

States. Many programs offered access to community-based primary care providers, including

access to medical homes that provided comprehensive and coordinated care through a team of

affiliated providers. 2 The various approaches we describe below highlight the critical interest in

reducing costs and the willingness of institutions to make large investments to do so. However,

the effectiveness of these approaches at intercepting the tendency for low-income patients to

seek care in the emergency department and reducing costs to the safety net system is unclear.

           A randomized trial to evaluate utilization of uninsured patients assigned to Milwaukee

Cares, a coordinated care coverage program administered by the Medical College of Wisconsin,



2
    See, for example, http://www.cjaonline.net/project-access/.


                                                            4
did not find reduced utilization for its beneficiaries in the first year following enrollment

(Mackinney et al. 2013). Similarly, The Access Partnership in East Baltimore (Maryland) did not

change emergency department utilization, although fewer emergency department visits resulted

in an inpatient admission (Block et al. 2013). Only one published study reported reduced

utilization in the first year of enrollment; p(Block et al. 2013). Patients participating in Project

Access Dallas (Texas) reported fewer emergency department visits and hospital days than similar

patients who were not enrolled in the program (DeHaven et al. 2012). However, this study did

not focus directly on the effects of PCP visits on health care utilization, and it is unclear whether

those assigned to the program were systematically different from the control population, raising

concerns about potential selection bias.

       Our own assessment of data from the Virginia Coordinated Care program, a community-

based primary care program, found that newly enrolled recipients used more health care services

than those who had been enrolled for two or more years even though recipients had access to free

primary care within the community (Bradley et al. 2012). However, in the second and third years

following enrollment, health care utilization declined, perhaps because beneficiaries’ health

status improved during the initial period. The study, like many others, suffered from the lack of a

control group.

       Many of these coordinated care programs continue to exist, particularly in states that did

not expand Medicaid. In states that expanded Medicaid, a number of methods to control costs

have been pursued, including PCP assignment. Moreover, some states went so far as to dis-

incentivize emergency department use by instituting penalties in the form of high co-pays on

beneficiaries who used the emergency department for non-emergent needs (Cunningham, Sabik,

and Bonakdar Tehrani 2016, Sabik and Gandhi 2016).




                                                   5
       As this review indicates, there is little rigorous evidence on whether these primary care

approaches are effective at controlling costs. We overcome this limitation by implementing a

randomized controlled trial of cash incentives to visit an assigned PCP among patients newly

provided coverage through a community-based PCP program. Using assignment to incentive

groups, we then disentangle the influence PCPs have on utilization and costs from other

unobservables that can drive PCP visits as well as utilization and costs. . This approach advances

what is known about whether low-cost incentives encourage desired health seeking behavior

(i.e., PCP visits), and more importantly whether PCPs are an effective mechanism through which

incentives can steer health care utilization away from expensive emergency departments and

inpatient care.

2. The experiment

       Starting in August 2013, (Bradley and Neumark 2017)subjects were identified and

enrolled through a community-based primary care program established by the Virginia (United

States.) Commonwealth University Medical Center (VCUMC), the state’s largest safety net

provider (Bradley and Neumark 2017). The primary care program, known as Virginia

Coordinated Care (VCC), provided access to primary care for uninsured subjects who had

household incomes below 100% of the federal poverty level, had no other health insurance

coverage, and resided within a 30-mile radius of VCUMC. Once enrolled in VCC, patients were

assigned to a community-based PCP and provided free or low-cost care (Bradley et al. 2012).

2.1 The Virginia Coordinated Care program

       The Virginia Coordinated Care program is funded by VCUMC and is intended to deliver

care to uninsured adults who lived in the Richmond, Virginia metropolitan area. The study

population is similar to the population that would have been newly enrolled in Medicaid had




                                                6
Virginia expanded Medicaid during the time of the experiment. 3 That group, like the study

population, comprises childless adults, many of whom are likely to have multiple chronic

conditions. These adults are likely eligible for subsidized coverage on the health insurance

exchange established under the ACA, but given their very low income, they are unlikely to

purchase coverage.

           Once enrolled in the program, patients were assigned to community-based primary care

providers near where they lived. Primary care providers received a monthly management fee and

fee-for-service rates comparable to approximately 110 percent of the Medicaid fee schedule in

Virginia.

2.2 Intervention

           Eligibility criteria for the randomized controlled trial were: no prior VCC coverage in the

past 12 months or were a VCC re-enrollee with no PCP or specialist visit in the prior 9 months;

aged 21-64 years; spoke English; and resided in the community (e.g., not homeless or living at a

drug or alcohol rehabilitation facility). Subjects also had to have a phone number where they

could be reached. We randomized subjects to groups so that there were equal distributions by

gender, race, and 5-year age bands. Subjects were randomized to either the incentive group or a

group of untreated controls.

           Subjects assigned to the incentive groups were given $10 to complete a baseline survey.

At the end of the baseline interview, subjects were told the group to which they had been

randomly assigned and given six months to see their primary care provider. If we received a

health care claim indicating that the subject saw their PCP with this six-month period, we paid

the subject either $25 or $50 depending on group assignment. Subjects were paid only once and



3
    The Virginia legislature approved expanding Medicaid to low-income childless adults in 2018.


                                                          7
only for the first PCP visit. Subjects in the $0 group did not receive a payment other than the

initial $10 to complete the baseline survey.

       The untreated controls comprised 415 subjects who were not contacted by study

interviewers, but for whom subjects’ medical claim files were collected. The untreated controls

allow us to observe behavior in the absence of activities associated with the randomized

controlled trial. It is possible that the experiment has an independent effect, which would be

underestimated if we only compared the $25 and $50 incentive groups to the $0 group.

Following the baseline interview, 413 subjects were assigned to the $0 group, 407 to the $25

group, and 408 to the $50 group. Health care claims for all four groups (e.g., laboratory,

diagnostic, other outpatient services, specialty care visits, emergency department visits, and

inpatient stays) were collected for a 12-month period following study enrollment.

       Institutional review boards at Virginia Commonwealth University and the University of

Colorado approved the study protocol. The trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov

(NCT02922855). The registration specified the outcomes we study in this paper in addition to

self-reported mental and physical health outcomes that will be assessed in the future.

3. Methods

3.1 Outcomes

       We separate the analysis into the first six-month period (when PCP visits were

incentivized), and the subsequent six months (post-incentive period); the latter period provides

the cleanest evidence on how the earlier PCP visit (or the incentives) influenced utilization and

costs. We are most interested in whether PCP visits are associated with a reduction in emergency

department visits, particularly visits for non-emergent care, which is where we expect PCP visits

to be a preferable substitute for the emergency department. The experiment may also have




                                                 8
affected other categories of utilization, and it is not clear a priori that other types of utilization

will decline. For example, due to diagnosis and treatment, follow-up visits to the PCP may occur

along with referrals and visits to outpatient and specialty providers. For this reason, we also

study these services. In the short-run these visits may increase health care costs, but if health

status is improved over time, these visits, including expensive emergency department and

inpatient utilization, should diminish. The evidence on utilization and costs in the second six-

month period may give us some indication of longer-run effects on these outcomes, although an

even longer time frame would provide more evidence.

        We measure utilization in different ways, to capture what occurred, when it occurred, and

intensity. Our primary outcomes are any PCP visit, any emergency department visit, any non-

emergent visit, and any outpatient visit.4 We also specify PCP, emergency department, and

outpatient visits as two or more visits. Visit types were identified through the use of a service

location variable in the claim files. Outpatient visits associated only with lab draws are not

counted as separate visits. Once categorized into three service locations (emergency department,

inpatient, and outpatient), outpatient visits were further categorized into PCP and outpatient and

specialty care. The claims files originating from the VCC program contain a PCP indicator flag

for all visits associated with a PCP. Outpatient visits not associated with a PCP are considered

outpatient and specialty care. These specialty care visits occurred in doctors’ offices, outpatient

hospital clinics, provider-based clinics, and ambulatory surgical centers.

        We convert billed charges to the Virginia Medicaid fee-for-service reimbursement rates

using procedure codes. Medicaid reimbursement rates were chosen because the population we



4
 In addition, we estimated days until the first PCP visit during the initial six-month incentive period. Those
who received either $25 or $50 saw the PCP approximately 19 and 25 days sooner respectively (results not
shown).


                                                        9
study is most similar to Medicaid beneficiaries in states that expanded Medicaid to low-income

childless adults. Reimbursement rates are intended to approximate costs and generally have less

variability than charges.

       Utilization and costs were estimated for all four groups—the three groups randomized to

the incentivized arm and the untreated controls. In some estimations, we combine the incentive

groups into a single category ($0, $25, or $50 vs. untreated; and $25 or $50 vs. $0). In addition,

we estimate models for the three incentivized groups alone, providing comparisons across the

levels of cash incentives.

       We estimate models for several utilization outcomes in addition to total costs. To avoid

the potential problem of searching for significant results, these outcomes were listed a priori in

our clinicaltrials.gov registration. Nonetheless, we also report statistical results for our

estimations accounting for multiple hypothesis testing, providing adjusted p-values in the

appendix (Appendix Tables 2a, 2b, and 2c), based on the Simes procedure to control the “false

discovery rate.” In some cases, the adjusted p-values become larger than those conventionally

associated with statistical significance, meaning that in these cases, our unadjusted tests falsely

reject the hypothesis of no effect. Nonetheless, the findings remain qualitatively important and

suggestive of areas where a PCP visit (or incentive group) may increase (or decrease) other

categories of utilization or cost. In addition, we perform power calculations for each outcome we

study, and footnote in the tables coefficients that exceed the one-sided detectable effect size

calculated for 80% power and alpha = 0.05.

3.2 Control variables

       We had data from administrative records on sex, age, race/ethnicity, and marital status for

all subjects who participated in the study. Subjects enrolled in the incentivized arm were




                                                  10
interviewed prior to randomization, with additional information collected on: education (high

school diploma or less, some college degree, and Bachelor’s degree or better); employed

(yes/no); monthly income (<$1500, $1500 to $2000, and $2001+); smoking status (yes/no);

drug/alcohol problems (yes/no); whether the subject had health insurance prior to enrollment in

VCC (yes/no); whether subject’s usual source of care was in the emergency department; and

whether the patient had two or more chronic conditions. The interviews also elicited additional

information about the frequency of emergency department utilization in the 12 months prior to

enrollment; visits were categorized as 0 to 1, 2 to 5, and 6 or more. We also calculated

respondents’ composite scores on a subset of the PROMIS domains (e.g., depression, anxiety,

social role, pain interference). PROMIS is a psychometrically sound instrument that measures

patient reported physical, mental, and social domains (http://www.healthmeasures.net). (National

Institute of Health 2017) Higher scores for the depression, anxiety, and pain interference

domains indicate worse health status, and a higher score for social role indicates better status.

We measured satisfaction with the health care system, referring back to their last health care visit

regardless of provider type and prior to randomization, using the Patient Satisfaction

Questionnaire (PSQ)-18 (https://www.rand.org/health/surveys_tools/psq.html). (Health 2017)

The PSQ measures satisfaction with medical care by addressing six aspects of care: technical

quality, interpersonal manner, communication, financial aspects of care, time spent with doctor,

and accessibility of care. Satisfaction with prior health care providers is likely to influence future

use and the provider from whom a patient seeks care. We also include physician fixed effects for

the assigned PCP, regardless of whether the patient had a visit.

3.3 Analytical approach




                                                 11
       Differences between the incentive groups and untreated controls were analyzed using χ2

tests for categorical variables and t-tests for difference in means.

       We used two-stage least squares (2SLS) to estimate whether PCP visits incentivized by

the experiment changed health care utilization and costs, using the experimental assignment to

cash incentive groups or the untreated control group as an exogenous source of variation in PCP

visits. In the first stage, we estimate a model for the probability of a PCP visit during the first six

months (the “incentive period,” as indicated by the 1 subscript), using:

                              PCPi1 = π0 + GRPi π1 + Xi π2 + υi1         (1)

where PCPi1 is measure of PCP visits during the first six months. Correspondingly, we define

PCPi2 as the corresponding measure for subject i seeing a PCP in the second six-month period

following the incentive period (the “post-incentive” period). In our analyses, PCPi1 and PCPi2 are

simply indicator variables for any PCP visit. The coefficients in π1 capture the effect of group

assignment—whether to untreated controls, $0, $25, or $50, or, in some specifications we

estimate, a combination of cash incentives. X includes dummy variables for each PCP, to control

for differences in PCP characteristics that might affect access or other outcomes (e.g., ease of

getting an appointment), as well as other controls listed in the table notes and described above.

We estimate equation (1) using a linear probability model.

       In the second stage, we estimate the effects of a single PCP visit on measures of

utilization, and on costs in the incentive period and the post-incentive period—denoted

generically Yi1 and Yi2—using the predicted probability of a PCP visit from equation (1) as an

instrumental variable for PCPi1 in the equation:

                          Yij = αY + βY PCPi1 + Xi γY + εYij , j = 1,2         (2)




                                                   12
where Y can represent each of the dependent variables we study (e.g., emergency department use,

outpatient use, cost).

        We offer two sets of estimations, one based on a stronger set of instruments that includes

assignment to the different incentive groups and the untreated control group, and a second set of

instruments (for a correspondingly smaller sample) including only the assignment to the different

incentive groups. The first set of instruments incorporates the experimental effect of contacting

subjects and asking questions about their health and potentially offering information about the

VCC. The second set of instruments is weaker, but perhaps more valid given the uniform

exposure to the experimental conditions. We test the strength of the instruments using the

Kleibergen-Paap Wald F-statistic and the five tests invoked by the weakiv command in Stata. 5,6

        To study the reduced form effects of assignment to incentive groups, we estimated

Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regressions for the outcomes of interest, including our controls,

estimating the effects of group assignment ($0, $25, $50, and untreated controls in estimations

that included all four groups; and ($0, $25, and $50 in estimations that included just the incentive

groups). These estimations are informative about the effects of different levels of cash incentives

to which subjects were randomized, and about assignment to the incentive arm. We use models

of the form:

                          Y𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = π0 ′Y + GRP𝑖𝑖 π1 ′ + Xi π2 ′ + υ𝑌𝑌 ij , 𝑗𝑗 = 1,2   (3)

        Like for equation (2), we estimate equation (3) for the first six-month period, and for the

second six-month period, indexed by j. We estimate equation (3) using OLS, which is a linear


5
  10 subjects were missing information on a few variables. We used multiple imputation methods with 10
imputations to impute missing data in the regressions. Results from the regressions using imputed data were nearly
identical to those obtained when subjects with missing data were dropped.
6
  We also estimate equations (1) and (2) for some of our discrete utilization measures using an IVPROBIT model.
The estimated marginal effects were nearly the same as the coefficients reported for the 2SLS model (available upon
request).


                                                        13
probability model for discrete outcomes such as any ED visits, it is a linear probability model.

Our outcomes also include 2 or more emergency department visits (any non-emergent ED visits),

any and two or more outpatient and specialty visits, and total costs.

         We report estimations for total costs summed across each category of utilization. Total

costs were skewed to the right and there were 187 subjects without claims. Therefore, we

transformed costs into its natural logarithm and replaced zeroes with the minimum value minus

0.01. We also tested specifications using the inverse hyperbolic sine (IHS) of costs, which can

accommodate zeroes and skewness and is interpreted as a percentage much in the same way as

coefficients derived from the natural log transformation (Ravallion 2017). Because it is likely

that the zeroes reflect no utilization during the study period, the IHS transformation may better

represent observed behavior in the study sample. 7,8

         In all estimations, standard errors are clustered at the physician level. Analyses were

conducted using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute) and Stata version 14.0 (Statacorp).

4. Results

4.1 Descriptive statistics

         Table 1 reports demographic and health characteristics. Recall that many of these are

measured from the interviews, which were administered only to the cash incentive groups. The

groups were generally well balanced, although the $50 group reported slightly lower social

function (p<0.10), less satisfaction with financial aspects of care (p<0.05), and more emergency

department visits than observed in the $0 and $25 group (p<0.10).

4.2 Utilization


7
  In alternative estimations (not shown), we handled zeroes by adding 1 before transforming costs to the natural
logarithm. This resulted in slightly larger coefficients, but with very qualitatively similar results.
8
  We also estimated total costs using GLM with the log link function. Coefficients are not statistically signficant and
are reported in the appendix (available on request).


                                                          14
         Table 2 reports unadjusted health care utilization and costs differences between the

different experimental groups. In the first six months—when PCP visits were incentivized—

subjects randomized to the cash incentive arm visited a PCP more often than subjects in the

untreated control group (p<0.01), and the subjects in the $25 and $50 groups saw a PCP more

often than subjects in the $0 group (p<0.10, p<0.05, respectively). In the second six-month

period, after the incentives for a PCP visit in the first six-month period, the number of PCP visits

was statistically significantly higher for the $25 and $50 groups individually, and combined,

relative to the untreated controls and relative to the $0 group, suggesting that an ongoing

relationship with the PCP may have been established following the initial incentivized visit.

         Table 2 shows that emergency department visits declined for all groups in the second six-

month period, and inpatient visits were uncommon among all subjects. 9 Outpatient and specialty

care visits declined for all groups from the initial six-month period to the second six-month

period. There is evidence that outpatient and specialty visits were higher in the incentivized

groups, in both periods (for both relative to the untreated controls, and relative to the $0

incentive group). One might expect these visits to increase along with an increase in PCP

utilization, at least in the short run, because diagnostic tests are performed and referrals are made

for treatment.

         Median total costs in the first six months following study enrollment ranged between

$860 and $1,193 across the groups. In the second six-month period, median costs were

considerably lower for all groups. Mean total costs were much larger than the median, ranging

from $4,723 ($0 incentive group) to $5,290 (untreated controls) in the first six-month period. In




9
  We do not report the estimations from regression models for inpatient visits because few patients had inpatient
stays and the results were statistically insignificant. Estimates are available upon request.


                                                         15
the second six-month period, untreated controls experience the greatest decline in mean total

costs (down to $3,298).

         We note two concerns with the cost distribution. First, 187 observations report no health

care utilization (true zeroes); these observations are, unsurprisingly, disproportionately in the

untreated and $0 groups (31.5% in each). We compared baseline characteristics of these subjects

to those of subjects with claims. Among those interviewed, subjects without claims had fewer

chronic conditions, greater social role function, lower pain interference, and lower satisfaction

with health care providers, suggesting that they may have been in better health than other

subjects and may have had a lower need (or desire) to seek a PCP visit or other forms of care. 10

We tested the sensitivity of the results to excluding these subjects from the sample and found that

results were virtually unchanged (results not shown). Second, costs over the 12 months have a

wide range—from $18 to $203,592—leading to a distribution skewed to the right. The 95th

percent of costs exceeds $41,500, and is similar across the groups. We address the issues of zero

costs and a strongly skewed distribution in our analytical approach.

4.3 Effects of PCP visits

         Table 3 reports the estimates from a linear probability model that predicts the likelihood

of any PCP visit. These are the first-stage estimates used in subsequent 2SLS models. In addition

to the full models, we report estimates where we combine the cash incentive groups and do a

simple comparison to the untreated controls (in the top panel), and where we combine the $25

and $50 incentive groups and do a simple comparison to the $0 incentive group (in the lower

panel). These specifications provide more parsimonious comparisons, and we do the same in the



10
  Note that overrepresentation of no claims cases among the untreated controls and $0 incentive group does not
imply a lack of balance between groups. Rather, those in less need of health care appear to have been less likely to
seek out health care if assigned to the untreated controls or the $0 incentive group.


                                                         16
reduced form estimations reported later. However, in the 2SLS estimation, we use the first-stage

equations in which the groups are separated.

       The incentive groups ($25 and $50) were statistically significantly more likely to visit the

PCP than the untreated controls (p<0.01, top panel), by 9 and 12 percentage points, respectively.

Relative to the $0 group, the $50 group was nearly 7 percentage points more likely to visit the

PCP (p<0.01) and the incentive groups combined were 5.5 percentage points more likely to visit

the PCP than the $0 group (p<0.01).

       Table 4 reports estimates from the two-stage least squares estimations. In the first six-

month period, the estimates indicate that a PCP visit increased outpatient visits by about 56

percentage points for any outpatient visit and 58 percentage points for two or more visits in the

estimates using the incentive groups and the untreated controls. For these same groups, the

specifications for the natural log of costs indicate that costs increased considerably as a result of

a PCP visit (about 6.5 times higher; e2.08-1). The IHS transformation yielded a similar estimate

(about 4 times higher costs). Total costs in the first six-month period were also higher for the

analysis limited to the incentive groups.

       However, in the second six-month, post-incentive, period only the coefficient for non-

emergent visits, using the incentive groups and the untreated controls, was statistically

significant. In this analysis, a PCP visit led to an approximately 19 percentage points lower




                                                 17
probability of having a non-emergent visit in the emergency department relative to untreated

controls (p<0.10). 11, 12

         We note that the F tests for the instruments were above 10 (see the table notes), the

generally accepted cut-off for weak instruments, when using all four groups (incentive groups

plus the untreated controls) in the IV estimations. The F tests are less than 10 when using only

the three groups randomized to incentives. The footnote to Table 4 also explains how the table

reports results from the other weak instruments tests. For most outcomes, these tests further

suggest that instruments are generally strong when using the incentive groups and untreated

controls, and also for the cost estimations when using only the incentive groups. Two

possibilities may weaken the results when using the incentive groups only to estimate emergency

department and outpatient visits. First, there could be a strong experimental effect in addition to

the incentives, and we lose that variation when we use only the incentive groups. Second, given

the better PROMIS scores and lower emergency department utilization reported at baseline, the

health status of the $0 group may be better than health status of the $25 and $50 groups, which

may be why there was a higher proportion of no health care utilization in the $0 group. However,

we controlled for health status based on interview data, to the extent possible.

4.4 Effect of group assignment (reduced form estimations)




11
   In addition, in the appendix (Appendix Table 1) we report coefficients from estimating the effect of a PCP visit in
the first six months on the number of PCP, emergency department, and outpatient visits. Positive and statistically
significant coefficients were found for PCP and outpatient visits in the second six-month period when using the
incentive groups and the untreated controls. A positive and statistically significant coefficient was also found for
outpatient visits in the second six-month period when using only the incentive groups.
12
   In this case, and for many other results, the 2SLS estimate is larger than the mean of the dependent variable. That
can happen, of course, especially with the rescaling of the reduced form estimate by the first-stage estimate. The
reduced form estimates reported below reveal how the experimental assignment affected the dependent variables we
study, and these estimates are smaller than the dependent variable means. We also report results for number of visits
as a measure of utilization in the appendix (Appendix Table 1). There is evidence that PCP visits increased the
likelihood of additional PCP visits by more than 2 additional visits (p<0.01) and outpatient visits by 4-6 visits
(p<0.10).


                                                         18
        Next, we turn to reduced form estimations for insight into the effects of the experimental

assignment (Table 5). For the second six-month, post-incentive, period, the estimated effects of

the experiment on emergency department utilization suggests a reduction—in particular, a lower

likelihood of two or more emergency department visits when we compare the cash incentive

groups to the untreated controls. Relative to the untreated controls, subjects in the $0 incentive

group were 4.9 percentage points (p<0.01) less likely to have two or more emergency department

visits, and this differential is not statistically significantly larger for the $25 or $50 groups (3.4

percentage points). This evidence suggests that participation in the experiment, on its own, had

an effect on behavior. Those assigned to any incentive group were 3.9 percentage points less

likely to have two or more emergency department visits than the untreated controls. Non-

emergent visits to the emergency department declined in the second six-month period (by 3 and

2.3 percentage points for $25 and $50 groups, respectively) relative to untreated controls.

        The last two columns of Table 5 report results for outpatient visits. In the second six-

month period, the estimated differentials are not statistically significant, except for the effect on

any visit for the $25 incentive group relative to the untreated controls (6.3 percentage points

increase). Further investigation into the reason for these visits revealed that several subjects in

the $25 group were receiving daily radiation treatments, leading to the continued high use of

outpatient and specialty care.

        Finally, Table 6 reports cost results. In the initial six-month period, we observe

statistically significant coefficients for the $50 group. The $50 group had about 32% (p<0.10)

higher costs (e0.276−1) than the untreated controls. Among the incentive groups, the $50 group

had 29% higher costs than the $0 group (p<0.05). The inverse hyperbolic sine transformation

yielded similarly qualitative results, but with larger coefficients. In the second six-month period,




                                                   19
after the experimental incentives for a PCP visit applied, there is no clear evidence of higher

costs, and the estimated differentials are smaller.

4.5 Who responds to incentives?

       The next set of estimations tests whether subjects who are healthier responded differently

to the incentives for PCP visits than those who have health conditions that require treatment or

monitoring. Policymakers and program administrators are likely to be interested in knowing

whether the incentives were more effective for subjects who had health conditions and needed to

see a PCP, or instead stimulated wellness visits where, to the subject’s knowledge, no underlying

health condition existed. These visits may be a concern if they stimulate unnecessary health care

utilization. In the first case, the incentives “nudge” a subject who may be delaying needed care,

while in the second case, the incentives encourage preventive behavior or arguably, unnecessary

visits. In addition, if unhealthy subjects were prompted to see the PCP, then changes in

subsequent utilization were more likely due to improvements in health, in addition to alterations

in health care seeking patterns.

       We define “healthy” three ways: 1) no drug or alcohol problems, no self-reported high

blood pressure, diabetes, lung disease or cancer, no more than one emergency department visit in

the past 12 months, no anxiety or depression; 2) meets the conditions for definition 1 but can

report high blood pressure; and 3) self-report excellent or very good health status. Because these

definitions rely on self-reported data, we cannot include the untreated controls in the analysis.

       Table 7 reports the findings. There is rather clear evidence that the increases in PCP visits

owing to the experimental cash incentives were driven by the unhealthy sample. In contrast,

there were no significant effects for the healthy samples. (The healthy samples are smaller and

the estimates less precise, but the estimates are not consistently positive, whereas every estimate




                                                 20
is positive for the unhealthy samples.) This evidence might be viewed positively, as indicating

that the incentives did not appear to encourage unnecessary visits. Furthermore, this evidence

suggests that our evidence of increases in outpatient and specialty visits, and in costs, was likely

to have arisen from the treatment of adverse health conditions prompted by the PCP visit—

consistent with the evidence of more visits and costs being stronger in the initial six-month

period when the incentivized PCP visit would have occurred. These patients may have been

diverted from the emergency department for treatment of non-emergent conditions.

5. Conclusions

       We test the effect of a small cash incentive program to encourage an initial primary care

provider (PCP) visit and use the experimentally-induced variation in PCP visits to estimate the

effects of PCP visits on outpatient and emergency department utilization, and on total costs,

using two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimations to control for endogenous variation in the

likelihood of an initial PCP visit that could be correlated with other unmeasured determinants of

health care utilization or costs. We estimate utilization and costs for two periods, the first six

months following enrollment in the experiment, during the period when the experiment provides

incentives for a PCP visit, and second six months following the incentive period.

       The groups assigned to positive cash incentives for a PCP visit were more likely to have a

PCP visit and outpatient and specialty care visits relative to untreated controls, and to have

higher costs, during the six-month incentive period. The 2SLS estimates of the effects of PCP

visits on utilization and costs point to PCP visits increasing utilization and costs during the first

six months of the experiment, when subjects were incentivized to visit their PCP. In the second

six-month, post-incentive period, utilization and costs were no higher for those who visited their

PCP, but there is some evidence that non-emergent ED visits were lower. This evidence suggests




                                                  21
that the incentives to visit the PCP led to diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions, but

subsequently may have helped divert patients from non-emergent ED care.

       There is other evidence consistent with this interpretation. First, we find that subjects

who saw the PCP continued to do so after the initial visit. Therefore, if a policymaker’s goal is to

increase PCP utilization and encourage low-income previously uninsured adults, particularly

those who have health care needs, to establish a relationship with a PCP, small cash incentives

may be effective and have other positive effects including fewer non-emergent emergency

department visits. Total costs, though, are unlikely to decrease—and more likely to increase—in

the short-term. Interestingly, we find some evidence of lower ED use even for patients assigned

to the $0 incentive group (in comparison to untreated controls), which suggests that simply

calling newly enrolled beneficiaries and explaining what it means to be assigned to a PCP—as

we did in the experiment—may also achieve some benefits.

       The second type of evidence consistent with the interpretation that the incentives to visit

the PCP led to diagnosis and treatment of medical conditions, is that the effects on PCP visits

were apparent for unhealthy subjects, but not for healthy subjects. This evidence suggests that

patients who needed health care may have been steered away from the emergency department,

particularly for non-emergent care, and toward PCP visits. Put differently, this evidence suggests

that the incentives did not stimulate unnecessary PCP utilization among the healthy.

       Overall, we conclude that in a low-income previously uninsured sample with poor

baseline health, small cash incentives are effective at encouraging a PCP visit and perhaps

effective at leading to a longer-term relationship with a PCP and fewer non-emergent emergency

department visits, but may result in higher health care costs in the short-term. Realistically, given

the poor health status of the patient population, use of the emergency department for non-




                                                 22
emergent visits may be the only outcome we can expect a PCP to reduce in the short-term by

offering a viable substitute for the emergency department.

6. Discussion

        Practical implementation of an incentive program modeled on our experiment could be

costly. Nonetheless, existing programs to steer patients away from expensive utilization are also

costly, and an incentive program could be complementary to or a substitute for such a program.

The population most like the subjects who participated in our experiment are those newly

enrolled in U.S. Medicaid expansions to low-income childless adults. It is conceivable that case

workers could contact newly enrolled beneficiaries to assess baseline health and inform them

about PCP assignment and other benefits, which is equivalent to our $0 incentive group. If the

effects were similar to those in our data, in which approximately 68% of the $0 group go to the

PCP, versus about 61% of subjects with no contact with study coordinators (Bradley and

Neumark, 2017), a 7 percentage points increase can be achieved by personal contact with

patients, without incentives. Approximately 75% of incentive patients, regardless of whether

they received an incentive of $25 or $50, go to the PCP. Roughly, an average of 300,000 non-

aged, non-disabled adults newly enroll annually in Medicaid. 13 Therefore, a $25 incentive would

cost $7.5 million to gain a 14 percentage point increase in PCP utilization. Although we do not

show a short-term cost savings associated with PCP visits, a cost reduction is not the only reason

an insurance provider would want to incentivize PCP visits. There may be longer-term health

benefits (and potentially cost savings), improved quality of life, and higher patient satisfaction




13
  See https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/program-information/medicaid-and-chip-enrollment-data/report-
highlights/index.html and https://www.kff.org/medicaid/state-indicator/distribution-of-medicaid-enrollees-by-
enrollment-
group/?currentTimeframe=0&sortModel=%7B%22colId%22:%22Location%22,%22sort%22:%22asc%22%7D.


                                                       23
associated with having an established PCP relationship. We await additional data from our study

to address these outcomes.

       An incentive program would need to be evaluated in terms of its cost-effectiveness. For

example, following an evaluation of preventive care in Japan, researchers concluded that subjects

respond to health signals from wearable devices and seek medical checkups (Iizuka et al. 2017).

These researchers caution that while checkups can prevent chronic diseases, they may also result

in over-use of care. In contrast, if the threshold for a health signal (analogous to our incentives)

is set too low, then medical care could be underutilized. Additional research is needed to

determine an incentive level that results in efficient use of care and to evaluate such a program in

terms of its long-term cost-effectiveness.

       More time may be required to improve health status, as opposed to altering health

seeking patterns, in this population. When health conditions are severe, a PCP visit—even

multiple visits—may not be sufficient to improve health status. Moreover, the evidence suggests

that the incentives, by encouraging an initial PCP visit, initially boost outpatient and specialty

visits. This evidence suggests that part of the effect of the PCP visit our experiment induced is

that the PCP detects heath conditions, orders diagnostic tests, and refers subjects to specialists,

resulting in an increase in outpatient utilization—some of which may be unnecessary. The

frequency of these visits lessens in the second six-month period that follows the incentivized

PCP visit, suggesting either resolution (or lessening) of the health care problem, or determination

of a treatment course that does not require additional outpatient follow-up.

       There are four main limitations to our study. First, the study is limited to a 12-month

period with only six months following the incentive period. This may be insufficient time to

observe whether the PCP relationships are sustained in the longer term, and if, over the longer




                                                 24
term, these relationships improved health status and altered long-term utilization patterns.

Second, it is possible that some subjects received health care outside the VCU medical center.

However, visits outside the medical center are likely to be minimal. Subjects reside within 30

miles of the medical center, which makes the center a convenient location for health care. The

center is the largest safety-net provider in the region and offers comprehensive care. More

importantly, when subjects received care outside the VCU medical center, VCC often received a

claim, which we included in our analyses. Third, our study is specific to a U.S. urban, low-

income safety net population with many health care needs, and may not generalize outside the

U.S. safety net, or to higher-income, healthier, or rural populations. Fourth, we assume that

health care utilization and costs were only affected by a PCP visit in our two-stage estimations.

However, there are other conditions like patient income and differences in patient health status

that may affect utilization. In this very low-income population (90% with monthly income below

$1,500), income is uniformly low, which may limit whether the results can be generalized to a

wealthier population who may require larger incentives to achieve the same results. Health

status, on the other hand, may have been better in the $0 group as evidenced by a

disproportionate number with no health care utilization.

       It has been hypothesized that, in addition to pent-up demand, an important source of

higher utilization following Medicaid coverage among the previously uninsured in the U.S. is

inadequate access to primary care (Heintzman et al. 2014). Arguments have been made for

having both health insurance coverage and a usual source of care in the primary care setting

(DeVoe et al. 2003, DeVoe et al. 2011). Using a rigorous study design and capitalizing on

exogenous variation in the likelihood of an initial PCP visit, we show modest evidence that PCPs

reduce non-emergent emergency department utilization in the short-term and may, in fact,




                                                25
initially increase costs. In the high health needs patients we study, in which nearly two-thirds

report two or more chronic conditions, PCPs may have very little ability to reduce health care

utilization in the short-term. Health status, among the very sick, may take years to improve.

Ultimately, however, longer-term evidence is needed to determine whether policies or programs

that encourage PCP visits lead to a sustained relationship with that provider and alter patterns of

care so as to improve health and reduce costs.




                                                 26
References

Asplin, B. R., K. V. Rhodes, H. Levy, N. Lurie, A. L. Crain, B. P. Carlin, and A. L. Kellermann.
       2005. "Insurance status and access to urgent ambulatory care follow-up appointments."
       Jama 294 (10):1248-54. doi: 10.1001/jama.294.10.1248.
Bazzoli, G. J., N. Fareed, and T. M. Waters. 2014. "Hospital financial performance in the recent
       recession and implications for institutions that remain financially weak." Health Aff
       (Millwood) 33 (5):739-45. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0988.
Block, L., S. Ma, M. Emerson, A. Langley, L. Torre Dde, and G. Noronha. 2013. "Does access
       to comprehensive outpatient care alter patterns of emergency department utilization
       among uninsured patients in East Baltimore?" J Prim Care Community Health 4 (2):143-
       7. doi: 10.1177/2150131913477116.
Bradley, C. J., S. O. Gandhi, D. Neumark, S. Garland, and S. M. Retchin. 2012. "Lessons for
       coverage expansion: a Virginia primary care program for the uninsured reduced
       utilization and cut costs." Health Aff (Millwood) 31 (2):350-9. doi:
       10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0857.
Bradley, C. J., and D. Neumark. 2017. "Small Cash Incentives Can Encourage Primary Care
       Visits By Low-Income People With New Health Care Coverage." Health Aff (Millwood)
       36 (8):1376-1384. doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2016.1455.
Buchmueller, T. C., K. Grumbach, R. Kronick, and J. G. Kahn. 2005. "The effect of health
       insurance on medical care utilization and implications for insurance expansion: a review
       of the literature." Med Care Res Rev 62 (1):3-30. doi: 10.1177/1077558704271718.
Cunningham, P., L. M. Sabik, and A. Bonakdar Tehrani. 2016. "Trends in Hospital Inpatient
       Admissions Following Early Medicaid Expansion in California." Med Care Res Rev.
       doi: 10.1177/1077558716669433.
DeHaven, M., H. Kitzman-Ulrich, N. Gimpel, D. Culica, L. O'Neil, A. Marcee, B. Foster, M.
       Biggs, and J. Walton. 2012. "The effects of a community-based partnership, Project
       Access Dallas (PAD), on emergency department utilization and costs among the
       uninsured." J Public Health (Oxf) 34 (4):577-83. doi: 10.1093/pubmed/fds027.
DeVoe, J. E., G. E. Fryer, R. Phillips, and L. Green. 2003. "Receipt of preventive care among
       adults: insurance status and usual source of care." Am J Public Health 93 (5):786-91.
DeVoe, J. E., C. J. Tillotson, S. E. Lesko, L. S. Wallace, and H. Angier. 2011. "The case for
       synergy between a usual source of care and health insurance coverage." J Gen Intern
       Med 26 (9):1059-66. doi: 10.1007/s11606-011-1666-0.
Finkelstein, A. N., S. L. Taubman, H. L. Allen, B. J. Wright, and K. Baicker. 2016. "Effect of
       Medicaid Coverage on ED Use - Further Evidence from Oregon's Experiment." N Engl J
       Med 375 (16):1505-1507. doi: 10.1056/NEJMp1609533.
Finkelstein, A., S. Taubman, B. Wright, M. Bernstein, J. Gruber, J. P. Newhouse, H. Allen, and
       K. Baicker. 2012. "THE OREGON HEALTH INSURANCE EXPERIMENT:
       EVIDENCE FROM THE FIRST YEAR." Q J Econ 127 (3):1057-1106.
Franks, P., C. Cameron, and K. D. Bertakis. 2003. "On being new to an insurance plan: health
       care use associated with the first years in a health insurance plan." Ann Fam Med 1
       (3):156-61.
Gold, H. T., K. Pitrelli, M. K. Hayes, and M. M. Murphy. 2014. "Decision to adopt medical
       technology: case study of breast cancer radiotherapy techniques." Med Decis Making 34
       (8):1006-15. doi: 10.1177/0272989X14541679.
Gold, R., S. R. Bailey, J. P. O'Malley, M. J. Hoopes, S. Cowburn, M. Marino, J. Heintzman, C.
        Nelson, S. P. Fortmann, and J. E. DeVoe. 2014. "Estimating demand for care after a
        medicaid expansion: lessons from Oregon." J Ambul Care Manage 37 (4):282-92. doi:
        10.1097/jac.0000000000000023.
Health, RAND. 2017. "Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire from RAND Health."
        https://www.rand.org/health/surveys_tools/psq.html.
Heintzman, J., R. Gold, S. R. Bailey, and J. E. DeVoe. 2014. "The Oregon experiment re-
        examined: the need to bolster primary care." Bmj 349:g5976. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g5976.
Johnson, T. L., D. J. Rinehart, J. Durfee, D. Brewer, H. Batal, J. Blum, C. I. Oronce, P.
        Melinkovich, and P. Gabow. 2015. "For many patients who use large amounts of health
        care services, the need is intense yet temporary." Health Aff (Millwood) 34 (8):1312-9.
        doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2014.1186.
Lee, J., R. Ding, S. L. Zeger, A. McDermott, G. Habteh-Yimer, M. Chin, R. S. Balder, and M. L.
        McCarthy. 2015. "Impact of Subsidized Health Insurance Coverage on Emergency
        Department Utilization by Low-income Adults in Massachusetts." Med Care 53 (1):38-
        44. doi: 10.1097/mlr.0000000000000279.
Mackinney, T., A. M. Visotcky, S. Tarima, and J. Whittle. 2013. "Does providing care for
        uninsured patients decrease emergency room visits and hospitalizations?" J Prim Care
        Community Health 4 (2):135-42. doi: 10.1177/2150131913478981.
National Institute of Health. 2017. "PROMIS - Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement
        Information System." Healthmeasures.net.
       http://www.healthmeasures.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout=blog
       &id=147&Itemid=806.
O'Malley, J. P., M. O'Keeffe-Rosetti, R. A. Lowe, H. Angier, R. Gold, M. Marino, B. Hatch, M.
         Hoopes, S. R. Bailey, J. Heintzman, C. Gallia, and J. E. DeVoe. 2016. "Health Care
         Utilization Rates After Oregon's 2008 Medicaid Expansion: Within-Group and Between-
         Group Differences Over Time Among New, Returning, and Continuously Insured
         Enrollees." Med Care 54 (11):984-991. doi: 10.1097/mlr.0000000000000600.
Peterson, K., M. Helfand, L. Humphrey, V. Christensen, and S. Carson. 2011. "VA Evidence-
         based Synthesis Program Reports Evidence Brief: Effectiveness of Intensive Primary
         Care Programs." In VA Evidence-based Synthesis Program Evidence Briefs. Washington
         (DC): Department of Veterans Affairs (US).
Pickens, G., Z. Karaca, E. Cutler, M. Dworsky, C. Eibner, B. Moore, T. Gibson, S. Iyer, and H.
         S. Wong. 2017. "Changes in Hospital Inpatient Utilization Following Health Care
         Reform." Health Serv Res. doi: 10.1111/1475-6773.12734.
Pitts, S. R., E. R. Carrier, E. C. Rich, and A. L. Kellermann. 2010. "Where Americans get acute
         care: increasingly, it's not at their doctor's office." Health Aff (Millwood) 29 (9):1620-9.
         doi: 10.1377/hlthaff.2009.1026.
Ravallion, Martin. 2017. "A concave log-like transformation allowing non-positive values."
         Economics Letters 161:130-132. doi: 10.1016/j.econlet.2017.09.019.
Sabik, L. M., and S. O. Gandhi. 2016. "Copayments and Emergency Department Use Among
         Adult Medicaid Enrollees." Health Econ 25 (5):529-42. doi: 10.1002/hec.3164.
Sommers, B. D., B. Maylone, R. J. Blendon, E. J. Orav, and A. M. Epstein. 2017. "Three-Year
         Impacts Of The Affordable Care Act: Improved Medical Care And Health Among Low-
         Income Adults." Health Aff (Millwood) 36 (6):1119-1128. doi:
         10.1377/hlthaff.2017.0293.
Table 1. Sample characteristics and health risks by incentive group and untreated controls, N=1,643
                                          Untreated
                                           controls               $0               $25                $50
                                           (N=415)            (N=413)           (N=407)            (N=408)
 Demographic characteristics
 Female                                      43.85              46.24             46.92              48.52
                                                                                    ++                  +
 Race
  White                                      28.67              29.29             27.27              28.43
  Black                                      64.09              66.34             68.79              67.15
  Other                                       6.98               3.87              2.70               3.43
  Missing                                     0.24               0.48              1.22               0.98
 Hispanic                                     2.65               2.18              1.97               3.19
  Missing                                     1.20                0                 0                  0
 Married/partnered                           10.84              13.55             9.82*              12.00
  Missing                                     0.48               0.73              0.98               0.49
 Mean age                                44.93 (11.20)      45.90 (11.22)     45.75 (10.95)     45.50 (11.07)
 Education                                    N/A
  High school or less                                           59.32             57.73              64.95
  Some college                                                  30.75             31.69              25.49
  Bachelor’s degree or higher                                    7.99              9.82               9.31
  Missing                                                        1.93              0.73               0.24
 Monthly income                               N/A
  <$1500                                                        91.76             92.38              94.60
  $1500 - $2000                                                  5.56              3.68               3.67
  >$2000                                                         2.17              3.43               1.47
  Missing                                                        0.48              0.49               0.24
 Employed                                     N/A               27.11             29.23              24.26
 Health insurance coverage prior to           N/A               22.51             22.35              23.03
   VCC
 Health conditions and behaviors
 Smoker                                       N/A               49.15             46.68              51.96
  Missing                                                         0                 0                 0.49
 Drug/alcohol problems                        N/A               16.22             14.25              12.74
  Missing                                                        0.48              0.24               0.73
 2 or more chronic conditions                 N/A               60.53             65.36              62.50
 PROMIS score                                 N/A
  Anxiety                                                   54.32 (11.21)     53.51 (11.10)     55.46 (11.60)
  Depression                                                54.18 (11.46)     53.51 (11.04)     55.35 (11.85)
  Social role                                               45.67 (11.67)     45.92 (11.63)     44.19 (11.00)*
  Pain interference                                         57.95 (11.53)     58.97 (11.40)     58.99 (11.35)
  Missing                                                        2.17              3.43               5.14
 PSQ-18 score                                 N/A
  General satisfaction                                       3.45 (0.98)       3.48 (0.91)        3.44 (0.96)
  Technical quality                                          3.51 (0.70)       3.49 (0.69)        3.44 (0.73)
  Interpersonal manner                                       3.69 (0.77)       3.70 (0.72)        3.63 (0.71)
  Communication                                              3.72 (0.79)       3.76 (0.78)        3.68 (0.82)
  Financial aspects                                          3.25 (1.01)       3.26 (0.96)       3.10 (1.02)**
  Time spent with doctor                                     3.46 (0.90)       3.51 (0.89)        3.39 (0.92)
  Accessibility and convenience                              3.21 (0.84)       3.21 (0.83)        3.22 (0.78)
                                            Untreated
                                             controls                $0                  $25                  $50
                                             (N=415)              (N=413)              (N=407)              (N=408)
 Missing                                                            4.35                 4.17                 4.41
Get most prior care at the ED                   N/A                37.28                33.90                40.44
                                                                                                                *
Prior ED utilization                            N/A
 0 to 1                                                             56.66               56.01                47.06
 2 to 5                                                             35.10               35.87                44.60
 6 or more                                                           8.23                7.86                 8.33
 Missing                                                              0                  0.24                  0
Notes: N/A = not applicable; ED=Emergency Department; standard deviations are in parentheses for age and PROMIS
scores. Remaining results are reported as percentages. Information on chronic conditions considered for the variable
“two or more chronic conditions” was collected from the patient during the initial interview. Tests of statistical
significance relative to the untreated controls, and relative to the $0 incentive group, were estimated using the χ2 test
for categorical variables, and the two-sample t-test for continuous variables. For tests relative to the $0 incentive
group, statistical significance is reported as: *p<0.10, **p<0.05. For tests relative to the untreated control group,
statistical significance is reported as: +p<0.10, ++p<0.05. These symbols are reported in separate rows for the tests for
categorical variables (for the label corresponding to the categories).
Table 2. Utilization and costs by incentive groups and untreated controls, N=1,643
                                    Untreated
                                     controls             $0                $25                            $50                $0, $25, $50              $25, $50
                                     (N=415)           (N=413)           (N=407)                         (N=408)               (N=1,228)                (N=815)
 1st 6 months (incentive period)
 Any PCP visit                      0.62 (0.02)      0.68 (0.02)+     0.73 (0.02)+++                0.76 (0.02) +++**        0.72 (0.01)+++         0.75 (0.02)+++**
 PCP visits                         2.08 (0.13)      2.28 (0.12)      2.64 (0.15)+++*               2.70 (0.14)+++**         2.54 (0.08)+++         2.67 (0.11)+++**
 ED visits                          0.68 (0.07)      0.59 (0.06)        0.64 (0.07)                   0.57 (0.05)             0.60 (0.03)             0.61 (0.04)
  Non-emergent ED visits            0.05 (0.01)      0.06 (0.01)       0.03 (0.01)*                   0.05 (0.01)             0.05 (0.01)             0.04 (0.01)
 Inpatient admissions               0.13 (0.03)      0.12 (0.02)        0.11 (0.02)                   0.12 (0.02)             0.12 (0.01)             0.12 (0.01)
 Outpatient & specialty visits      2.69 (0.25)      2.93 (0.24)       3.47 (0.24)++                  3.15 (0.21)             3.18 (0.13)+           3.31 (0.16)++
 Median total costs ($)                 860             1,036              1,193                         1,187                   1,144                   1,188
 Mean total costs ($)               5,290 (720)      4,723 (656)       4,905 (592)                    4,950 (532)             4,859 (344)             4,928 (398)
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Any PCP visit                      0.48 (0.02)      0.51 (0.02)        0.50 (0.02)                    0.52 (0.02)             0.51 (0.01)            0.51 (0.02)
 PCP visits                         1.21 (0.09)      1.27 (0.09)     1.65 (0.15)+++**                 1.52 (0.12)++*          1.48 (0.07)++         1.59 (0.10)++**
 ED visits                          0.55 (0.07)      0.45 (0.06)        0.55 (0.07)                    0.46 (0.05)             0.49 (0.03)            0.50 (0.04)
  Non-emergent ED visits            0.05 (0.01)      0.04 (0.01)        0.04 (0.02)                    0.02 (0.01)+            0.04 (0.01)            0.03 (0.01)
 Inpatient admissions               0.10 (0.02)      0.11 (0.02)        0.10 (0.02)                    0.07 (0.02)             0.09 (0.01)            0.08 (0.01)
 Outpatient & specialty visits      2.04 (0.19)      2.05 (0.18)      2.68 (0.22)++**                 2.60 (0.23)+*           2.44 (0.12)+          2.64 (0.16)++**
 Median total costs ($)                 316              390                529                            486                    453                    506
 Mean total costs ($)               3,298 (479)      3,559 (560)       3,984 (615)                     3,671 (479)            3,737 (320)            3,827 (390)
Notes: PCP=Primary Care Provider; ED=Emergency Department; standard errors of the mean are reported in parentheses. Tests of statistical significance relative
to the untreated controls and relative to the $0 incentive group are reported using the two-sample t-test for continuous variables. For tests relative to the untreated
controls, statistical significance is reported as: +p<0.10, ++p<0.05, +++p<0.01. For tests related to the $0 incentive group, statistical significance is reported as:
*
  p<0.10, **p<0.05.
Table 3. First-stage estimations for any PCP visit, OLS, first six
months (incentive period)
                                            Any PCP visit
 Incentive & untreated controls
 N=1,643
 Untreated                                     Reference
 $0                                          0.043 (0.029)
 $25                                        0.092 (0.031)***
 $50                                        0.124 (0.025)***

 Untreated                                       Reference
 $0, $25, & $50                               0.086 (0.022)***
 Incentive groups
 N=1,228
 $0                                               Reference
 $25                                            0.041 (0.029)
 $50                                           0.069 (0.027)**

 $0                                               Reference
 $25 & $50                                     0.055 (0.024)**
 PCP=Primary care provider. Levels of statistical significance are:
**
  p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Control variables for estimations using untreated
controls and incentive groups are: age, gender, race, ethnicity
(Hispanic), and marital status. Additional control variables for
estimations using only incentive groups include: education, monthly
income, employed, health insurance coverage in the 12 months prior to
VCC enrollment, smoker, drug/alcohol problems; gets most of care at
the emergency department, visits to the emergency department in the 12
months, having two or more chronic conditions, and PROMIS domains
and PSQ-12 scores. Physician fixed effects are included.
Table 4. Effects of PCP visits on utilization and costs, 2SLS estimations
                                               Emergency department visits                          Outpatient/specialty visits                  Total costs ($)
                                                                  Any non-emergent
                                       Any visits 2+ visits            ED visits                    Any visits           2+ visits         Ln(costs)          IHS costs
 1st 6 months (incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls          -0.163       -0.160            -0.078                         0.556              0.579              2.028              3.873
                                        (0.173)      (0.135)           (0.107)+                      (0.257)**+        (0.219)***+‡        (0.811)**‡        (1.098)***+‡
 Sample means                           33.72%       13.21%             4.08%                         62.69%             47.60%               6.68               6.83

 Incentive groups                          -0.211         -0.055              -0.054                   0.443              0.318              2.962              6.078
                                           (0.281)       (0.176)              (0.179)                 (0.434)            (0.354)           (1.475)**+        (2.234)***+‡
 Sample means                              33.47%        12.79%               3.91%                   64.66%             49.76%               6.74               6.93
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls        0.123              -0.178              -0.189                   0.260               0.217             0.975              1.405
                                      (0.176)            (0.152)             (0.104)*+                (0.226)             (0.204)           (0.975)            (1.527)
 Sample means                         25.68%             11.44%               3.16%                   49.85%              35.91%             5.73                5.33

 Incentive groups                          0.076          0.191               -0.162                  -0.094              0.105             -0.029             -0.626
                                          (0.328)        (0.288)              (0.170)                 (0.399)            (0.391)            (1.995)            (3.155)
 Sample means                             26.14%         10.50%               2.69%                   51.22%             37.05%              5.79               5.42
Notes: IHS=Inverse hyperbolic sine; N=1,643 for incentive and untreated controls combined. N=1,228 for incentive group only. For the utilization analyses, the first-
stage F=14.26 for incentive and untreated controls; F=6.32 for incentive groups. For the cost analyses, F=14.10 for incentive and untreated controls; F=5.90 for incentive
groups. The F-statistics are slightly different for these analyses because of a handful of observations missing data on costs. Any PCP visit in the 1st 6 months is the
endogenous variable in the 2SLS regressions. Assignment to treatment and untreated control groups are used as instrumental variables. (We use as the first-stage
regressions the first and third set of estimates from Table 3. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and clustered at the physician level. Levels of statistical
significance are: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Otherwise, the notes are the same as in Table 3. In the cost estimations using the log of costs, we replace zero values with
the minimum value minus 0.01. +One or more robust tests for weak instruments were statistically significant at p<0.05 (out of 5 tests). ‡Actual effect size is greater than
the one-sided detectable effect size calculated for 80% power and alpha = 0.05.
Table 5. Effect of incentives on utilization, reduced form estimations, linear probability models
                                           Emergency department                                  Outpatient/specialty
                        Any visit           2+ visits     Any non-emergent ED visits         Any visit         2+ visits
 1st 6 months (incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls (N=1,643)
 Untreated              Reference           Reference               Reference               Reference         Reference
 $0                       -0.012              -0.024                  -0.001                   0.027             0.048
                          (0.038)            (0.023)                 (0.012)                  (0.023)          (0.023)**
 $25                      -0.040              -0.034                  -0.025                   0.066             0.069
                          (0.031)            (0.023)               (0.011)**+++             (0.032)**++       (0.029)**++
 $50                      -0.012              -0.020                  -0.001                   0.075             0.086
                          (0.029)            (0.022)                (0.015)+++              (0.031)**++      (0.028)***++‡

 Untreated             Reference               Reference                  Reference                  Reference            Reference
 $0, $25, & $50         -0.021                  -0.026                      -0.009                     0.056                0.067
                        (0.029)                 (0.019)                    (0.011)                   (0.022)**‡          (0.023)***‡
 Sample means           33.72%                  13.21%                      4.08%                     62.69%               47.60%
 Incentive groups (N=1,228)
 $0                    Reference               Reference                  Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $25                    -0.032                  -0.014                      -0.022                     0.024               0.011
                        (0.026)                 (0.019)                   (0.010)**                   (0.033)             (0.022)
 $50                    -0.012                  -0.001                     0.0003                      0.036               0.028
                        (0.024)                 (0.016)                    (0.015)                    (0.032)             (0.030)

 $0                    Reference         Reference                        Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $25 & $50               -0.022            -0.008                           -0.010                     0.030               0.019
                        (0.020)            (0.013)                         (0.012)                    (0.028)             (0.024)
 Sample means           33.47%            12.79%                            3.91%                     64.66%              49.76%
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls (N=1,643)
 Untreated             Reference         Reference                        Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $0                      -0.004            -0.049                            -0.014                    0.024               0.008
                        (0.028)         (0.017)***‡                         (0.013)                   (0.031)             (0.032)
 $25                      0.019            -0.034                            -0.030                    0.063               0.038
                        (0.028)           (0.019)*                       (0.011)***++‡                (0.031)*            (0.027)
 $50                      0.009            -0.034                            -0.023                    0.022               0.021
                        (0.028)           (0.018)*                         (0.012)*++                 (0.035)             (0.036)

 Untreated             Reference               Reference                  Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $0, $25, & $50          0.007                  -0.039                      -0.022                     0.036               0.022
                        (0.023)               (0.013)***‡                 (0.009)**‡                  (0.026)             (0.024)
 Sample means           25.68%                  11.44%                      3.16%                     49.85%              35.91%
 Incentive groups (N=1,228)
 $0                    Reference               Reference                  Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $25                     0.020                   0.015                      -0.017                      0.021              0.016
                        (0.026)                 (0.020)                    (0.012)                    (0.035)             (0.035)
 $50                     0.002                   0.014                      -0.011                     -0.014              0.006
                        (0.030)                 (0.024)                    (0.014)                    (0.033)             (0.035)

 $0                       Reference            Reference                  Reference                  Reference           Reference
 $25 & $50                  0.011                0.015                      -0.014                     0.003               0.011
                           (0.023)              (0.020)                    (0.013)                    (0.030)             (0.029)
 Sample means              26.14%               10.50%                      2.69%                     51.22%              37.05%
Notes: The levels of statistical significance are: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. In the OLS analysis performed on the full sample,
the statistical significance of the joint test comparing the $25 incentive group and the $50 incentive group to the untreated control
group is indicated as follows: ++p<0.05, +++p<0.01. Otherwise, notes are the same as reported in Table 3. ‡Actual effect size is
greater than the one-sided detectable effect size calculated for 80% power and alpha = 0.05.
Table 6. Incentive effects on costs, reduced form estimations
                                                    Ln(costs)                                  IHS costs
 1st 6 months (incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls (N=1,638)
 Untreated                                          Reference                                  Reference
 $0                                                    -0.027                                     -0.082
                                                      (0.133)                                    (0.188)
 $25                                                    0.143                                      0.273
                                                      (0.121)                                   (0.161)*++
 $50                                                    0.276                                      0.515
                                                     (0.127)**                                (0.189)***++‡

 Untreated                                                Reference                            Reference
 $0, $25, & $50                                             0.129                                0.233
                                                           (0.100)                              (0.133)*
 Sample means                                                6.68                                 6.83
 Incentive groups (N=1,224)
 $0                                                       Reference                             Reference
 $25                                                        0.128                                 0.287
                                                           (0.128)                               (0.208)
 $50                                                        0.252                                 0.512
                                                          (0.115)**                            (0.183)***‡

 $0                                                       Reference                            Reference
 $25 & $50                                                  0.190                                0.399
                                                           (0.111)*                            (0.177)**
 Sample means                                                6.74                                 6.93
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls (N=1,638)
 Untreated                                                Reference                            Reference
 $0                                                         0.057                                0.134
                                                           (0.159)                              (0.230)
 $25                                                        0.219                                0.350
                                                           (0.148)                              (0.233)
 $50                                                        0.080                                0.119
                                                           (0.162)                              (0.260)

 Untreated                                                Reference                            Reference
 $0, $25, & $50                                             0.118                                0.199
                                                           (0.117)                              (0.180)
 Sample means                                                5.73                                 5.33
 Incentive groups (N=1,224)
 $0                                                       Reference                            Reference
 $25                                                         0.103                                0.136
                                                           (0.172)                              (0.260)
 $50                                                        -0.030                               -0.096
                                                           (0.179)                              (0.280)

 $0                                                       Reference                            Reference
 $25 & $50                                                  0.036                                0.020
                                                           (0.145)                              (0.220)
 Sample means                                               5.79                                 5.42
Notes: IHS=inverse hyperbolic sine. The sample size is reduced by 5 subjects who had visits but were not
charged. Levels of statistical significance: *p<0.10, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. In the OLS analysis performed on the
full sample, the statistical significance of the joint test comparing the $25 incentive group and the $50 incentive
group to the untreated control group is indicated as follows: ++p<0.05. Otherwise, notes are the same as
reported in Table 3. In the log of costs estimations, we replace zero values with the minimum value minus 0.01.
‡Actual effect size is greater than the one-sided detectable effect size calculated for 80% power and alpha =
0.05.
Table 7. Effects of incentives on PCP visits in first six months (incentive period), comparisons of healthy
samples to remaining sample
                  No drug/alcohol problems,        No drug/alcohol problems,
                  hypertension, diabetes, lung      diabetes, lung disease or       Excellent or very good
                         disease or cancer                    cancer                        health
                     Healthy         Unhealthy        Healthy      Unhealthy      Healthy        Unhealthy
                     N=127            N=1,101         N=229           N=999       N=293           N=935
 $0                 Reference        Reference      Reference      Reference Reference           Reference
 $25                  -0.082            0.050          0.041          0.045        -0.073          0.087
                     (0.104)           (0.031)        (0.067)        (0.036)      (0.069)       (0.0323)**‡
 $50                   0.109            0.064          0.104          0.061        0.041           0.078
                     (0.175)          (0.028)**       (0.091)        (0.030)*     (0.063)        (0.035)**

 $0                 Reference        Reference        Reference     Reference      Reference       Reference
 $25 & $50           -0.001            0.057            0.065         0.053          -0.023           0.082
                     (0.101)         (0.026)**         (0.063)       (0.030)*       (0.056)        (0.029)***‡
 Sample
 means               53.54%           74.66%          63.76%         74.47%         66.21%          74.44%
                                       *         **      ***
Notes: Levels of statistical significance: p<0.10, p<0.05, p<0.01. Otherwise, notes are the same as reported in
Table 3. ‡Actual effect size is greater than the one-sided detectable effect size calculated for 80% power and
alpha=0.05.
Appendix Table 1. Effects of PCP visits on number of PCP,
emergency department, and outpatient visits, 2SLS estimations
                                                 Utilization
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)            PCP Visits
 Incentive & untreated controls               2.196 (0.672)***+
 Incentive groups                               2.420 (1.902)

 1st 6 months (incentive period)                Emergency department
 Incentive & untreated controls                    -0.771 (0.545)
 Incentive groups                                  -0.506 (0.805)
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls                       -0.522 (0.482)
 Incentive groups                                     -0.240 (1.059)

 1st 6 months (incentive period)                       Outpatient
 Incentive & untreated controls                       2.636 (1.792)
 Incentive groups                                     1.771 (3.187)
 2nd 6 months (post-incentive period)
 Incentive & untreated controls                       3.589 (1.977)*
 Incentive groups                                     6.378 (3.589)*
Notes: N=1,643 for incentive and untreated controls combined. N=1,228
for incentive group only. For the utilization analyses, F=14.26 for incentive
and untreated controls; F=6.32 for incentive groups. The levels of statistical
significance are noted as follows: *p<0.10, ***p<0.01. Notes are the same as
reported in Table 3. +One or more robust tests for weak instruments were
statistically significant at p<0.05.
Appendix Table 2a. P-value comparison when controlling for the false discovery rate (Simes method), 2SLS
estimates

                                        Incentive & untreated controls                       Incentive groups
                                    Estimated      Unadjusted      Adjusted     Estimated       Unadjusted      Adjusted
                                    coefficient     p-value        p-value      coefficient      p-value        p-value
 1st 6 months (incentive
 period)                            6 estimates                                6 estimates
 Any ED visits                        -0.163          0.346         0.415         -0.211           0.452         0.678
 2+ ED visits                         -0.160          0.236         0.354         -0.055           0.752         0.761
 Any non-emergent ED visits           -0.078          0.466         0.466         -0.054           0.761         0.761
 Any outpatient visits                0.556*          0.031         0.062          0.443           0.306         0.678
 2+ outpatient visits                 0.579**         0.008         0.036          0.318           0.368         0.678
 Ln(costs)                            2.028**         0.012         0.036          2.962           0.045         0.270
 2nd 6 months (post incentive
 period)                            6 estimates                                6 estimates
 Any ED visits                         0.123          0.484         0.484          0.076           0.816         0.979
 2+ ED visits                         -0.178          0.242         0.380          0.191           0.506         0.979
 Any non-emergent ED visits           -0.189          0.071         0.380         -0.162           0.342         0.979
 Any outpatient visits                 0.260          0.250         0.380         -0.094           0.813         0.979
 2+ outpatient visits                  0.217          0.288         0.380          0.105           0.787         0.979
 Ln(costs)                             0.975          0.317         0.380         -0.029           0.988         0.988
Notes: PCP=Primary Care Provider; ED=Emergency Department. Original coefficients are reported in the main text (Table 4).
The levels of statistical significance for the estimates are: *p<0.10, **p<0.05.
Appendix Table 2b. P-value comparison when controlling for the false discovery rate (Simes method), reduced form
estimations including untreated controls
                                Estimated Unadjusted Adjusted                        Estimated Unadjusted Adjusted
                               coefficient   p-value    p-value                      coefficient   p-value     p-value
 1st 6 months
 (incentive period)             18 estimates                                        6 estimates
 Any ED visits           $0       -0.012      0.743      0.891       $0, $25, $50      -0.021       0.469       0.469
                        $25       -0.040      0.207      0.405
                        $50       -0.012      0.671      0.862
 2+ ED visits            $0       -0.024      0.303      0.454       $0, $25, $50      -0.026       0.181       0.301
                        $25       -0.034      0.143      0.321
                        $50       -0.020      0.369      0.510
 Any non-emergent        $0       -0.001      0.875      0.925       $0, $25, $50      -0.009       0.400       0.469
 ED visits              $25       -0.025      0.038      0.126
                        $50       -0.001      0.925      0.925
 Any outpatient          $0        0.027      0.248      0.405       $0, $25, $50       0.056*      0.018       0.054
 visits                 $25        0.066      0.047      0.126
                        $50        0.075      0.019      0.126
 2+ outpatient visits    $0        0.048      0.049      0.126       $0, $25, $50      0.067**      0.006       0.036
                        $25        0.069      0.025      0.126
                        $50       0.086*      0.004      0.072
 Ln(costs)               $0       -0.027      0.839      0.925       $0, $25, $50       0.129       0.201       0.301
                        $25        0.143      0.243      0.405
                        $50        0.276      0.035      0.126
 2nd 6 months
 (post incentive
 period)                       18 estimates                                          6 estimates
 Any ED visits           $0       -0.004      0.869      0.869       $0, $25, $50       0.007       0.737       0.737
                        $25        0.019      0.491      0.760
                        $50        0.009      0.738      0.830
 2+ ED visits            $0      -0.049*      0.007      0.081       $0, $25, $50     -0.039**      0.006       0.036
                        $25       -0.034      0.079      0.237
                        $50       -0.034      0.078      0.237
 Any non-emergent        $0       -0.014      0.278      0.556       $0, $25, $50      -0.022*      0.022       0.066
 ED visits              $25      -0.030 *
                                              0.009      0.081
                        $50       -0.023      0.054      0.237
 Any outpatient          $0        0.024      0.454      0.760       $0, $25, $50       0.036       0.173       0.346
 visits                 $25        0.063      0.053      0.237
                        $50        0.022      0.520      0.760
 2+ outpatient visits    $0        0.008      0.803      0.850       $0, $25, $50       0.022       0.361       0.433
                        $25        0.038      0.162      0.364
                        $50        0.021      0.549      0.760
 Ln(costs)               $0        0.057      0.720      0.830       $0, $25, $50       0.118       0.320       0.433
                        $25        0.219      0.145      0.364
                        $50        0.080      0.621      0.798
Notes: PCP=Primary Care Provider; ED=Emergency Department. Original coefficients are reported in main text (Tables 5 and 6). The
levels of statistical significance for the estimates are: *p<0.10, **p<0.05.
Appendix Table 2c. P-value comparison when controlling for the false discovery rate (Simes method), reduced form
estimations, using only incentive groups
                                 Estimated     Unadjusted Adjusted                       Estimated      Unadjusted Adjusted
                                 coefficient    p-value   p-value                        coefficient     p-value   p-value
 1st 6 months
 (incentive period)             12 estimates                                                   6 estimates
 Any ED visits           $25      -0.032          0.235         0.685     $25, $50         -0.022         0.293         0.495
                         $50      -0.012          0.611         0.733
 2+ ED visits            $25      -0.014          0.448         0.685     $25, $50         -0.008          0.552        0.552
                         $50      -0.001          0.921         0.981
 Any non-emergent        $25      -0.022          0.033         0.204     $25, $50         -0.010          0.384        0.495
 ED visits               $50       0.000          0.981         0.981
 Any outpatient          $25       0.024          0.457         0.685     $25, $50         0.030           0.289        0.495
 visits                  $50       0.036          0.263         0.685
 2+ outpatient visits    $25       0.011          0.608         0.733     $25, $50         0.019           0.413        0.495
                         $50       0.028          0.370         0.685
 Ln(costs)               $25       0.128          0.322         0.685     $25, $50         0.190           0.095        0.495
                         $50       0.252          0.034         0.204
 2nd 6 months (post
 incentive period)              12 estimates                                          6 estimates
 Any ED visits           $25       0.020          0.431         0.881     $25, $50         0.011           0.629        0.906
                         $50       0.002          0.946         0.946
 2+ ED visits            $25       0.015          0.441         0.881     $25, $50         0.015           0.458        0.906
                         $50       0.014          0.555         0.881
 Any non-emergent        $25      -0.017          0.175         0.881     $25, $50         -0.014          0.272        0.906
 ED visits               $50      -0.011          0.451         0.881
 Any outpatient          $25       0.021          0.538         0.881     $25, $50         0.003           0.906        0.906
 visits                  $50      -0.014          0.661         0.881
 2+ outpatient visits    $25       0.016          0.637         0.881     $25, $50         0.011           0.705        0.906
                         $50       0.006          0.865         0.945
 Ln(costs)               $25       0.103          0.553         0.881     $25, $50         0.036           0.801        0.906
                         $50      -0.030          0.867         0.945
Notes: PCP=Primary Care Provider; ED=Emergency Department. Original coefficients are reported in main text (Tables 5 and 6).
