NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES
BEHAVIORAL IMPEDIMENTS TO VALUING ANNUITIES:
EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF COMPLEXITY AND CHOICE BRACKETING
Jeffrey R. Brown
Arie Kapteyn
Erzo F.P. Luttmer
Olivia S. Mitchell
Anya Samek
Working Paper 24101
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24101
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017, Revised March 2019

This paper was funded as a pilot project as part of a Roybal grant awarded to the University of
Southern California, entitled “Roybal Center for Health Decision Making and Financial
Independence in Old Age” (5P30AG024962-12). We are also grateful for support provided by the
Pension Research Council/Boettner Center at the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. The project described in this paper relies on data from survey(s) administered by
the Understanding America Study (UAS) which is maintained by the Center for Economic and
Social Research (CESR) at the University of Southern California. The authors thank Peter Choi
for excellent research assistance. We are grateful for helpful comments from Alan Gustman and
seminar audiences at the Federal Reserve Board, Tsinghua University, Uppsala University, the
University of Virginia, and the George Washington University. Brown is a Trustee of TIAA and
has served as a speaker, author, or consultant for a number of financial services organizations,
some of which sell annuities and other retirement income products. Mitchell is a Trustee of the
Wells Fargo Advantage Funds and has received research support from the TIAA Institute. The
opinions and conclusions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and do not represent the
opinions or policy of any institution with which the authors are affiliated nor of USC, CESR, the
UAS, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24101.ack
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Anya
Samek. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Behavioral Impediments to Valuing Annuities: Evidence on the Effects of Complexity and
Choice Bracketing
Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Anya Samek
NBER Working Paper No. 24101
December 2017, Revised March 2019
JEL No. D14,D91,G11,H55
ABSTRACT
This paper examines two behavioral factors that diminish people’s ability to value a lifetime
income stream or annuity, drawing on a survey of about 4,000 adults in a U.S. nationally
representative sample. By experimentally varying the degree of complexity, we provide the first
causal evidence that increasing the complexity of the annuity choice reduces respondents’ ability
to value the annuity, measured by the difference between the sell and buy values people assign to
the annuity. We also find that people’s ability to value an annuity increases when we
experimentally induce them to think jointly about the annuitization decision as well as how
quickly or slowly to spend down assets in retirement. Accordingly, we conclude that narrow
choice bracketing is an impediment to annuitization, yet this impediment can be mitigated with a
relatively straightforward intervention.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Gies College of Business
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
brownjr@illinois.edu

Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Arie Kapteyn
University of Southern California
Center for Economic and Social Research
635 Downey Way Suite 312
Los Angeles, CA 90089-3332
and NBER
kapteyn@usc.edu

Anya Samek
Center for Economic and Social Research
University of Southern California
635 Downey Way
Los Angeles, CA 90089
anyasamek@gmail.com

Erzo F.P. Luttmer
6106 Rockefeller Center, Room 305
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
Erzo.FP.Luttmer@Dartmouth.Edu
An Online Appendix Tables and Survey Instrument is available at
http://users.nber.org/~luttmer/annuityexperiment_apx.pdf

1. Introduction
The possibility of exhausting financial resources or having to severely curtail retirement
consumption is a significant risk to older individuals’ wellbeing, and annuities can be invaluable
in helping people avoid outliving their assets. Nevertheless, there is relatively little demand for
these insurance products (Mitchell, Piggott, and Takayama, 2011; Poterba, Venti, and Wise, 2011).
A voluminous literature reviewed in Brown (2009) explores rational explanations for why
observed levels of annuitization are much lower than predicted by standard optimizing models
such as those by Yaari (1965) and Davidoff, Brown, and Diamond (2005). Recent contributions to
this literature include several papers that combine multiple deviations from the standard optimizing
framework. For instance, Ameriks, Caplin, Laufer, and Van Nieuwerburgh (2011), Ameriks,
Briggs, Caplin, Shapiro, and Tonetti (2018), and Lockwood (2012, 2018) explain observed low
annuity demand using structural models that combine a precautionary savings motive (for longterm care expenses when there is public care aversion) with a bequest motive; Reichling and
Smetters (2015) do so as well by introducing stochastic mortality and correlated uninsured health
care costs. Peijnenburg, Nijman, and Werker (2017) show that medical expenditure risk can
rationalize low observed annuitization levels early in retirement, but not why many older people
fail to buy annuities. Finally, Laitner, Silverman, and Stolyarov (2018) show analytically how the
presence of implicit longevity insurance provided by Medicaid nursing home care can crowd out
demand for annuities for the lower and middle classes.
A different strand of literature explores whether behavioral factors help explain low
observed levels of annuitization. Several hypothetical choice experiments suggest that behavioral
factors influence the demand for annuities, including studies showing that framing of the annuity
choice affects the demand for annuities (Brown, Kling, Mullainathan, and Wrobel, 2008, 2013;
Beshears, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Zeldes, 2014; Brown, Kapteyn, and Mitchell, 2016;
Merkle, Schreiber, and Weber, 2017; and Bockweg, Ponds, Steenbeek and Vonken, 2018). Similar
findings emerge in incentivized laboratory settings (Agnew, Anderson, Gerlach, and Szykman,
2008; Gazzale and Walker, 2011). Another source of evidence is research demonstrating that
individuals in a hypothetical choice setting provide widely divergent valuations for small increases
versus small decreases in annuitization (Brown, Kapteyn, Luttmer, and Mitchell, 2017). This latter
result is consistent with people having trouble assessing the value of an annuity stream and
therefore requiring a high selling price and offering a low buying price, as they are reluctant to
trade what they do not understand. There is also suggestive evidence from non-hypothetical

1

choices that points to behavioral mechanisms. For instance, in 10 Swiss companies, Bütler and
Teppa (2007) show that annuitization rates were much higher on average in the firms that offered
an annuity as the default payout option, than in the one firm that paid out a lump sum as the default.
This finding suggests that annuitization rates are influenced by the default, implying a deviation
from a standard rational model. Similarly, Hagen, Hallberg, and Lindquist (2018) show that a
nudge affected annuitization decisions of Swedish pensioners. Other papers finding patterns in
observed annuitization choices suggestive of deviations from rational choice models include Hurd
and Panis (2006), Chalmers and Reuter (2012), Previtero (2014), and Fitzpatrick (2015). Shepard
(2011) and Bronshtein, Scott, Shoven, and Slavov (2016) use arbitrage arguments to show that,
for many people, the annuitization decision implicit in when to claim Social Security benefits
cannot be fully explained by a standard rational model.
While credible rational models can be constructed to match the low observed demand for
annuities, our take from the literature on the annuity puzzle is that behavioral factors still remain
operative. In short, we share Brown’s (2009, p. 185) assessment that while “it is possible to
generate more limited annuitization by extending the rational model in several directions, such an
approach does not seem to provide the complete answer to the puzzle” of low observed levels of
annuitization. Similarly, Benartzi, Previtero, and Thaler (2011, p.161) conclude that the “tiny
market share of individual annuities should not be viewed as an indicator of underlying preferences
but rather as a consequence of institutional factors about the availability and framing of annuity
options.”
Despite the fact that many studies find that behavioral factors influence annuitization
decisions, relatively little is known about the mechanisms driving this behavior. Brown et al.
(2008, 2013) report that presenting annuities in terms of the consumption streams they generate
leads to higher annuity demand, versus presenting annuities as investment products. Brown et al.
(2008) suggest that the adoption of a narrow decision frame, also referred to as choice bracketing
(Thaler, 1985; Read, Loewenstein, and Rabin, 1999), may drive this finding: that is, people
evaluate annuities based on the return and variance of the payouts in isolation, rather than focusing
on the level and variance of the consumption stream flowing from the annuity (which is what
matters for utility). It remains a leap of faith, however, to infer that the choice is more rational
simply because demand is higher. Brown et al. (2017) establish that the deviation from rational
choice, measured by the gap between peoples’ sell versus buy prices for annuities, is lower for
individuals with better cognition scores. The authors take this as suggestive evidence that valuing

2

annuities is cognitively challenging, because it is a complex task. Nevertheless, they do not claim
that this is causal evidence of a mechanism, as they lack exogenous variation in the complexity of
the annuitization decision.
In the present paper, we produce stronger evidence on behavioral mechanisms that may
affect the annuitization decision. Rather than asking for a respondent’s own hypothetical
annuitization decision, we first describe a vignette where a hypothetical person faces an annuity
decision, and we then ask our respondents to advise that vignette person. This alternative way of
eliciting hypothetical annuitization choices allows us to experimentally vary characteristics of the
vignette person that affect the complexity of the annuitization decision, but to hold the
characteristics of the annuity itself constant. The annuitization decision faced by the vignette
person is a choice between a lump sum amount and a change in Social Security benefits. We use
the stream of Social Security benefits as the annuity in our experiment for two main reasons. First,
most respondents are aware that Social Security payments last as long as they live (Greenwald,
Kapteyn, Mitchell, and Schneider, 2010), which means they understand that Social Security
provides an annuity even if they do not understand the term “annuity.”1 Second, because Social
Security is a widely held annuity, it is natural to ask both about the value of decreases and increases
in Social Security benefits, which allows us to measure the divergence between sell and buy
valuations of the annuity. This divergence is our measure of deviations from rational decisionmaking.
Specifically, we present respondents regularly interviewed by the nationally representative
Understanding America Study (UAS) with a vignette in which a hypothetical person faces a choice
between receiving a $100 per month increase in Social Security benefits, versus receiving a lump
sum amount. We ask each respondent what the vignette person should choose and repeat the
question for various values of the lump sums until we find the lump sum deemed equivalent in
value to a $100 per month increase in the Social Security annuity. We call this lump sum amount
the “sell” valuation, because the respondent advises the vignette person to sell a $100 a month
annuity for this lump sum. At a different point in the experiment, we ask each respondent to advise
the same vignette person on a choice between a $100 per month decrease in Social Security
benefits, versus paying a lump sum. The lump sum amount that is valued as much as the decrease
in benefits is the “buy” valuation, as it represents the amount of money the respondent advises the
While policy risk reduces people’s valuation of the stream of Social Security benefits (Luttmer and Samwick,
2018), this should reduce both the buy and sell valuation, leaving their differential unaffected.
1

3

vignette person to pay to avoid forfeiting a $100 per month annuity. We refer to the absolute
difference between the log sell valuation and the log buy valuation as the “sell-buy spread,” and
we use this to measure deviations from rational decision-making.
We introduce two experimental interventions to test for two types of behavioral
impediments to valuing annuities.2 First, we vary the complexity of the annuitization choice.
Valuing an annuity stream is more difficult when there is greater uncertainty about longevity. We
experimentally manipulate this uncertainty by telling the respondent what longevity information
the vignette person received from a doctor. Valuing an annuity is also more difficult when the
description of the annuity contains additional information that turns out to be irrelevant but
nevertheless takes effort to process. This is an alternative means by which we vary complexity.
Second, and independently, we randomize whether or not the respondent receives information
about the benefits and drawbacks of spending down non-annuitized wealth during retirement more
rapidly versus more slowly. This intervention occurs before the respondent advises the vignette
person about annuitization. The purpose of the intervention is to induce people to think about the
consumption consequences of holding an annuity during retirement. The “consequence message”
intervention therefore has the potential to be a new instrument (besides framing) to reduce the
narrow choice bracketing that Brown et al. (2008) identified as a behavioral mechanism.
Our experiment yields two main findings. First, we show that greater complexity causes
the sell-buy spread to increase, indicating that complexity associated with annuities reduces
people’s ability to assess the value of an annuity. This is the first causal evidence of complexity as
a mechanism that impedes valuing annuities, and we consider this to be the first main contribution
of our paper. This result supports the interpretation offered by Brown et al. (2017) that the
cognitive challenge of assessing the value of an annuity makes people reluctant to either buy or
sell an annuity, leading to a low buy price but a high sell price. Our finding is consistent with
results from other contexts documenting that complexity reduces people’s responsiveness to
incentives or the quality of their decision-making, including in work decisions (Abeler and Jäger,
2015), portfolio choice (Carlin, Kogan, and Lowery, 2013; Carvalho and Silverman, 2017), benefit
claiming (Bhargava and Manoli, 2015), and the selection of health insurance plans (Schram and
Sonnemans, 2011; Besedeš, Deck, Sarangi, and Shor, 2012a, b).

As described below, we have included additional experimental interventions to test for anchoring and to test whether
results are robust. All these experimental interventions are orthogonal to the two main interventions designed to test
for behavioral impediments to valuing annuities.

2

4

Our second result is that the “consequence message” intervention reduces the sell-buy
spread. In other words, people are better able to assess the value of an annuity if they think about
the effect of the annuity on the distribution of their future consumption streams, versus when they
do not make this connection. This finding supports Brown et al. (2008, 2013) on the role of choice
bracketing in annuity decisions. Yet unlike that study, here we measure a deviation from rational
decision-making by the discrepancy between the buy and sell price of a small change in annuitized
wealth, which is a more objective indicator of lack of rational decision-making than simply the
level of annuitization. We consider this additional evidence on choice bracketing the second main
contribution of this paper, and our finding adds to the growing empirical evidence on choice
bracketing based on experimental variation in the breadth of the decision frame. For example,
Bertrand and Morse (2011) report that people take out smaller payday loans when they are
experimentally induced to think more broadly about the consequences of taking out such loans,
and Enke (2017) shows that people develop more accurate beliefs when they are experimentally
induced to adopt broader mental frames.3
Evidence that behavioral mechanisms affect annuitization decisions has the important
implication that one cannot infer how much people value annuities by simply observing their
annuitization decisions. Specifically, the fact that observed voluntary annuitization levels are low
does not necessarily imply that utility-maximizing levels of annuitization are also low. In light of
behavioral mechanisms affecting annuitization decisions, the fact that Social Security pays out
benefits exclusively as an annuity is particularly valuable to people that would otherwise
underannuitize.
Evidence that complexity impedes annuitization decisions has the important implication
that reducing complexity can improve individuals’ annuitization decisions. While it may be
possible to make the decision less complex by presenting information about the annuity more
clearly, we stress that much of the complexity is inherent in the annuitization decision itself: people
need to jointly evaluate how much they will consume each future year with and without the
annuity, how much they care about consumption fluctuations, and the probability that they will be
alive in each future year. No matter how well the decision is presented, it remains a complex task.
Similarly, evidence that inducing people to consider the consequences of annuitization decisions
In addition, there is compelling empirical evidence that people do not treat money as fungible. Studies showing this
include Kooreman (2000), Milkman and Beshears (2009), Feldman (2010), Hastings and Shapiro (2013), Beatty,
Blow, Crossley, and O’Dea (2014), and Abeler and Marklein (2017). While these papers do not experimentally vary
the breadth of the decision frame, a leading explanation of these findings is mental accounting, which is a form of
choice bracketing.

3

5

for their consumption streams enables them to better assess the value of an annuity is important,
because it provides clear guidance on how annuitization decisions should be presented. Still, while
the consequence message limits the degree to which choice bracketing acts as an impediment to
valuing an annuity, we emphasize that the sell-buy spread remains substantial even for those
exposed to the consequences message.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes our methodology and
explains our experimental design. In Section 3, we present our empirical findings, and Section 4
concludes.
2. Methodology and Experimental Design
2.1 Understanding America Study
Our experiment is conducted using the Understanding America Study (UAS), a
probability-based Internet panel of about 6,000 adults (age 18+) representative of the U.S.
population. Panel members are recruited exclusively through address-based sampling, in which
invitation letters are sent to randomly-selected households using address lists obtained from the
U.S. postal service. This provides a broadly representative sample, since individuals lacking prior
access to the Internet were provided with a tablet and broadband Internet.4 In addition, the UAS
contains small oversamples (about 5% each) of Native Americans and of residents of Los Angeles
County. Our experimental module was fielded between June and October of 2016, and all UAS
panel members at the time were invited to participate. Panel members received $10 for completing
the survey, which took an average of 14 minutes, and they could also receive additional earnings
depending on their answers to quiz questions. Of the 5,521 invited panel members, 83.2% opened
the link to the survey.5 Of those who opened the link, 99.1% completed both annuity valuation
questions for an overall response rate of 82.4% (4,549 respondents).
The UAS gathers information on demographic characteristics for all respondents as well
as detailed measures of cognitive capabilities and financial literacy (the latter for about 90% of
respondents). Given that cognitive ability and financial literacy are important predictors of
responses to annuity questions, we limit our analysis sample to those observations with nonmissing

An extensive discussion of the UAS is provided in Alattar, Messer, and Rogofsky (2018).
This response rate is typical in UAS surveys. The invitation read “In the following survey we want you to play the
role of financial advisor. We will show you some examples of persons who have to make a decision about money
and we will ask you to help them make the decision.”

4
5

6

measures of cognitive ability and financial literacy. In addition, we exclude 0.5% of observations
with missing values for any demographic characteristics. The final analysis sample was therefore
of 4,060 observations (89.2% of the total respondents who completed both questions and 73.5%
of the panel members).
We recognize that a drawback of hypothetical choice data is that people may not put as
much effort in making decisions as they might in real-life situations. As a result, their answers may
contain more measurement error than would be true in the real world. Nevertheless, it seems
unlikely that people can fully overcome cognitive biases simply by exerting more effort. Moreover,
concerns about the reliability of willingness-to-pay responses in the UAS are allayed by Mas and
Pallais (2017) who show that the distribution of willingness-to-pay for flexible work arrangements
obtained in the UAS closely matched the willingness-to-pay distribution provided from a similar
field experiment. In our case, using hypothetical choice data has the important advantage that we
can elicit both a willingness-to-pay and a willingness-to-accept for the same person, permitting us
to measure deviations from rational decision-making. We know of no field setting that allows for
the simultaneous measurements of willingness-to-pay and a willingness-to-accept for an annuity
for the same person. Moreover, in our setting, we observe the valuations of all respondents, in
contrast to most revealed preference approaches where only the valuations of marginal individuals
can be observed and the valuations of inframarginal persons can only be bounded, absent
functional form assumptions.
Table 1 provides summary statistics for our baseline sample and compares it to the Current
Population Survey (CPS) of the same year. Compared to the CPS, our sample overrepresents
respondents between the ages of 35 and 65 by 11 percentage points, females by 6 percentage
points, married respondents by 7 percentage points, Nonhispanic whites by 11 percentage points,
individuals with more than a high school education by 16 percentage points, households with
annual incomes above $75,000 by 3 percentage points, households with two or fewer members by
10 percentage points, and households with no children by 5 percentage points. While these
differences are generally statistically significant, the two samples are reasonably similar in terms
of economic magnitudes, with the absolute difference in the fraction of respondents in a category
being 5 percentage points on average across the 25 demographic categories listed in Table 1. As
such, we consider our sample to be broadly representative of the U.S. adult population.

7

2.2 Experimental Context
Rather than describing an unfamiliar hypothetical annuity product, we use Social Security
benefits as the context for the analysis of payout annuities. Specifically, we asked respondents to
make trade-offs between receiving higher or lower Social Security benefits (a change in a real
annuity stream), and paying or receiving different one-time payments (lump sums). Our setting is
policy relevant because past discussions of pension reforms around the world, including in the
U.S., have included proposals to offer workers lump sum payments in exchange for a reduction in
their annuitized pension benefits (Maurer, Mitchell, Rogalla and Tschimetschek, 2018). Several
U.S. corporations have also recently offered to buy back defined benefit pension annuities from
retirees in exchange for lump sums (Wayland, 2012).

2.3 Elicitation of the Valuation of an Annuity Stream
Throughout the experiment, we use vignettes to describe trade-offs and ask respondents to
give the hypothetical “vignette person” advice about annuitization decisions. This approach has
several attractive features. First, we can directly manipulate the complexity of the annuitization
decision by using different experimental treatments. Second, we control for the respondent’s own
characteristics: unlike making a decision for one’s own situation (as in Brown et al. 2017), we
need not worry about factors such as liquidity constraints or private knowledge that the respondent
may have about his or her situation.
The vignette person in the control condition was described as follows:
Mr. Jones is a single, 60-year old man with no children. He will retire and claim his Social
Security benefits at 65. When he retires, he will have $100,000 saved for his retirement,
and he will receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security benefits. Based on his current health
and family history, doctors have told Mr. Jones that he will almost certainly be alive at age
75 but almost certainly will not live beyond age 85.
The gender and name of the vignette person was experimentally varied between respondents. The
variable $[SSB] represents the vignette person’s monthly Social Security benefits, and it was
randomized with equal probability across respondents to $800, $1,200, $1,600 and $2,000.
Our main outcome of interest is the respondent’s advice for how the hypothetical “vignette
person” should trade off annuitized wealth and lump sum amounts at retirement. All respondents
answer a series of questions that elicit either the equivalent variation (EV) of a $100 increase in
8

monthly Social Security benefits, or the EV of a $100 decrease in monthly Social Security benefits.
Each respondent was asked both questions, and the order in which they were asked was
randomized.
The valuation of a $100 increment in the annuity stream was elicited by asking a series of
questions of the form:
What should Mr. Jones do?
(1) Receive a Social Security benefit of $[SSB+100] per month starting at age 65.
or
(2) Receive his expected Social Security benefit of $[SSB] per month and receive a one-time
payment of $[LS] from Social Security at age 65.
The $100 increment in benefits of $[SSB+100] was displayed as a single number on the screen.
The variable LS represents the lump sum amount that is traded off, which was randomized across
respondents to start at $10,000, $20,000 or $30,000. The question was subsequently asked four
more times for different values of LS. For example, if the person declined a $20,000 lump sum,
we inferred that that the valuation must exceed $20,000, so for the next question we used a higher
value of LS, namely $60,000. Had the person accepted the $20,000 lump sum, we would have used
a lower value of LS. Next, if the person accepted the $60,000 lump sum, we inferred that the
valuation must lie below $60,000, and we asked the question three more times to further reduce
the difference between the lower and upper bound of the person’s valuation of the $100 increment
in the annuity stream. The exact sequence of values for LS is shown in the survey instrument in
the Online Appendix. We refer to this question as the “sell” version, because the person receives
a payment in exchange for a smaller annuity stream.
The valuation of a $100 decrease in the annuity stream was elicited by asking a series of
questions of the form:
What should Mr. Jones do?
(1) Receive a Social Security benefit of $[SSB-100] per month starting at age 65.
or
(2) Receive his expected Social Security benefit of $[SSB] per month and make a one-time
payment of $[LS] to Social Security at age 65.

9

As before, the question was asked five times for different values of LS until we could place the
respondent’s valuation of the annuity into one of 32 bins. We refer to this question as the “buy”
version, because the person is making a payment in exchange for a larger annuity stream.
Given that a $100 change in the annuity stream is small relative to the average monthly
benefit of $1400, a rational respondent should value this change approximately the same whether
it is an increase or a decrease. We therefore take the absolute difference of the sell and buy
valuations to measure the deviation from rational decision-making.

2.4 Experimental Design
Our experiment consisted of a 3x2 between-subjects design, summarized in Table 2. First,
we experimentally varied the complexity of the vignette in one of two ways, either by increasing
the uncertainty associated with length of life (Complexity: Wide age range treatment), or by adding
extraneous information to the vignette that was not relevant to the decision (Complexity: Added
information treatment). For example, control group respondents were told that the vignette person
will “almost certainly be alive at age 75 but almost certainly will not live beyond age 85.” By
contrast, respondents in the Complexity: Wide age range treatment were told that the vignette
person “has an 80% chance of being alive at age 70, a 50% chance of being alive at age 80, a
20% chance of being alive at age 90, and a 10% chance of being alive at age 95.” Determining
the value of an annuity is a more complex task when the variation in possible ages of death is more
dispersed, as is the case in this second vignette. The extraneous information added to the
Complexity: Added information treatment included information about Social Security qualification
rules and described why the vignette person qualified. Here the increased complexity required the
respondent to think about the additional information and determine whether it was relevant.
Second, prior to the advice decision, in half of the treatments we additionally provided a
message about the consequences of spending down retirement savings (Consequence message).
This message described an interaction between a different vignette person and his or her financial
advisor. In this interaction, the advisor described the benefits and drawbacks of spending down
savings relatively quickly (more likely to be able to use money in one’s lifetime, but running a
larger risk of running out of money while alive), versus relatively slowly (less likely to run out of
money, but running a larger risk of not getting to enjoy one’s money in one’s lifetime). This
message was framed as neutrally as possible and designed to encourage the respondent to avoid
10

narrow choice bracketing: by inducing respondents to think about the problem of how to spend
down wealth in retirement, we intended that respondents consider the annuitization decision and
the asset decumulation decisions jointly, rather than as disjoint decisions. To ensure that
respondents paid attention to the message, respondents were further told that, at the end of the
message, they would be asked two questions about the facts in the story and would receive an
additional $1 for each question they answered correctly. These factual questions were two multiple
choice questions about the financial advisor’s explanation about the benefits and drawbacks under
each scenario (spending down slowly or quickly). Of the respondents who were asked the two
questions, 63% answered both correctly, 27% answered one correctly, and 10% answered neither
correctly.
In summary, all respondents were asked to give advice to a primary vignette person about
buying and selling a small fraction of that vignette person’s Social Security benefit stream.
Between respondents, we had two main treatments: (1) the information about the vignette person,
which was randomized between “No added complexity”, “Complexity: Wide age range”, and
“Complexity: Added information”, and (2) whether we discouraged narrow choice bracketing,
where we randomized between “No consequence message” and “Consequence message.” In
addition, we had six secondary randomizations. We also performed two randomizations to test for
anchoring, which is another indication of lack of rational decision-making: (3) the starting value
for the lump sum amount ($LS=$10,000, $20,000, $30,000); and (4) the order of the two annuity
valuation questions. Finally, we randomized (5) the name and gender of the primary vignette
person (Mr. Jones, Mrs. Jones, Mr. Smith, Mrs. Smith) and the secondary vignette person, featured
in the consequence message, had the opposite name and gender of the primary vignette person;6
(6) the Social Security benefit ($SSB=$800, $1,200, $1,600 or $2,000); (7) the order of the options
shown (option with lump sum always shown first, option with lump sum always shown last); and
(8) whether the consequence message first discussed the consequences of spending wealth down
quickly or slowly. The latter four manipulations were intended to verify that choices in the vignette

In short, the secondary vignette person was female if and only if the primary vignette person was male, and vice
versa. Similarly, the secondary vignette person was named Jones if and only if the primary vignette person was named
Smith, and vice versa. We did this to eliminate the possibility that the consequence message affected advice on annuity
choices for the primary vignette person by respondents inferring the primary vignette person’s preferences or
circumstances from information provided in the consequence message. Because the consequence message used a
different person, it can only have altered the advice by the respondent through the respondent thinking differently
about annuitization decisions rather the respondent knowing more about the annuitant him- or herself.

6

11

that we assumed would be innocuous indeed did not matter for our results. All randomizations
occurred across subjects and were mutually orthogonal. The options within each randomization
had equal probability of being selected.

2.5 Data on Cognition
To investigate how the ability to value annuities varies by cognitive ability, we merged the
data from our survey with existing data in the UAS, including a financial literacy survey (Lusardi
and Mitchell, 2014). We also included four subtests of the Woodcock-Johnson Test of Cognitive
Ability, a nationally normed test. The sub-tests included numeracy, number series, verbal
analogies, and picture vocabulary. Whereas the first two sub-tests measure numerical ability, the
second two tests measure lexical ability. We standardize the financial literacy measure and each
of the four test scores. For the main analysis, we create a “cognition index” from these four tests
and the financial literacy measure by taking their first principal component. In the robustness
section, we demonstrate the robustness of the main results to using alternative measures of
cognition.

3. Results
3.1 Baseline Sample and Randomization Check
As noted in Section 2.1, our baseline sample consists of respondents who answered both
annuity valuation questions and who have nonmissing values for the cognition and demographic
variables. We investigate whether the exclusion from the baseline sample due to missing data is
balanced across the two key treatment conditions (see Appendix Table A1), and we find that
neither the complexity treatment nor the consequence message treatment affect the likelihood that
the respondent failed to answer the annuity questions (p-values: 0.322 and 0.491, respectively).
The fraction of observations with missing demographic data is marginally significantly higher in
the complexity treatment than in the control condition, and the fraction with missing cognition
data is significantly higher in the complexity treatment than in the control condition. Since both
demographic and cognition data were collected prior to randomization, these findings cannot
logically be a consequence of the treatment, and we conclude they were a fluke of the
randomization. There are no significant differences in the fractions with missing demographics or
cognition data between the consequence treatment and the control condition. In Section 3.5 below,
12

we explore the robustness of the main results to including observations with missing demographic
or cognition information.
We also test for balance on the control variables in the baseline sample by the two main
treatments (Panel B, Appendix Table A1). Of the four dozen tests of differences in means across
treatments for individual control variables, four are significant at the 10-percent level and one at
the 5-percent level. This is roughly what one would expect by chance. Jointly, the control variables
do not significantly predict the complexity treatment (p-value: 0.107) or the consequence message
treatment (p-value: 0.788).

3.2 Annuity Valuation Distributions and Summary Statistics
Figure 1 shows the distribution of buy valuations for the subsample in which the buy
valuation was asked first, and the distribution of sell valuations for the subsample in which the sell
valuation was asked first. By focusing on valuations when the question was asked first, we avoid
any influence of anchoring on a previously-asked valuation question. The figure clearly shows that
the buy valuation is lower than the sell valuation throughout the distribution. Respondents advised
our hypothetical vignette individuals to buy an annuity that pays $100 per month for a median
price of $4,750 (s.e.: $180) but advised them to sell this annuity for a median price of $16,250
(s.e.: $543). This represents a statistically significant difference (two-sample Wilcoxon-MannWhitney rank-sum test z-statistic=25.8, p-value<0.001).7 The actuarially fair value of this annuity
is roughly $15,000 at a 3% real discount rate.
Rational individuals should value a marginal increase in the Social Security annuity the
same as a marginal decrease. To examine the extent to which this holds in our data, where we ask
about a $100 change in the Social Security annuity, we calculate for each respondent the difference
between the log sell price and the log buy price. Figure 2 shows the distribution of this log
difference for our baseline sample. The figure highlights two facts. First, there are large differences
between buy and sell values at the individual level. Only about 10 percent of respondents have a
buy value that is equal to their sell value, and only 40 percent have a buy and sell value that are
within one log unit (i.e., within a factor of 2.72) of each other. In short, deviations from the

Appendix Figure A1 shows the distributions of the buy and sell valuations in the entire baseline sample which,
unlike Figure 1, includes responses to valuation questions that followed an earlier valuation question. The
distributions are similar to those in Figure 1.

7

13

predictions of the rational model for buy and sell valuations of marginal changes in Social Security
benefits are substantial.8 Second, the distribution is not symmetric around zero: 63% have sell
valuations that strictly exceed their buy valuations, whereas buy valuations strictly exceed sell
valuations for about 27% of respondents. As Brown et al. (2017) explain, people may worry that
they might be taken advantage of when they trade a good that they cannot value accurately.
Accordingly, it is can be a useful heuristic to be reluctant to trade such goods, and only to sell them
at a very high price (or buy them at very low price). Such a heuristic predicts that sell prices exceed
buy prices whenever it is difficult to accurately determine the value of a good, as is the case with
an annuity. We note that status-quo bias (or an endowment effect) in the level of Social Security
benefits cannot explain why sell prices generally exceed buy prices. We elicited the sell price as
the price for which people would be willing to sell $100 of Social Security benefits that would be
received on top of the expected benefits. Someone with status-quo bias would put a low price on
this $100 of benefits because this amount is in addition to the status-quo level of benefits.
Conversely, we elicited the buy price as the price for which people would be willing to buy $100
of Social Security benefits that would bring the total benefit level back to the expected level. Thus,
someone with status-quo bias would place a high price on these benefits because they would return
the benefit level to the status quo.
Any difference between the sell and buy price is a deviation from the prediction of the
rational model for marginal changes in Social Security benefits, whether the sell price differs from
the buy price due to the reluctance-to-trade heuristic offered by Brown et al. (2017) or for other
reasons. Accordingly, our measure of the deviation from rational decision-making is the absolute
value of the difference between the log buy price and the log sell price. We refer to this variable
as the spread and use it as our main outcome variable. Figure 3 shows the distribution of the spread
and Table 3 presents summary statistics. Results show that 90 percent of respondents have a strictly
positive spread, the median spread is 1.55, and the mean spread is 2.21. The table also shows the
components of the spread, namely the log buy price and the log sell price. Anchoring mainly affects
the buy price, which is significantly higher when asked after the (generally higher) sell price is
elicited. The spread is slightly higher when the sell question was asked first (2.27 versus 2.16), but
this difference is only marginally significant (p-value: 0.079). Because the spread is measured as

In Section 3.5, we show that these deviations cannot be explained by the fact that the $100 change in Social
Security benefits is not strictly speaking a marginal change.

8

14

an absolute log difference, an increase in the spread of 0.11 (from 2.16 to 2.27) can be interpreted
as the difference between the higher valued annuity and the lower valued annuity increasing by 12
(=exp(0.11)) percentage points.
Our findings on the discrepancy between buy and sell valuations are in line with the results
of Brown et al. (2017), who asked respondents for how much they themselves would buy or sell
an annuity that paid them $100 per month. This similarity is reassuring, as it suggests that our
elicitation of valuation advice to a vignette person (rather than asking about respondents’ own
valuations) does not meaningfully alter the responses. A further similarity is that we also find that
the log buy and the log sell valuations are negatively correlated (correlation coefficient: -0.11, pvalue<0.001).9 Our use of vignettes allows us to vary the complexity of the annuity by
experimentally altering the dispersion of ages of death, which would not be ethically feasible when
asking about an annuity tied to the respondent’s own life.

3.3 Treatment Effects
In Table 4, we investigate our two main research questions. The first asks whether
complexity inhibits respondents’ ability to value an annuity stream. The second asks whether
narrow choice bracketing contributes to respondents’ difficulty in valuing the annuity. We measure
respondents’ inability to value an annuity by the spread between their sell and buy valuations,
because the spread should be approximately zero for fully rational respondents. In all regressions,
we control for the experimental manipulations,10 the cognition index, and a common set of control
variables (see Panel B, Appendix Table A1). In Table 4, we report only the coefficients of interest
(the full set of coefficient estimates is provided in Appendix Table A2).
The estimate in the first row of Column 1 shows that the complexity treatment increases
the sell-buy spread by 0.131, implying a 14 percent (=exp(0.131)) increase in the ratio of the
higher-valued to the lower-valued annuity. To our knowledge, this is the first causal evidence that
the complexity of an annuity choice affects peoples’ reported annuity valuations. The fact that
complexity increases the spread between the buy and sell price indicates that complexity reduces
9 The negative correlation and the discrepancy between buy and sell prices are also consistent with the results of
Chapman, Dean, Ortoleva, Snowberg, and Camerer (2017), who elicit buy and sell prices for a monetary lottery in
an incentivized way and show that these prices are persistent within person over time and that the discrepancy
between buy and sell prices is not due to measurement error.
10 We do not control for the order in which the two blocks of consequence message treatment were shown because
this variable is available for only half the sample. Within the half of the sample for which this order was randomized,
the order has no significant effect on the spread (p-value: 0.758).

15

individuals’ ability to accurately value an annuity. The next two columns show the effect of the
complexity treatment on the buy and sell price, separately. While the estimates seem to indicate
that the complexity treatment primarily operates on the buy price, and hence it reduces the average
of the log sell and buy price, this is not a valid interpretation as we cannot reject that increase in
the sell price and the decrease in the buy price are the same in absolute value (p-value 0.302). We
also evaluate whether the two types of complexity treatments (wide age range vs. added
information) have different effects on the spread. As reported in Appendix Table A3, this is not
the case (p-value: 0.646), so we therefore pool the two complexity treatments.
The second row shows the treatment effects of the consequence message. The consequence
message decreases the sell-buy spread by 0.141. This means that inducing respondents to think
about how to spend down savings during retirement causes them to report an annuity sell price and
a buy price that are closer together, which is consistent with being more able to value annuities
rationally. Apparently, the consequence message reduces the degree to which respondents consider
annuitization and the spending down of assets during retirement as two separate decisions, a form
of narrow choice bracketing. The consequence message does move the buy and sell value closer
by 15 percentage points, but this still leaves a substantial spread of 2.21-0.14=2.07 log units among
respondents who received the consequence message. In short, decision-making among those who
receive the consequence message is still far from rational, given that their spread remains well
above 0. The next two columns show that the consequence message has virtually no effect on the
sell price but significantly increases the buy price. In fact, it marginally significantly increases the
average of the log buy and sell price (p-value 0.073), suggesting that the consequence message not
only increases the rationality of the annuity valuations but also raises the levels. The latter finding
is what one would expect when people jointly consider the asset decumulation decision and how
to value the lifetime income stream. In particular, annuities remove uncertainty in consumption
associated with asset decumulation in the face of uncertain life spans.
The third row shows that the cognition index is a very strong predictor of the sell-buy
spread, with a standard deviation increase in the cognition index narrowing the sell-buy spread by
0.788. This underscores the conclusion that cognitive limitations play an important role in people’s
inability to value an annuity. This limitation had been previously established in a different setting
by Brown et al. (2017), but we now have causal evidence on two mechanisms by which cognition
affects people’s ability to value annuities: narrow choice bracketing, and the complexity of the
annuity choice. The effect of cognition also allows us to put the magnitudes of the treatment effects

16

in perspective. Each of our two treatments, which by coincidence have the same absolute
magnitude of around 0.14, has the same effect on the spread as roughly a 17% (=0.14/0.79) of a
standard deviation change in cognitive ability.
The remaining rows examine the effects of our secondary randomizations. Consistent with
earlier findings in the literature, and indicative of less-than-fully rational decision-making, we find
significant effects of anchoring. When we ask the sell valuation first (which typically has a higher
valuation than the buy valuation), the respondent’s buy valuation is significantly higher, consistent
with the buy valuation being anchored on the sell valuation. We find no significant anchoring of
the sell price on the buy price when the latter is asked first. The starting values ($10,000, $20,000,
or $30,000) of the lump sum amount used in the annuity value elicitation procedure also have a
strong effect on the valuation reported: in fact, we can reject at the 1-percent level that the starting
value has no effect on the sell price or the buy price. The starting value has a similar effect on the
sell and buy price, resulting in no significant net effect on the spread. The remaining
randomizations cover the various choices we made in the design of the experiment (whether the
lump sum amount was the first or second choice, the monthly Social Security benefit amount, and
the name of the vignette person). We anticipated that these choices would be innocuous, but the
randomizations allow us to test whether outcomes indeed are insensitive to them. The last three
rows show that these choices had no significant effects on our main outcome variable, the sell-buy
spread. With the exceptions of the effect of vignette name and the benefit amount on the buy price,
these choices also do not affect the sell or buy price.11
What would annuity valuations be if we had an intervention sufficiently powerful to cause
the mean log sell price and the mean log buy price to be equal (so no deviation from rationality at
the mean)? We can get a rough answer to this question by extrapolating the effects of each of our
two main experimental interventions. The mean log difference between the sell and buy price is
1.01 (see Figure 2), and the consequence message moves log sell and buy price closer by 0.122
(=0.133-0.011, see columns 2 and 3 of Table 4). Thus, a treatment about 8 »1.01/0.122 times more
powerful than our current consequence message would close the gap between the mean log sell
and buy price. At that level of treatment, the median sell and buy price would be predicted to be
One might expect that people with a higher Social Security benefit amount to begin with put a lower value on a
$100 change in Social Security benefits. After all, they are already more highly annuitized. To test this, we ran an
alternative specification in which the baseline Social Security benefit amount was included as a linear control instead
of as a set of dummy variables. Both the buy and sell value decline in the baseline amount of Social Security benefits.
The effect is not significant for the sell value (p-value 0.145) but there is a significant 2.5% decline in the buy value
for each additional $100 in baseline Social Security benefits.
11

17

about $17,000. Similarly, we can extrapolate the complexity treatment, but in the direction of
making the problem less complex, such that the sell and buy price coincide. This would require
reducing complexity by about 5 times the amount of complexity added by our complexity
treatment. The resulting sell and buy prices would then be predicted to be about $12,000. These
point estimates obviously rely on a substantial extrapolation, and therefore they should be taken
as only suggestive. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that a simple average of these two predicted
valuations at treatments sufficiently powerful to eliminate the discrepancy between the buy and
sell prices is quite close to the actuarially fair value (of about $15,000).
3.4 Heterogeneous Treatment Effects
In Table 5, we explore whether the impact of our two main treatments varies across
respondent subgroups. The first column examines heterogeneity in the effect of the complexity
treatment, and the second column investigates whether the consequence message has different
effects across subgroups. For each specification, we create two subgroups that are as close as
possible in size to each other in order to maximize statistical power.
The first two specifications examine interaction effects between our treatments. One might
expect that the complexity treatment has a greater impact on the spread when people engage in
narrow choice bracketing, because they do not recognize how annuities help in the asset drawdown
process. In line with this prediction, the point estimate of the complexity treatment is larger for
respondents who receive no consequence message than for those who do; nevertheless, this
difference is not statistically significant (p-value: 0.408). The second specification is the flipside
of the first, asking whether the consequence message has a greater impact on persons exposed to
the complexity treatment. While the point estimates do go in this direction, this effect is not
significant either (and the p-value is the same as in the first specification by construction).
The remaining specifications examine heterogeneity by cognition, gender, education, age,
income, and level of Social Security benefits, respectively. In none of the 10 specifications do we
find a difference in the treatment effect by demographic characteristic significant at the 5-percent
level or better. Respondents age 50 or older are marginally significantly more affected by the
complexity treatment than younger respondents, but we are reluctant to make much of this single
marginally significant result given issues surrounding multiple hypothesis testing when running
more than a dozen specifications.

18

The last specification splits the estimates by the randomly assigned level of Social Security
benefits. The $100 change in Social Security benefits is closer to a marginal change for someone
with monthly benefits of $2000 than for someone with monthly benefits of $800. The stability of
treatment effects by level of benefits helps alleviate concerns that the estimates are affected by the
fact that the $100 change is not literally a marginal change.

3.5 Robustness
Table 6 examines the robustness of the two primary treatments to different measures of
cognition, to different ways of selecting the sample, to different sets of controls, and to
transformations of the outcome variable. The first row reproduces our baseline specification from
Column 1 of Table 4. Subsequent rows provide estimates on the two main treatments in
specifications identical to the baseline specification, except for the change noted in the row
heading.
In Panel A, we examine the robustness to using different measures of cognition because
cognition is a very strong predictor of the spread and because we saw in Appendix Table A1 that
the cognition index is marginally significantly higher for those who received the complexity
treatment than for those who did not. Rows (2) and (3) show that the point estimates and standard
errors are not at all sensitive to the details of the construction of the cognition index: it does not
matter whether we control for cognition by using the first principal component of the five available
cognition measures, by taking a simple average of these five measures, or by entering all five
measures separately. However, it is important for the significance of complexity treatment that we
exploit information from all the cognition tests. If we control only for financial literacy, the point
estimate on the complexity treatment declines moderately (by about a fifth) but loses statistical
significance. If we control only for the two numeracy measures or only for the two verbal
measures, the point estimate on the complexity treatment declines somewhat (by less than a fifth)
but becomes only marginally statistically significant. In contrast, the point estimate on the
consequence message is very stable, retaining statistical significance in all three specifications that
use a subset of the cognition measures.
Panel B examines robustness to different sample definitions. Row (7) includes observations
with missing demographic information, row (8) includes observations with missing cognition data,
row (9) includes observations with any missing information (demographic or cognition), and row

19

(10) excludes the oversamples of Native Americans and Los Angeles county residents. We include
observations with missing values in the regression by dummying out the missing values. While
the coefficient estimate of the complexity treatment is reasonably stable, it becomes only
marginally significant once observations with missing cognition data are included or the
oversample is excluded. The estimate of the treatment effect of the consequence message remains
significant in all specifications of Panel B. Next, Panel C investigates robustness to excluding
various controls. Given the earlier finding that cognition is not quite balanced across complexity
treatments, it is not surprising that the complexity treatment is sensitive to having cognition
controls included. Excluding the controls for the secondary experimental manipulations makes the
complexity treatment only marginally significant. The four remaining estimates of panel C are not
sensitive in magnitude or significance to the exclusion of controls.
Our module tells the respondent that the vignette person will have saved $100,000 for
retirement when making the annuity decision. Hence, unless there are other sources of savings, the
vignette person cannot logically pay more than $100,000 for an annuity. This implies that there is
an implicit topcode of $100,000 on the buy valuations, though respondents are permitted to give a
buy recommendation at a price in excess of $100,000, and 9% of them do so. Nevertheless, we
want to be sure that this implicit topcode does not drive key results. More generally, it is useful to
know that the results do not hinge on a few respondents with very high buy or sell valuations. In
the final specification check, therefore, we topcode all buy and all sell valuations at $100,000. Row
14 of Panel D shows that the main results are not sensitive in terms of economic magnitude or
statistical significance to such topcoding. Similarly, Row 15 shows that the results are not sensitive
to topcoding the spread itself at the 90th percentile, rather than topcoding the underlying sell or buy
valuations. Row 16 shows that bottomcoding the buy and sell valuations at $1000 each results in
somewhat smaller estimates that are significant at the 10% level. Apparently, the low valuations
given by some respondents do contribute to the significance of our treatment effects.
Our finding in Table 5 that the treatment effects do not meaningfully vary by the level of
Social Security benefits already alleviated the concern that our estimates might be due to the fact
that a $100 change in monthly Social Security benefits is not literally a marginal change. Another
way to address this concern is to not count small spreads, which could arise when a $100 change
is insufficiently marginal, as deviations from rational behavior. In row 17, we do this by setting

20

any spreads less than 0.50 log units equal to zero, and we find that the estimated treatment effects
are essentially unaffected.
We defined the spread as strictly positive both when the sell price is larger than the buy
price and vice versa. We did this because any difference is a deviation from rationality for a
marginal change in Social Security benefits. However, if our treatment effects operate by reducing
individuals’ reluctance to trade when their understanding increases (due to the consequence
message) or decreases (due to increased complexity), then they should operate predominantly on
people who are reluctant to trade, i.e., whose sell price exceeds their buy price. We test this
prediction in row 18 by having a positive spread only for those who are reluctant to trade, and
setting the spread to zero for everyone else. Row 18 confirms that the treatment effects operate
entirely on those who had sell prices exceeding buy prices, which is consistent with people’s
reluctance to trade being affected by the degree of their understanding.
Overall, Table 6 shows that the results on the complexity treatment are reasonably stable
in magnitude but somewhat sensitive in terms of statistical significance, which falls to marginal in
7 of the 17 specification checks and disappears in 2 of them. This sensitivity can be traced largely
to the fact that the cognition control, a very strong predictor of the spread, was not balanced across
the complexity treatment and control conditions. Hence, having good controls for cognition is
important for the results of the complexity treatment. By contrast, the consequence message
treatment is extremely robust and remains significant at the 5% level everywhere, except for one
specification where it is significant at the 10% level.

4. Conclusion
Annuities allow people to smooth consumption in retirement when facing an uncertain age
of death, yet annuity holdings are relatively low and only about 3 percent of individuals maximize
their annual Social Security annuity payouts by delaying claiming benefits until age 70 (Social
Security Administration, 2017). While these decisions may be rational for some people, this paper
investigates whether behavioral factors impede people’s annuitization choices. We do so in the
context of a hypothetical choice experiment on a broadly representative sample of about 4,000
adults in the U.S. Such a setting confers two important advantages for our purposes. First, we can
measure deviations from rational decision-making by observing for each respondent both his
willingness to pay to forgo a small decrease in annuitization and his willingness to accept to forgo

21

a small increase in annuitization. Second, we can experimentally vary the complexity of the
annuitization decision. We also experimentally vary whether respondents are encouraged to jointly
consider the annuitization decision and the asset decumulation decision during retirement (thus
discouraging narrow choice bracketing), though this treatment could in principle also be applied
in non-hypothetical choice settings.
Our first main finding is that increasing the complexity of the annuity decision reduces
people’s ability to value the annuity. This decreased ability manifests itself as an increase in the
divergence of people’s sell and buy prices for a marginal change in annuitization. When the annuity
decision becomes more complex, people tend to become more reluctant to buy or sell annuities,
meaning they need greater inducements (lower buy or higher sell prices) to do so. Brown et al.
(2017) document that a reluctance to trade annuities, as measured by the sell-buy price spread, is
strongly negatively associated with cognitive ability, but of course, cognitive ability is not
randomly assigned. In our setting, we experimentally vary the complexity of the annuitization
decision to obtain the first causal evidence that more complex annuitization decisions reduce
people’s ability to place a value on an annuity, as measured by the sell-buy spread. Hence the
observed low level of annuity holdings, at least in part, can be traced to the cognitive challenges
of the complex task of valuing an annuity.
The second finding is that inducing people to jointly think about annuitization and how to
draw down assets during retirement increases their ability to place a value on an annuity. We
experimentally induce respondents to think about these decisions jointly by exposing them to a
“consequence message” which explains the result of spending down assets more slowly or more
rapidly during retirement. Respondents who think about this asset decumulation decision have a
smaller sell-buy spread for annuities than do respondents not exposed to the consequence message.
This finding suggests that narrow choice bracketing, which the consequence message counteracts,
is one behavioral mechanism impeding people from placing a rational value on annuities.
Our results on the roles of complexity and cognitive ability offer relatively little scope for
interventions to improve the quality of people’s annuitization decisions. Cognitive ability is
relatively immutable as is the complexity of the annuitization decision for any given person. While
this complexity can be somewhat diminished by presenting the annuity information more
transparently, most of the complexity stems from having to consider how the annuity would alter
consumption streams in different states of the world, which is an inherently complex task. In
contrast, our finding on the role of narrow choice bracketing does offer scope for interventions to

22

improve people’s decision-making about annuities. In particular, people provide more rational
annuity valuations if they first consider the question of how to spend down non-annuitized wealth
during retirement. We therefore conclude that annuitization decisions can be improved by inducing
people to jointly consider annuitization and spending down non-annuitized wealth.
Our paper adds to the evidence that behavioral factors influence annuitization decisions,
and it also provides causal evidence on two specific mechanisms: narrow choice bracketing and
cognitive limitations to dealing with complex decisions. Naturally, our evidence on these two
behavioral impediments to valuing annuities does not preclude other mechanisms (c.f., Brown
2009). An avenue for future investigation could quantify the welfare effects of behavioral
deviations from rational decision-making in the context of annuitization decisions.

23

References
Abeler, Johannes, and Simon Jäger. 2015. “Complex Tax Incentives.” American Economic
Journal: Economic Policy 7(3): 1–28.
Abeler, Johannes, and Felix Marklein. 2017. “Fungibility, Labels, and Consumption.” Journal of
the European Economic Association 15(1): 99–127.
Agnew, Julie R., Lisa R. Anderson, Jeffrey R. Gerlach, and Lisa R. Szykman. 2008. “Who Chooses
Annuities? An Experimental Investigation of the Role of Gender, Framing, and Defaults.”
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98(2): 418–422.
Alattar, Laith, Matt Messel, and David Rogofsky. 2018. “An Introduction to the Understanding
America Study Internet Panel.” Social Security Bulletin 78(2): 13–28.
Ameriks, John, Joseph Briggs, Andrew Caplin, Matthew D. Shapiro, and Christopher Tonetti.
2018. “Long-Term-Care Utility and Late-in-Life Saving.” Vanguard Research Initiative
Working Paper.
Ameriks, John, Andrew Caplin, Steven Laufer, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. 2011. “The Joy of
Giving or Assisted Living? Using Strategic Surveys to Separate Public Care Aversion from
Bequest Motives.” The Journal of Finance 66(2): 519–561.
Beatty, Timothy K.M., Laura Blow, Thomas F. Crossley, and Cormac O’Dea. 2014. “Cash by Any
Other Name? Evidence on Labeling from the UK Winter Fuel Payment.” Journal of Public
Economics 118: 86–96.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Alessandro Previtero, and Richard H. Thaler 2011. “Annuitization Puzzles.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4): 143–64.
Bertrand, Marianne, and Adair Morse. 2011. “Information Disclosure, Cognitive Biases, and
Payday Borrowing.” The Journal of Finance 66(6): 1865–1893.
Besedeš, Tibor, Cary Deck, Sudipta Sarangi, and Mikhael Shor. 2012a. “Age Effects and
Heuristics in Decision Making.” Review of Economics and Statistics 2: 580–595.
Besedeš, Tibor, Cary Deck, Sudipta Sarangi, and Mikhael Shor. 2012b. “Decision-Making
Strategies and Performance among Seniors.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 81: 524–533.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Stephen P. Zeldes. 2014.
“What Makes Annuitization More Appealing?” Journal of Public Economic 116: 2–16.
Bhargava, Saurabh, and Dayanand Manoli. 2015. “Psychological Frictions and the Incomplete
Take-Up of Social Benefits: Evidence from an IRS Field Experiment.” American
Economic Review 105(11): 3489–3529.
Bockweg, Christian, Eduard Ponds, Onno Steenbeek, and Joyce Vonken. 2018. “Framing and the
Annuitization Decision: Experimental Evidence from a Dutch Pension Fund.” Journal of
Pension Economics and Finance 17(3): 385–417.
Bronshtein, Gila, Jason Scott, John B. Shoven, and Sita N. Slavov. 2016. “Leaving Big Money on
the Table: Arbitrage Opportunities in Delaying Social Security.” NBER Working Paper
No. 22853.
Brown, Jeffrey R. 2009. “Understanding the Role of Annuities in Retirement Planning.” In
Overcoming the Savings Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of Financial Education
and Saving Programs, edited by Annamaria Lusardi. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press: 178–206.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Arie Kapteyn, Erzo F.P. Luttmer, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2017. “Cognitive
Constraints on Valuing Annuities.” Journal of the European Economic Association 15(2):
429–462.

24

Brown, Jeffrey R., Arie Kapteyn, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2016. “Framing and Claiming: How
Information Framing Affects Expected Social Security Claiming Behavior.” Journal of
Risk and Insurance 83(1): 139–162.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2008. “Why
Don’t People Insure Late Life Consumption? A Framing Explanation of the UnderAnnuitization Puzzle.” American Economic Review 98(2): 304–309.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Jeffrey R. Kling, Sendhil Mullainathan, and Marian V. Wrobel. 2013. “Framing
Lifetime Income.” The Journal of Retirement 1(1): 27–37.
Bütler, Monika, and Federica Teppa. 2007. “The Choice between an Annuity and a Lump Sum:
Results from Swiss Pension Funds.” Journal of Public Economics 91(10): 1944–1966.
Carlin, Bruce Ian, Shimon Kogan, and Richard Lowery. 2013. “Trading Complex Assets.” The
Journal of Finance 68(5): 1937–1960.
Carvalho, Leandro and Dan Silverman. 2017. “Complexity and Sophistication.” Working Paper,
The University of Southern California.
Chalmers, John, and Jonathan Reuter. 2012. “How Do Retirees Value Life Annuities? Evidence
from Public Employees.” Review of Financial Studies 25(8): 2601–2634.
Chapman, Jonathan, Mark Dean, Pietro Ortoleva, Erik Snowberg, and Colin Camerer. 2017.
“Willingness to Pay and Willingness to Accept are Probably Less Correlated than You
Think.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 23954.
Davidoff, Thomas, Jeffrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond. 2005. “Annuities and Individual
Welfare.” American Economic Review 95(5): 1573–1590.
Enke, Benjamin. 2017. “What You See Is All There Is.” Working Paper, Harvard University.
Feldman, Naomi E. 2011. “Mental Accounting Effects of Income Tax Shifting.” The Review of
Economics and Statistics 92(1): 70–86.
Fitzpatrick, Maria Donovan. 2015. “How Much Are Public School Teachers Willing to Pay for
Their Retirement Benefits?” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(4): 165–
188.
Gazzale, Robert S., and Lina Walker. 2011. “I’ll Cross That Bridge If I Get to It: Focusing on the
Near (Certain) Future.” Unpublished Manuscript. University of Toronto.
Greenwald, Mathew, Arie Kapteyn, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Lisa Schneider. 2010. “What Do
People Know about Social Security?” RAND Working Paper WR-792-SSA.
Hagen, Johannes, Daniel Hallberg, and Gabriella Sjögren Lindquist. 2018. “A Nudge to Quit? The
Effect of a Change in Pension Information on Annuitization, Labor Supply and Retirement
Choices among Older Workers.” GLO Discussion Paper Series 209, Global Labor
Organization.
Hastings, Justine S., and Jesse M. Shapiro. 2013. “Fungibility and Consumer Choice: Evidence
from Commodity Price Shocks.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(4): 1449–
1498.
Hurd, Michael, and Stan Panis. 2006. “The Choice to Cash out Pension Rights at Job Change or
Retirement.” Journal of Public Economics 90(12): 2213–2227.
Kooreman, Peter. 2000. “The Labeling Effect of a Child Benefit System.” American Economic
Review 90(3): 571–583.
Laitner, John, Dan Silverman, and Dmitriy Stolyarov. 2018. “The Role of Annuitized Wealth in
Post-Retirement Behavior.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 10(3): 71-117.
Lockwood, Lee. 2012. “Bequest Motives and the Annuity Puzzle.” Review of Economic Dynamics
15(2): 226–243.
Lockwood, Lee. 2018. “Incidental Bequests and the Choice to Self-Insure Late-Life Risks.”
American Economic Review 108(9): 2513–2550.
25

Lusardi, Annamaria, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. “The Economic Importance of Financial
Literacy: Theory and Evidence.” Journal of Economic Literature 52(1): 5–44.
Luttmer, Erzo F.P., and Andrew A. Samwick. 2018. “The Welfare Cost of Perceived Policy
Uncertainty: Evidence from Social Security.” American Economic Review 108(2): 275–
307.
Mas, Alexandre, and Amanda Pallais. 2017. “Valuing Alternative Work Arrangements.”
American Economic Review 107(12): 3722–3759.
Maurer, Raymond, Olivia S. Mitchell, Ralph Rogalla, and Tatjana Schimetschek. 2018. “Will
They Take the Money and Work? People’s Willingness to Delay Claiming Social
Security Benefits for a Lump Sum” Journal of Risk and Insurance 85(4): 877–909.
Merkle, Christoph, Philipp Schreiber, and Martin Weber. 2017. “Framing and Retirement Age:
The Gap between Willingness-To-Accept and Willingness-To-Pay.” Economic Policy
32(92): 757-809.
Milkman, Katherine L., and John Beshears. 2009. “Mental Accounting and Small Windfalls:
Evidence from an Online Grocer.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 71(2):
384–394.
Mitchell, Olivia S., John Piggott, and Noriyuke Takayama, eds. 2011. Revisiting Retirement
Payouts: Market Developments and Policy Issues. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peijnenburg, Kim, Theo Nijman, and Bas J.M. Werker. 2017. “Health Cost Risk: A Potential
Solution to the Annuity Puzzle.” Economic Journal 127: 1598–1625.
Poterba, James, Steven Venti, and David Wise. 2011. “The Composition and Drawdown of Wealth
in Retirement.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 25(4): 95–118.
Previtero, Alessandro. 2014. “Stock Market Returns and Annuitization.” Journal of Financial
Economics 113: 202–214.
Read, Daniel, George Loewenstein, and Matthew Rabin. 1999. “Choice Bracketing.” Journal of
Risk and Uncertainty 19(1–3): 171–97.
Reichling, Felix, and Kent Smetters. 2015. “Optimal Annuitization with Stochastic Mortality and
Correlated Medical Costs.” American Economic Review 105(11): 3273–3320.
Schram, Arthur, and Joep Sonnemans. 2011. “How Individuals Choose Health Insurance: An
Experimental Analysis.” European Economic Review 55: 799–819.
Shepard, Mark. 2011. “Social Security Claiming and the Life-Cycle Model.” Working Paper,
Harvard University.
Social Security Administration. 2017. Annual Statistical Supplement to the Social Security
Bulletin, 2016. Washington, DC.
https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/statcomps/supplement/2016/supplement16.pdf
Thaler, Richard. 1985. “Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice.” Marketing Science 4(3):
199–214.
Wayland, Michael. 2012. “GM Pensions: 13, 200 White Collar Retirees Taking Buyouts Makes
Sense, Analysts Say.” MLive, November 1.
http://www.mlive.com/auto/index.ssf/2012/11/gm_pensions_12600_white-collar.html.
Yaari, Menahem. 1965. “Uncertain Lifetime, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the Consumer.”
Review of Economic Studies 32(2): 137–150.

26

Figure 1: CDF of Sell Price and Buy Price in the Subsample without Anchoring
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Fraction Below

Distribution of Buy Prices
0.6

Distribution of Sell Prices
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Median Sell Price = $16,250
0.1

Median Buy Price = $ 4,750
0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

60,000

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Sell Price and Buy Price of an Annuity That Pays Out $100 per Month

Figure 2: CDF of Log Sell Price Minus Log Buy Price
1
0.9
0.8
0.7

Fraction Below

0.6

Mean Log Difference: 1.01
Median Log Difference: 0.60

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

0

2

4

6

8

10

Log Sell Price Minus Log Buy Price for an Annuity That Pays Out $100 per Month

27

Figure 3: CDF of Sell-Buy Spread
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction Below

0.7
0.6

Mean Spread = 2.21

0.5

Median Spread = 1.55

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Absolute Difference of Log Sell and Log Buy Price of an Annuity That Pays Out $100 per Month

28

Table 1: Summary Statistics and Comparison to the CPS
(1)
Understanding America
Study: Ages 18+
Mean
0.223
0.296
0.317
0.164

(2)
Current Population
Survey: Ages 18+
Mean
0.300
0.248
0.258
0.194

Difference
-0.077
0.048
0.060
-0.030

Female

0.574

0.516

0.058

Married

0.597

0.527

0.070

Nonhispanic white
Nonhispanic black
Nonhispanic other
Hispanic

0.755
0.081
0.078
0.085

0.644
0.118
0.080
0.158

0.112
-0.037
-0.002
-0.072

High school dropout
High school education
Some college
Bachelor's degree
Graduate degree

0.053
0.193
0.388
0.218
0.148

0.117
0.290
0.286
0.195
0.112

-0.064
-0.096
0.102
0.023
0.036

Household
Household
Household
Household
Household

Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:

0.166
0.176
0.165
0.130
0.364

0.161
0.205
0.173
0.138
0.324

0.005
-0.029
-0.008
-0.008
0.040

Household
Household
Household
Household

size
size
size
size

0.201
0.390
0.174
0.235

0.145
0.342
0.191
0.322

0.057
0.048
-0.017
-0.087

Any kids

0.328

0.378

-0.050

Observations

4,060

134,420

Variable:
Age:18-34
Age:35-49
Age:50-64
Age:65+

of
of
of
of

Less than 25k
25k-50k
50k-75k
75k-100k
Above 100k

one
two
three
four or more

(3)

Notes: Column 1 shows the demographic characteristics of respondents in our baseline sample from the Understanding
America Study. The UAS data throughout the paper are unweighted. The Current Population Survey data tabulated in the
second column come from the 2016 Annual Social and Economic Supplement and are weighted. The sample is limited to
non-institutionalized respondents age 18 and older. With four exceptions, each demographic characteristic's mean is
statistically significantly different at the 1 percent level between the two samples. The exceptions are for the means of
the fractions "Nonhispanic other," "Household Income: Less than 25k," "Household Income: 50k-75k," and "Household
Income: 75k-100k," which are not even marginally statistically significantly different.

29

Table 2: Experimental Design
No added
complexity

Complexity:
Wide age
range

Complexity:
Added
information

No consequences message
Vignette 1: Mr. Jones is a single, 60-year
old man with no children. He will retire
and claim his Social Security benefits at
65. When he retires, he will have $100,000
saved for his retirement, and he will
receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security
benefits. Based on his current health and
family history, doctors have told Mr. Jones
that he will almost certainly be alive at age
75 but almost certainly will not live
beyond age 85.
Vignette 2: Mr. Jones is a single, 60-year
old man with no children. He will retire
and claim his Social Security benefits at
65. When he retires, he expects to have
$100,000 saved for his retirement, and
expects to receive $[SSB] in monthly
Social Security benefits. Based on his
current health and family history, doctors
have told Mr. Jones that he has an 80%
chance of being alive at age 70, a 50%
chance of being alive at age 80, a 20%
chance of being alive at age 90, and a 10%
chance of being alive at age 95.
Vignette 3: Mr. Jones is a single, 60-year
old man with no children. Social Security
rules state that you need at least 40 credits,
or 10 years of work, to qualify for Social
Security – and Mr. Jones qualifies since he
has worked for 30 years. Since Mr. Jones
was born in 1956, his full retirement age is
66 years and 4 months, but he is eligible to
start claiming starting at 62. He will retire
and claim his Social Security benefits at
65. When he retires, he will have $100,000
saved for his retirement, and he will
receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security
benefits. Based on his current health and
family history, doctors have told Mr. Jones
that he will almost certainly be alive at age
75 but almost certainly will not live
beyond age 85.

Consequences message
One of the vignettes 1-3 is offered with a consequence
message preceding it, which is always the following. The
order of the last two paragraphs was randomized.
First, we will show you a story about Mrs. Smith. Please pay
close attention to the story, because at the end we will ask
you two questions about the story. You will receive an
additional $1 for each question you answer correctly.
Mrs. Smith is a single, 65-year old woman with no children,
and she is as healthy as the typical 65-year old woman. She
just retired and receives her monthly Social Security check.
She is talking with her financial adviser on how to spend her
substantial savings in retirement.
Her advisor explains that she could decide to spend down
her savings relatively quickly. In this case, she will be more
likely to be able to enjoy her money during her lifetime. But
she also runs a risk of running out of money while alive and
having to cut back on her spending as a result.
Her advisor explains that she could also decide to spend
down her savings relatively slowly. In this case, she will be
less likely to run out of money. But now she runs a risk of
not getting to enjoy all her money during her lifetime.
This story is followed by two 4-option multiple-choice
questions to induce the respondent to pay attention to the
story. One question asks about the benefits and
drawbacks of spending down wealth quickly while the
other asks about the benefits and drawbacks of spending
down wealth slowly. See the online appendix for the exact
wording of these questions.
The screen with the two test questions is followed by an
advice question where the respondent is asked to advise
the vignette person how quickly to spend down her
wealth. This question was asked to induce the respondent
to think about the problem of how to spend down wealth
during retirement. See the online appendix for the exact
wording of this question.

Note: The experiment featured 6 main treatment cells: one of Vignettes 1-3 without the consequences message, or one of
the same three vignettes with a consequence message preceding it, as described in the “Consequences message” column.
Additionally, we include experimental variation in the name and gender of the vignette person: Mr./Mrs., Smith/Jones, and
the order of the last two paragraphs of the consequence message (spending quickly first, versus spending slowly first) are
independently randomized across respondents. A different name and gender was used in the consequence message from that
in the vignette. Finally, there is experimental variation in the monthly Social Security benefit value (SSB = $800, $1,200,
$1,600, or $2,000).

30

Table 3: Descriptive Statistics on the Sell Price, Buy Price, and Spread
(1)
Sell Question First

Sell value (log)
Buy value (log)
Sell-Buy Spread
N

(2)
Buy Question First

(3)

(4)
Entire Baseline Sample

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Mean

Standard
Deviation

p-value on
difference

Mean

Standard
Deviation

9.65
9.06
2.27

1.53
2.43
2.04

9.71
8.28
2.16

1.96
1.68
2.21

0.257
0.000
0.079

9.68
8.67
2.21

1.76
2.12
2.13

2,009

2,051

4,060

Notes: Whether the buy valuation or sell valuation was asked first was randomized for each respondent. The p-value corresponds to
the test that the mean in column 1 is equal to the mean in column 2. The Sell-Buy Spread is defined as the absolute difference
between the log sell price and the log buy price for an annuity stream of $100 per month.

31

Table 4: Treatment Effects on the Sell-Buy Spread and its Components
(1)
Explanatory variables:
Complexity treatment
Consequence message treatment
Cognition index
Sell question first
P-value
P-value
P-value
P-value

on
on
on
on

lump-sum starting values
lump-sum shown first
SS benefit amounts
vignette names

Demographic controls
R2
N

Sell-Buy Spread
0.131**
(0.065)
-0.141**
(0.062)
-0.788***
(0.043)
0.166***
(0.062)

(2)
Sell price
0.050
0.011
-0.188***
-0.043

(3)
(log)
(0.057)
(0.055)
(0.038)
(0.055)

Buy price
-0.137**
0.133**
0.098**
0.777***

(log)
(0.068)
(0.065)
(0.046)
(0.065)

0.623
0.633
0.249
0.375

0.000
0.425
0.363
0.552

0.000
0.316
0.000
0.033

Yes

Yes

Yes

0.157
4,060

0.035
4,060

0.067
4,060

Notes: The Sell-Buy Spread is defined as the absolute difference between the log sell price and the log buy price for an annuity stream of $100
per month. Each column displays the results from a single OLS regression, with the dependent variable listed in the column heading. Coefficient
estimates on the secondary experimental treatments and the control variables are reported in Appendix Table A2. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

32

Table 5: Heterogeneity in Treatment Effects
Dependent Variable: Sell-Buy Spread

Specification:
(1) By Consequence Message
No consequence message
Consequence message
P-value on test of equal coefficients

(1)
Complexity
Treatment
(S.E.)
Coeff.
[p-value]
0.185**
0.078

(2)
Consequence Message
Treatment
(S.E.)
Coeff.
[p-value]

(0.094)
(0.089)
[0.408]

(2) By Complexity Treatment
No complexity treatment
Complexity treatment
P-value on test of equal coefficients

-0.071
-0.178**

(0.104)
(0.077)
[0.408]

(3) By Cognition
Below median cognition index
Above median cognition index
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.132
0.133*

(0.103)
(0.077)
[0.988]

-0.167*
-0.117

(0.099)
(0.074)
[0.682]

(4) By Gender
Female
Male
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.126
0.139

(0.089)
(0.093)
[0.917]

-0.152*
-0.125

(0.086)
(0.088)
[0.826]

(5) By Education
Some college or less
Bachelor's degree or more
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.135
0.122

(0.085)
(0.098)
[0.923]

-0.179**
-0.074

(0.082)
(0.092)
[0.397]

(6) By Age
Below median (less than 50)
Above median (50 or more)
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.022
0.252***

(0.091)
(0.092)
[0.075]

-0.191**
-0.083

(0.086)
(0.089)
[0.383]

(7) By Income
Below median (less than $75k)
Above median ($75k or more)
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.074
0.186**

(0.097)
(0.086)
[0.387]

-0.220**
-0.060

(0.091)
(0.083)
[0.196]

(8) By Level of Social Security Benefits
Below median ($800 or $1200)
Above median ($1200 or $1600)
P-value on test of equal coefficients

0.123
0.139

(0.092)
(0.091)
[0.903]

-0.142
-0.140

(0.087)
(0.088)
[0.985]

R2
0.1569

N
4,060
[1,998]
[2,062]

0.1569

4,060
[1,409]
[2,651]

0.1574

4,060
[2,030]
[2,030]

0.1568

4,060
[1,729]
[2,331]

0.1569

4,060
[2,577]
[1,483]

0.1577

4,060
[2,107]
[1,953]

0.1573

4,060
[2,054]
[2,006]

0.1568

4,060
[2,015]
[2,045]

Notes: The Sell-Buy Spread is defined as the absolute difference between the log sell price and the log buy price for an annuity stream of
$100 per month. Each row reports the results from a single OLS regression in which the two main experimental treatments are interacted
with the characteristics listed in the row header. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%,
*** significant at 1%.

33

Table 6: Robustness of the Main Treatment Effects
Dependent Variable: Sell-Buy Spread

Specification:
(1) Baseline
Panel A: Changing Cognition Measures
(2) Cognition index is the simple average of the 5 cognition measures
(3) All five components of cognitions score entered separately
(4) Financial literacy is the only cognition measure
(5) Numeracy measures are the only cognition measures
(6) Verbal measures are the only cognition measures
Panel B: Sample Selection
(7) Include observations with missing demographics (dummied out)
(8) Include observations with missing cognition index (dummied out)
(9) Include observations with any missing values (dummied out)
(10) Exclude Native American and LA county oversamples
Panel C: Different Controls
(11) No cognition controls
(12) No demographic controls
(13) No secondary experimental controls
Panel D: Adjustments to Outcome Variable
(14) Buy and sell valuations topcoded at $100,000
(15) Topcoding spread at the 90th percentile
(16) Bottomcoding buy and sell valuations at $1000
(17) Spread set to zero if spread ≤ 0.50
(18) Spread set to zero if buy valuation > sell valuation

(1)
Coefficient on
Complexity
Treatment
0.131**
(0.065)

(2)
Coefficient on
Consequence
Message
Treatment
-0.141**
(0.062)

(3)

(4)

R2
0.1568

N
4,060

0.131**
(0.065)
0.131**
(0.065)
0.107
(0.066)
0.121*
(0.065)
0.111*
(0.066)

-0.141**
(0.062)
-0.137**
(0.062)
-0.128**
(0.063)
-0.153**
(0.062)
-0.152**
(0.063)

0.1554

4,060

0.1614

4,060

0.1146

4,060

0.1495

4,060

0.1174

4,060

0.130**
(0.065)
0.118*
(0.062)
0.117*
(0.062)
0.113*
(0.068)

-0.139**
(0.062)
-0.120**
(0.059)
-0.118**
(0.059)
-0.169***
(0.064)

0.1585

4,081

0.1422

4,528

0.1441

4,552

0.1632

3,704

0.087
(0.068)
0.137**
(0.065)
0.125*
(0.065)

-0.159**
(0.064)
-0.140**
(0.062)
-0.138**
(0.062)

0.0825

4,060

0.1465

4,060

0.1534

4,060

0.111**
(0.054)
0.119**
(0.055)
0.104*
(0.057)
0.131**
(0.066)
0.159**
(0.067)

-0.108**
(0.051)
-0.106**
(0.053)
-0.098*
(0.054)
-0.142**
(0.063)
-0.132**
(0.064)

0.1427

4,060

0.1641

4,060

0.1501

4,060

0.1592

4,060

0.0930

4,060

Notes: Each row displays the results of a single OLS regression that is identical to the baseline regression shown in Column 1 of Table 4 except for the
difference described in the row header. In the baseline regression, the cognition index is the first principal component of five standardized cognition
measures: financial literacy, a numeracy score, a number series score, a verbal analogies score, and a picture vocabulary score. Robust standard errors
are in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

34

Online Appendix for:
Behavioral Impediments to Valuing Annuities:
Complexity and Choice Bracketing
Jeffrey R. Brown, Arie Kapteyn, Erzo F.P. Luttmer,
Olivia S. Mitchell, and Anya Samek

Appendix Figure and Tables .………..…. pp. A2-A5
Survey Instrument ……………………… pp. A6-A15

A-1

Figure A1: CDF of Sell Price and Buy Price in the Entire Baseline Sample
1
0.9
0.8

Fraction Below

0.7

Distribution of Buy Prices

0.6

Distribution of Sell Prices

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2

Median Sell Price = $16,250
0.1

Median Buy Price = $ 5,875
0
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

60,000

70,000

80,000

90,000

100,000

Sell Price and Buy Price of an Annuity That Pays Out $100 per Month

A-2

Table A1: Balance Tests
p-value
on test of
No
equal
Complexity Complexity
means

Variable

Panel A: Excluded from Baseline Sample due to:
Missing annuity valuation data
0.008
0.011
Missing demographic data
0.003
0.007
Missing cognition data
0.090
0.115

p-value
No
on test of
Consequence Consequence
equal
Message
Message
means

0.322
0.099
0.008

0.011
0.006
0.109

0.009
0.005
0.104

0.491
0.507
0.627

Panel B: Balance on Control Variables in the Baseline Sample
Age
48.43
48.51
0.876
2
Age
25.96
25.85
0.831

48.50
25.88

48.46
25.90

0.925
0.965

Female

0.58

0.57

0.592

0.58

0.57

0.663

Married

0.57

0.61

0.028

0.59

0.60

0.636

Nonhispanic white
Nonhispanic black
Nonhispanic other
Hispanic

0.76
0.07
0.08
0.09

0.75
0.09
0.08
0.09

0.507
0.132
0.627
0.960

0.76
0.08
0.07
0.08

0.75
0.08
0.08
0.09

0.626
0.722
0.349
0.843

High School Dropout
High School Education
Some College
Bachelor's Degree
Graduate Degree

0.05
0.19
0.41
0.21
0.15

0.05
0.20
0.38
0.22
0.15

0.805
0.381
0.087
0.151
0.917

0.05
0.20
0.38
0.22
0.16

0.05
0.19
0.40
0.22
0.14

0.697
0.651
0.219
0.998
0.151

Household
Household
Household
Household
Household

Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:

0.17
0.18
0.15
0.14
0.37

0.17
0.18
0.17
0.12
0.36

0.944
0.945
0.060
0.145
0.695

0.16
0.18
0.17
0.13
0.37

0.17
0.17
0.16
0.13
0.36

0.114
0.428
0.915
0.383
0.263

Household
Household
Household
Household

size
size
size
size

0.22
0.38
0.18
0.23

0.19
0.40
0.17
0.24

0.114
0.249
0.730
0.616

0.20
0.38
0.18
0.23

0.20
0.39
0.16
0.24

0.818
0.498
0.074
0.301

0.32

0.33

0.711

0.33

0.33

0.764

-0.04

0.02

0.072

-0.01

0.01

0.704

of
of
of
of

Less than 25k
25k-50k
50k-75k
75k-100k
Above 100k

one
two
three
four or more

Any Kids
Cognition index
P-value of joint test of equality of
control variables

0.107

0.788

Notes: Each cell contains the mean of the variable listed in the row header for observations subject to the experimental condition listed in
the column header. The baseline sample consists of observations with nonmissing annuity valuation data, nonmissing demographic data,
and nonmissing cognition data. The first panel (N=4,596) examines balance on inclusion into the baseline sample. The second panel
(N=4,060) examines balance of control variables included into the baseline regression specifications.

A-3

Table A2: Full Set of Coefficient Estimates from Table 4
Dependent Variable:
Sell-Buy Spread

(1)

(2)
Sell price
0.050
0.011
-0.188***
-0.043

(3)

Explanatory variables:
Complexity treatment
Consequence message treatment
Cognition index
Sell question first

Sell-Buy Spread
0.131**
(0.065)
-0.141**
(0.062)
-0.788*** (0.043)
0.166*** (0.062)

Lump-sum medium: 20k
Lump-sum high: 30k

0.063
-0.002

(0.076)
(0.075)

Lump-sum shown first

0.029

(0.062)

-0.044

(0.055)

-0.065

(0.065)

Social security benefit 1200
Social security benefit 1600
Social security benefit 2000

0.113
0.057
0.167*

(0.087)
(0.084)
(0.087)

0.010
-0.006
-0.118

(0.075)
(0.074)
(0.080)

-0.458***
-0.393***
-0.353***

(0.093)
(0.091)
(0.093)

0.239***
0.484***

(log)
(0.057)
(0.055)
(0.038)
(0.055)
(0.067)
(0.068)

Buy price
-0.137**
0.133**
0.098**
0.777***
0.236***
0.476***

(log)
(0.068)
(0.065)
(0.046)
(0.065)
(0.079)
(0.079)

Vignette name: Mr. Jones
Vignette name: Mr. Smith
Vignette name: Mrs. Smith

0.114
0.088
-0.011

(0.086)
(0.088)
(0.085)

-0.028
-0.097
-0.081

(0.076)
(0.076)
(0.076)

-0.098
0.114
0.146

(0.089)
(0.091)
(0.089)

Age
Age2

0.025*
-0.015

(0.013)
(0.013)

0.001
0.006

(0.011)
(0.010)

-0.035***
0.023*

(0.013)
(0.013)

Female

0.085

(0.066)

-0.075

(0.058)

-0.160**

(0.069)

Married

0.097

(0.076)

-0.007

(0.069)

-0.104

(0.081)

Nonhispanic black
Nonhispanic other
Hispanic

0.028
0.048
0.081

(0.142)
(0.122)
(0.125)

-0.087
-0.056
-0.094

(0.134)
(0.107)
(0.122)

-0.116
-0.087
-0.097

(0.148)
(0.128)
(0.133)

High School Dropout
High School Education
Bachelor's Degree
Graduate Degree

-0.057
0.033
0.008
0.076

(0.178)
(0.093)
(0.084)
(0.095)

Household
Household
Household
Household

0.102
-0.166
-0.055
-0.257**

(0.117)
(0.116)
(0.130)
(0.110)

Household size of two
Household size of three
Household size of four or more

-0.025
0.147
0.182

(0.095)
(0.131)
(0.145)

Any Kids

-0.177*

(0.106)

R2
N

Income:
Income:
Income:
Income:

25k-50k
50k-75k
75k-100k
Above 100k

0.1568
4,060

0.138
0.104
0.019
0.224***
0.046
-0.070
-0.104
-0.098

(0.161)
(0.085)
(0.073)
(0.077)

0.136
0.048
0.100
0.233**

(0.182)
(0.099)
(0.086)
(0.100)

(0.108)
(0.107)
(0.119)
(0.100)

-0.136
-0.037
-0.010
-0.041

(0.123)
(0.121)
(0.132)
(0.111)

0.042
0.252**
0.178

(0.084)
(0.113)
(0.135)

-0.007
-0.025
-0.207

(0.100)
(0.134)
(0.151)

-0.239**

(0.101)

0.117

(0.114)

0.035
4,060

0.0672
4,060

Notes: The regressions in Table A2 are identical to the regressions reported in Table 4, but here we also report the coefficients on all the
secondary experimental manipulations as well as the coefficients on the demographic control variables. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

A-4

Table A3: Complexity Treatment Split out by Type of Complexity Treatment
Dependent Variable: Sell-Buy Spread
Explanatory variables:
Complexity treatment: Wide Age Range
Complexity treatment: Added Information
Consequence message treatment
Cognition index
Sell question first
P-value
P-value
P-value
P-value

on
on
on
on

lump-sum starting values
lump-sum shown first
SS benefit amounts
vignette names

(1)
Sell-Buy
0.149*
0.114
-0.140**
-0.788***
0.165***

Spread
(0.076)
(0.075)
(0.062)
(0.043)
(0.062)

(2)
Sell price (log)
0.066
(0.068)
0.034
(0.066)
0.011
(0.055)
-0.188*** (0.038)
-0.043
(0.054)

(3)
Buy price (log)
-0.117
(0.079)
-0.156**
(0.079)
0.134**
(0.065)
0.098**
(0.046)
0.777*** (0.065)

0.624
0.623
0.248
0.374

0.000
0.434
0.368
0.566

0.000
0.323
0.000
0.032

Yes

Yes

Yes

P-value that coefficients on both
complexity treatments are equal

0.646

0.638

0.626

R2
N

0.157
4,060

0.035
4,060

0.067
4,060

Demographic controls

Notes: This table is identical to Table 4, except that the two complexity treatments are estimated separately (rather than pooled). Robust standard
errors are in parentheses. * significant at 10%, ** significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%.

A-5

Survey Instrument
Notes on the Survey Instrument
• Everyone sees both EV-Sell and EV-Buy questions in the same survey
• Randomizations are all orthogonal and across subjects. All options within each
randomization are selected with equal probability.
o The main manipulations consist of a 3x2 design: three vignettes that vary the
complexity, and whether or not the consequence message (see Table 2) is shown.
o The secondary manipulations consist of a 4x3x4x2x2 design that is orthogonal to
the main manipulations.
§ There are four different versions for name and gender of the vignette person
to be advised on annuity decisions. This name and gender is randomized to
one of the following: Mr. Jones, Mrs. Jones, Mr. Smith, or Mrs. Smith. The
person featured in the consequence message has the opposite name and
gender from the vignette person in the annuity valuation questions.
§ The starting value for lump-sum amounts is randomized at $10,000,
$20,000, or $30,000. For any given respondent, the same starting value is
used for the EV-Sell and EV-Buy questions.
§ The baseline monthly Social Security Benefit, $SSB, is randomized to
$800, $1200, $1600, or $2000.
§ Whether the choice option with the lump-sum amount ($LS) is shown first
or second is randomized. For each respondent, this is randomized once and
the same order is used for EV-Buy and EV-Sell.
§ Whether EV-Buy is asked before or after EV-Sell is randomized.
§ For the consequence message, it is randomized whether the paragraph on
the benefits and drawbacks of spending down retirement wealth quickly is
shown before or after the paragraph on the benefits and drawbacks of
spending down retirement slowly.
• Text in Arial are instructions to the programmers while text in Times New Roman is shown
to respondents. Text in italicized Arial denote variables and the respondents see the value
contained by that variable.
• Text between square brackets is replaced based on the randomization.
• Page breaks are shown by horizontal lines.

A-6

Survey Instrument Text and Instructions for Understanding America Study #49
Invitation to the survey. When panelists logged on to their UAS account, they saw the
following message. If they clicked on the link in this message, they entered into UAS49.
This survey asks you to make decisions as if you were giving someone financial advice. You will then
play an insurance game. You will earn $10 for completion, and have a chance to win more.
In the following survey we want you to play the role of financial advisor. We will show you some
examples of persons who have to make a decision about money and we will ask you to help them make
the decision.

Consequence message treatment: Advisor explanations. Only people in the
consequence message treatment get this screen and the following two screens.
Respondents are randomized to see one of four vignette person names: Mr. Jones, Mrs.
Jones, Mr. Smith, or Mrs. Smith. The pronouns [he/she] and [his/her] should match the
gender of the consequence-message vignette person. Similarly, the word [man/women]
should match the gender of the vignette person.
First, we will show you a story about [Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith]. Please pay close
attention to the story, because at the end we will ask you two questions about the story. You will receive
an additional $1 for each question you answer correctly.
[Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith] is a single, 65-year old [man/woman] with no children, and
[he/she] is as healthy as the typical 65-year old [man/woman]. [He/She] just retired and receives [his/her]
monthly Social Security check. [He/She] is talking with [his/her] financial adviser on how to spend
[his/her] substantial savings in retirement.

Randomize whether either block 1 or block 2 is shown.
Block 1:

[His/Her] advisor explains that [he/she] could decide to spend down [his/her] savings relatively quickly.
In this case, [he/she] will be more likely to be able to enjoy [his/her] money during [his/her] lifetime. But
[he/she] also runs a risk of running out of money while alive and having to cut back on [his/her] spending
as a result.
[His/Her] advisor explains that [he/she] could also decide to spend down [his/her] savings relatively
slowly. In this case, [he/she] will be less likely to run out of money. But now [he/she] runs a risk of not
getting to enjoy all [his/her] money during [his/her] lifetime.

Block 2:

[His/Her] advisor explains that [he/she] could decide to spend down [his/her] savings relatively slowly. In
this case, [he/she] will be less likely to run out of money. But now [he/she] runs a risk of not getting to
enjoy all [his/her] money during [his/her] lifetime.
[His/Her] advisor explains that [he/she] could also decide to spend down [his/her] savings relatively
quickly. In this case, [he/she] will be more likely to be able to enjoy [his/her] money during [his/her]
lifetime. But [he/she] also runs a risk of running out of money while alive and having to cut back on
[his/her] spending as a result.

A-7

Consequence message treatment: Test questions 1 and 2.
Remember, you will earn an extra $1 for each question you answer correctly on this page.
The financial advisor tells [Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith] that spending down [his/her]
savings more quickly:
o Increases the risk that [he/she] does not get to enjoy all of [his/her] money during [his/her]
lifetime.
o Decreases the risk that [he/she] runs out of money during [his/her] lifetime.
o Increases the risk that [he/she] runs out of money during [his/her] lifetime.
o None of the above.
The financial advisor tells [Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith] that spending down [his/her]
savings more slowly:
o Increases the risk that [he/she] runs out of money during [his/her] lifetime.
o Decreases the risk that [he/she] does not get to enjoy all of [his/her] money during [his/her]
lifetime.
o Increases the risk that [he/she] does not get to enjoy all of [his/her] money during [his/her]
lifetime.
o None of the above.

If a question is not answered, prompt once to answer the question, but move to next
screen if respondent still leaves the question blank.
Consequence message treatment: Question to induce respondent to think about
how to draw down savings during retirement
Now we are going to switch to a different type of question. Instead of asking you about facts, we are
going to ask your advice about what decisions [Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith] should
make. Unlike the previous questions, there is no right or wrong answer; we just want to know what you
think.
Recall [Mr. Jones/Mrs. Jones/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Smith], the retired, single, 65-year old [man/woman] with
no children. [He/She] is as healthy as the typical 65-year old [man/woman].
How quickly should [he/she] spend [his/her] savings?
o Spend [his/her] savings by age 70. [he/she] can spend a large amount each year, but [he/she] will
have to cut back if [he/she] lives beyond 70. If [he/she] dies before 70, [he/she] will not have
enjoyed all of [his/her] savings.
o Spend [his/her] savings by age 80. [he/she] can spend a moderate amount each year, but [he/she]
will have to cut back if [he/she] lives beyond 80. If [he/she] dies before 80, [he/she] will not have
enjoyed all of [his/her] savings.
o Spend [his/her] savings by age 90. [he/she] can spend a modest amount each year, but [he/she]
will have to cut back if [he/she] lives beyond 90. If [he/she] dies before 90, [he/she] will not have
enjoyed all of [his/her] savings.
o Spend [his/her] savings by age 100. [he/she] can spend a small amount each year, and [he/she]
will have to cut back if [he/she] lives beyond 100. If [he/she] dies before 100, [he/she] will not
have enjoyed all of [his/her] savings.

This is the end of the screens shown for the consequence message.

A-8

Complexity Treatment. Respondents are randomized to one of the three vignettes
shown below: Vignette 1 (corresponding to treatment “No added complexity”), Vignette 2
(corresponding to treatment “Complexity: Wide age range”) or Vignette 3 (corresponding
to treatment “Complexity: Added information”). The name in the complexity vignette below
is different than the name shown in the consequence-message vignette above. Similarly,
the gender of the person in the complexity vignette is different from the gender of the
person in the consequence-message vignette. The scalar variable SSB is randomized to
800, 1200, 1600, or 2000.
In the next few questions, we are going to ask you to give some advice to [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs.
Jones/Ms. Jones] for when [she/he] retires. You will be happy to know that whatever advice you give
[Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones], [she/he] will not owe any taxes on the amounts shown and
[her/his] benefits will keep up with inflation. There is no right or wrong answer; we just want to know
what you think.

Vignette 1 (“No added complexity”):

[Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no children.
[She/He] will retire and claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires, [she/he] will
have $100,000 saved for [her/his] retirement, and [she/he] will receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security
benefits. Based on [her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told Mr. Smith that [she/he]
will almost certainly be alive at age 75 but almost certainly will not live beyond age 85.

Vignette 2 (“Complexity: Wide age range”):

[Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no children.
[She/He] will retire and claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires, [she/he]
expects to have $100,000 saved for [her/his] retirement, and expects to receive $[SSB] in monthly Social
Security benefits. Based on [her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told Mrs. Jones that
[she/he] has an 80% chance of being alive at age 70, a 50% chance of being alive at age 80, a 20% chance
of being alive at age 90, and a 10% chance of being alive at age 95.

Vignette 3 (“Complexity: Added information”):
[Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no children.
Social Security rules state that you need at least 40 credits, or 10 years of work, to qualify for Social
Security – and [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] qualifies since [she/he] has worked for 30
years. Since [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] was born in 1956, [her/his] full retirement age
is 66 years and 4 months, but [she/he] is eligible to start claiming starting at 62. [She/He] will retire and
claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires, [she/he] will have $100,000 saved for
[her/his] retirement, and [she/he] will receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security benefits. Based on
[her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/ Mrs. Jones/Ms.
Jones] that [she/he] will almost certainly be alive at age 75 but almost certainly will not live beyond age
85.

Initializations for EV-Sell and EV-Buy. Whether the EV-Buy questions or the EV-Sell
questions are shown first is randomized.
The scalar variable LS_STARTVALUE is randomized to 1, 2, or 3.
The values in the matrices LS_LOW, LS_MED, and LS_HIGH are listed at the very end
of this document.
Initialization of the matrix LS_AMT:
If LS_STARTVALUE ==1
A-9

Set the 16x5 matrix LS_AMT=LS_LOW
Elseif LS_STARTVALUE ==3
Set the 16x5 matrix LS_AMT=LS_HIGH
Else
Set the 16x5 matrix LS_AMT=LS_MED
Endif
EV-Sell Questions
Set the scalar j=1
Set the scalar ROW=1
For j=1 to 5
This is the start of the loop for EV-Sell questions.
The text for each iteration of the loop is shown on a new screen.
If j = 1, Display:
If EV-Sell is asked before EV-Buy:

Suppose that the Social Security Administration is considering a new policy that
gives people more choice in how they want to receive their benefits. As part of
this policy, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is asked to make a
choice between two money amounts.
What should [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] do?

Else

Now consider a different way of giving people more choice in how they want to
receive their benefits. As part of this policy, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs.
Jones/Ms. Jones] is asked to make a choice between two money amounts.

Endif
Else, Display:

Now we ask you the same question but with a different amount for the one-time payment.
What should [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] do?

Endif
The order of the two options shown is randomized once for each respondent.
The order remains the same for the EV-Sell and EV-Buy questions shown to a
given respondent. The third appearance of the word “receive” (i.e., when it
appears after the underlined word “and”) in the text below is shown in bold if and
only if EV-Sell is asked after EV-Buy.
o
o

Receive a Social Security benefit of $[SSB+100] per month starting at age 65.
Receive [her/his] expected Social Security benefit of $[SSB] per month and receive a
one-time payment of $[LS_AMT[ROW,j ]] from Social Security at age 65.

If the respondent does not select any option, the respondent is prompted once to
answer this question. If the respondent still doesn’t give an answer, the variable j
is set to 5, so that we get skipped out of this loop.
If Respondent selects the option that does not contain the one-time payment:
A-10

Set ROW=ROW+2^(4-j)]
Note: this will increase the size of one-time payment in the next iteration,
so it makes the option that does not contain the one-time payment less
attractive.
Endif
Set j=j+1
This is the end of the loop for the EV-Buy questions.
Vignette reminder. The complexity vignette is shown again, but now preceded by the
word “Remember, ”.
Vignette 1 (“No added complexity”):

Remember, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no
children. [She/He] will retire and claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires,
[she/he] will have $100,000 saved for [her/his] retirement, and [she/he] will receive $[SSB] in monthly
Social Security benefits. Based on [her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told Mr. Smith
that [she/he] will almost certainly be alive at age 75 but almost certainly will not live beyond age 85.

Vignette 2 (“Complexity: Wide age range”):

Remember, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no
children. [She/He] will retire and claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires,
[she/he] expects to have $100,000 saved for [her/his] retirement, and expects to receive $[SSB] in
monthly Social Security benefits. Based on [her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told
Mrs. Jones that [she/he] has an 80% chance of being alive at age 70, a 50% chance of being alive at age
80, a 20% chance of being alive at age 90, and a 10% chance of being alive at age 95.

Vignette 3 (“Complexity: Added information”):

Remember, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is a single, 60-year old [woman/man] with no
children. Social Security rules state that you need at least 40 credits, or 10 years of work, to qualify for
Social Security – and [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] qualifies since [she/he] has worked
for 30 years. Since [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] was born in 1956, [her/his] full
retirement age is 66 years and 4 months, but [she/he] is eligible to start claiming starting at 62. [She/He]
will retire and claim [her/his] Social Security benefits at 65. When [she/he] retires, [she/he] will have
$100,000 saved for [her/his] retirement, and [she/he] will receive $[SSB] in monthly Social Security
benefits. Based on [her/his] current health and family history, doctors have told [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/
Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] that [she/he] will almost certainly be alive at age 75 but almost certainly will not
live beyond age 85.

EV-Buy Questions
Set the scalar j=1
Set the scalar ROW=1
For j=1 to 5
This is the start of the loop for EV-Buy questions.
The text for each iteration of the loop is shown on a new screen.
If j = 1, Display:
If EV-Buy is asked before EV-Sell:
A-11

Suppose that the Social Security Administration is considering a new policy that
gives people more choice in how they want to receive their benefits. As part of
this policy, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/ Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] is asked to make a
choice between two money amounts.
What should [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/ Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] do?

Else

Now consider a different way of giving people more choice in how they want to
receive their benefits. As part of this policy, [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/ Mrs.
Jones/Ms. Jones] is asked to make a choice between two money amounts.

Endif
Else, Display:

Now we ask you the same question but with a different amount for the one-time payment.
What should [Mrs. Smith/Mr. Smith/ Mrs. Jones/Ms. Jones] do?

Endif
The order of the two options shown is randomized once for each respondent.
The order remains the same for the EV-Sell and EV-Buy questions shown to a
given respondent. The word “payment” in the text below is shown bold if and
only if EV-Buy is asked after EV-Sell.
o
o

Receive a Social Security benefit of $[SSB-100] per month starting at age 65.
Receive [her/his] expected Social Security benefit of $[SSB] per month and make a onetime payment of $$[LS_AMT[ROW,j]] to Social Security at age 65.

If the respondent does not select any option, the respondent is prompted once to
answer this question. If the respondent still doesn’t give an answer, the variable j
is set to 5 so that we get skipped out of this loop.
If Respondent selects the option that does contain the one-time payment:
Set ROW=ROW+2^(4-j)]
Note: this will increase the size of one-time payment in the next iteration,
so it makes this option with the payment less attractive.
Endif
Set j=j+1
This is the end of the loop for the EV-Buy questions
End of survey instrument for experiment on annuity valuations. The remainder of
UAS49 consisted of approximately 24 screens with information and questions about
insurance decisions that were collected for a different project.

A-12

The Values of the Matrices for the Lump-Sum Amounts
The following tables show lump-sum amounts for three different starting values: low,
medium and high, which are randomized as mentioned above.
10,000

4,000

2,000

7,000

1,000

500
1,500

Row 1
Row 2

3,000

2,500

Row 3

3,500

Row 4

4,750

Row 5

6,250

Row 6

7,750

Row 7

9,250

Row 8

12,500

Row 9

17,500

Row 10

22,500

Row 11

27,500

Row 12

35,000

Row 13

50,000

Row 14

80,000

Row 15

200,000

Row 16

5,500

8,500

30,000

20,000

15,000

25,000

60,000

40,000

100,000

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Col. 5

We put the values of this in the 16x5 matrix LS_LOW. The ith row and jth column of this matrix is
denoted by LS_LOW[i,j]

A-13

20,000

4,000

2,000

10,000

1,000

500
1,500

Row 1
Row 2

3,000

2,500

Row 3

3,500

Row 4

5,500

Row 5

8,500

Row 6

12,500

Row 7

17,500

Row 8

22,500

Row 9

27,500

Row 10

35,000

Row 11

50,000

Row 12

70,000

Row 13

90,000

Row 14

150,000

Row 15

500,000

Row 16

7,000

15,000

60,000

30,000

25,000

40,000

100,000

80,000

200,000

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Col. 5

We put the values of this in the 16x5 matrix LS_MED. The ith row and jth column of this matrix is
denoted by LS_MED[i,j]

A-14

30,000

10,000

4,000

20,000

2,000

1,000
3,000

Row 1
Row 2

7,000

5,500

Row 3

8,500

Row 4

12,500

Row 5

17,500

Row 6

22,500

Row 7

27,500

Row 8

32,500

Row 9

37,500

Row 10

45,000

Row 11

55,000

Row 12

70,000

Row 13

90,000

Row 14

150,000

Row 15

500,000

Row 16

15,000

25,000

60,000

40,000

35,000

50,000

100,000

80,000

200,000

Col. 1

Col. 2

Col. 3

Col. 4

Col. 5

We put the values of this in the 16x5 matrix LS_HIGH. The ith row and jth column of this matrix is
denoted by LS_HIGH[i,j]

A-15

