Austerity and the Rise of the Nazi party
Gregori Galofré-Vilà, Christopher M. Meissner, Martin McKee, and David Stuckler
NBER Working Paper No. 24106
December 2017, Revised in September 2020
JEL No. E6,N1,N14,N44
ABSTRACT
We study the link between fiscal austerity and Nazi electoral success. Voting data from a
thousand districts and a hundred cities for four elections between 1930 and 1933 shows that areas
more affected by austerity (spending cuts and tax increases) had relatively higher vote shares for
the Nazi party. We also find that the localities with relatively high austerity experienced relatively
high suffering (measured by mortality rates) and these areas’ electorates were more likely to vote
for the Nazi party. Our findings are robust to a range of specifications including an instrumental
variable strategy and a border-pair policy discontinuity design.

Gregori Galofré-Vilà
Department of Sociology
University of Oxford
Manor Road Building
Oxford OX1 3UQ
United Kingdom
galofrevila@unibocconi.it
Christopher M. Meissner
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Avenue
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu

Martin McKee
Department of Health Services Research
and Policy
London School of Hygiene
& Tropical Medicine
15-17 Tavistock Place
London WC1H 9SH
United Kingdom
martin.mckee@lshtm.ac.uk
David Stuckler
Università Bocconi
Carlo F. Dondena Centre for Research on
Social Dynamics and Public Policy (Dondena)
Milan, Italy
david.stuckler@unibocconi.it

Austerity and the Rise of the Nazi party
Gregori Galofré-Vilà

Christopher M. Meissner

Martin McKee

David Stuckler

Abstract: We study the link between fiscal austerity and Nazi electoral success. Voting data
from a thousand districts and a hundred cities for four elections between 1930 and 1933 shows
that areas more affected by austerity (spending cuts and tax increases) had relatively higher
vote shares for the Nazi party. We also find that the localities with relatively high austerity
experienced relatively high suffering (measured by mortality rates) and these areas’
electorates were more likely to vote for the Nazi party. Our findings are robust to a range of
specifications including an instrumental variable strategy and a border-pair policy
discontinuity design.

Keywords: Austerity, Nazis, Radical Voters, Dictatorship.
JEL Code: N14, N34, N44, D7, D72.
Earlier versions of this paper were presented at the Australian National University, Bocconi University,
Hitotsubashi University, Humboldt University, NBER, New York University, New York University-Shanghai,
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics, UC Berkeley, UC Davis, UC Irvine, UCLA, University of
Groningen, University of Michigan and the 2018 World Economic History Congress. We thank Maja Adena,
Barbara Biasi, Dan Bogart, Fabio Braggion, Barry Eichengreen, Ruben Enikolopov, Harold James, Sanford
Jacoby, Peter Lindert, Dan Liu, Petra Moser, Maria Petrova, Burkhard Schipper, Nico Voigtländer, HansJoachim Voth and Noam Yuchtman, for a series of constructive suggestions.
Gregori Galofré-Vilà, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Department of Economics and Business and Barcelona
Graduate School of Economics, gregori.galofre@upf.edu. Christopher M. Meissner, Department of Economics
University of California, Davis and NBER, cmmeissner@ucdavis.edu. Martin McKee, Department of Health
Services Research and Policy, London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, martin.mckee@lshtm.ac.uk.
David Stuckler, Dondena Centre for Research on Social Dynamics and Public Policy and Department of
Policy Analysis and Public Management, University of Bocconi, david.stuckler@unibocconi.it.

1

1. Introduction
In 1928 the German Nazi party earned just over two percent of the votes in the general
federal elections. By mid-1932 it had received 38 percent of votes in the national elections
becoming the largest political party in the Reichstag. How did this shift to the extreme
far-right happen so quickly? Economic factors like high unemployment associated with the
Great Depression, socio-cultural issues, and the excessively punitive Treaty of Versailles are
well studied. They undoubtedly played an important role in the rise of the Nazi party. Still,
the rapid growth of support for the Nazi party well into the Great Depression remains the
subject of considerable debate (Eichengreen 2018; Ferguson 1996; James 1986; Satayanth et
al. 2017; Temin 1990; Voth 2020).
In this paper we investigate the association between the austerity measures implemented
by the German government between 1930 and 1932 and voters’ increased support for the Nazi
party. A growing literature studies the interactions between political preferences and fiscal
policy with evidence that austerity packages are correlated with rising extremism (Alesina
et al. 2019; Bor 2017; Eichengreen 2015, 2018; Fetzer 2019; Ponticelli and Voth 2020). It
stands to reason that the austerity measures implemented in Germany in the early 1930s
played a role. However, there is no direct quantitative assessment of this issue for the Weimar
republic of which we are aware.
During this period, Heinrich Brüning of the Center Party, and Germany’s chancellor
between March 1930 and May 1932, implemented a set of measures via executive decree
in order to balance the country’s finances. These austerity measures included real cuts in
spending and transfers as well as higher tax rates. According to Brüning, the consequent
suffering would be highly visible, thereby eliciting international sympathy for the Germans
and helping put an end to the unpopular reparations imposed at Versailles (Evans 2003).
To test the hypothesis that austerity can explain increased Nazi vote share, we use city
and district level election returns for the federal elections of 1930, 1932 (July and November)
and 1933. We then link local vote shares to different proxies for city, district and state-level
fiscal policy changes while also controlling for other potential explanations for the rise of

2

the Nazis, such as unemployment, changes in wages and economic output. Our results are
robust to inclusion of a number of different controls and specifications including city-level
time trends, state by year fixed effects and electoral district by year fixed effects.
The observational data we use to study austerity and extremism have a number of features
which enable us to overcome obvious issues of reverse causality and endogeneity. Brüning’s
policies on spending and taxes were not expected. Instead they became an outcome of
the unexpectedly severe economic and financial crisis. They were decided at the Reich
level by Brüning and his cabinet with implicit support of the Reichstag. Spending cuts
and tax rise were uniformly applied across the nation so that the policy decisions were
exogenous to the preferences of specific cities and districts. As noted by Balderston (1993:
225) “the progressive ‘nationalization’ of taxing and spending decisions, justifies historians
in the responsibility they place on the Brüning cabinet and on Brüning personally, for the
fiscal balance during the slump.”
Limits on spending and on changes to taxes, policy variables often formerly controlled
by local authorities, were also imposed. Successive pay cuts to national civil service salaries
are an example. Although some expenditure cuts were out of the hands of localities and
mandated by the national government, some budget categories were hit harder than others.
This fact means that nationally imposed budget cuts might have differential impacts on
localities depending on the pre-determined patterns of spending and reliance on the national
government for transfers to fund different categories of spending. We use city-level variation
in the pre-austerity reliance on Reich transfers and national changes in transfers as a shiftshare instrumental variable for subsequent spending declines. Since states, localities and
the central government were unable to borrow on international capital markets after 1930
(Schuker 1988), localities were forced by markets to traverse the depression with highly
disruptive fiscal shocks.
As for taxes, a similar logic applies. The Reich maintained control over a number of
specific taxes determining, for example, the statutory marginal rates for income taxes and
corporation turnover taxes. Changes to the statutory marginal rates applied equally and
evenly to all states and localities, but lower brackets had higher percentage increases in in-

3

come tax rates (Newcomer 1936). We use variation at the local level in the initial distribution
of taxable income across tax brackets and national changes in tax policy to instrument for
the austerity-driven tax hikes. To make identification valid, we need to avoid confounding
our fiscal shock with an unobservable economic shock correlated with income distribution.
On the income distribution, Dell (2007) and Gómez-León and de Jong (2019), show that
Gini coefficients and top income shares were fairly constant between 1928 and 1933.
Higher Nazi vote share could be because of resentment arising from distributional battles
for slices of the fiscal pie in difficult times. There is clearly a distributional component to these
changes, the percentage rise in tax rates being much higher for the lower income brackets.
Wueller (1933) also discusses that while tax revenue had traditionally been retained where
it was collected, intra-state redistribution was increasingly becoming need based during the
Depression.
We also use a number of different econometric specifications to eliminate further concerns
about endogeneity. We employ both city/district fixed effects models and long differences
to focus on within locality variation in Nazi support. We are also able to circumscribe the
control group by matching districts to neighboring districts just across state borders as in
Dube et al. (2010). While relevant observables were spatially smooth, fiscal policy across the
state borders was sharply different because state policies responded to state-wide concerns.
With this identification strategy, we are also able to control for common economic shocks
correlated with the initial characteristics of localities by using period by district-pair fixed
effect interaction terms. Even after controlling for local economic shocks between 1930 and
1932 in this way, austerity remains a statistically, economically, and politically significant
determinant of Nazi vote share.
We also provide some novel quantitative estimates concerning the channels by which
austerity mattered. To do so, we study the relationship between mortality rates and austerity.
We find a plausible link since where public spending on health care dropped more, mortality
was higher. These places also saw a relatively large increase in Nazi support at the polls.
Finally, looking at archival documents of Nazi propaganda, we document how Nazi leaders
invoked austerity to attack Brüning and the Weimar Republic and how Brüning’s tax rises

4

were seen as inefficient and unfair by the German masses.
Even though there has been a German debate on whether there was an alternative to
austerity (Borchardt 1980; Büttner 1989; Ritschl 1998; Voth 1993) and speculation that
austerity played a role in the rise of the Nazi party, to our knowledge no previous research
has directly tested the quantitative impact and the channels by which fiscal austerity mattered. Falter et al. (1986), Frey and Weck (1981), King et al. (2008) and Stögbauer and
Komlos (2004) studied the economic shocks of the period but did not use fiscal data and the
transmission mechanisms emphasized are different from ours. Previous work focused on a
direct channel from lower disposable incomes and unemployment to frustration at the polls.
On global comparisons, one study evaluated the impact of the Great Depression and austerity on voting patterns in 171 elections in 28 countries (Bromhead et al. 2013) and another
looked at the European level (Ponticelli and Voth 2020). Yet these have not considered the
particular context of Weimar Germany.
Regarding the connection between political competition and differential effects of the
crisis, the literature notes that the lowest status groups and the unemployed turned to the
Communists (Falter et al. 1986, King et al. 2008), but those just above in the economic
hierarchy, who had more to lose from the tax hikes and spending cuts, seem to have favored
the Nazis. Between 1930 and 1933 the Nazis gained votes from all walks of life. Yet,
Evans (2003), Falter et al. (1986), King et al. (2008), Voigtländer and Voth (2019) have
documented how the party was ‘underrepresented’ among the working classes, in industrial
cities, and in Catholic regions. We control for these fixed factors and allow for interactions
between them and our measures of austerity.
Our baseline results show that Brüning’s austerity had a sizable effect. Each one standard
deviation increase in austerity was associated with between one quarter to one half of one
standard deviation of the dependent variable. In localities where austerity was more severe,
Nazi vote share was significantly higher. Our novel use of within locality variation in the size
of the fiscal shock, sheds light on the local and national experience of democratic decline.
The rest of the paper is as follows. In the next section we provide a detailed account
of the main existing explanations for the rise of the Nazis. Section 3 reviews how austerity
5

was implemented and Section 4 presents the historical context of the different elections in
Germany between 1930 and 1933. In Sections 5 and 6 we show our main results and robustness checks for the city- and district-level outcomes using spending and tax data. Section 7
concludes.

2. Competing explanations
There are many competing explanations for the stark rise of the Nazi party in Weimar
Germany. The conventional explanation is the impact of the Great Depression. Those hit
hardest by the economic downturn held the incumbent parties responsible for their situation,
punishing them by voting for the Nazi party. Economic activity peaked in Germany in 1928,
driven by a sharp downturn in investment (Ritschl 2002; Temin 1971). Later, the cessation
of capital inflows and a crisis in the German banking sector culminated in a slowdown
in the growth of credit, while other international shocks prolonged the downturn. Yet, the
unwillingness of the Reichsbank to stop the deflation mattered but cannot necessarily explain
regional variation in Nazi support.
A similar point could be made with respect to the increasing numbers of unemployed
workers, soaring from 1.4 million in 1928 to 5.6 million in 1932. Unemployment also reached
very high levels in other countries such the United States around that time, without being accompanied by electoral radicalization (Eichengreen and Hatton 1988). Additionally,
unemployed were more likely to vote for the Communist party or the Social Democrats (in
Protestant precincts) rather than the Nazi party (Evans 2003; King et al. 2008), as the Communist party was perceived as the party that traditionally represented workers’ interests.
A third explanation invokes resentment about high debt repayments imposed on Germany
in the Treaty of Versailles. These debts initially totaled up to 260 percent of 1913 GDP
(Ferguson 1997; Ritschl 2013). Although France and Britain had war debt burdens similar
to Germany, the Versailles agreements treated Germany as a conquered enemy, forcing it to
pay a large share of the allies’ costs of the war. This placed financial demands on Germany

6

that were very difficult to meet and which were dubbed as ‘cruel’ by some (Keynes 1920;
Temin and Vines 2014). However, Germany’s war debts were never completely paid (GalofréVilà et al. 2019). German war debts were postponed in the Hoover moratorium of 1931 or
temporarily suspended in the Lausanne Conference a year later.1
Fiscal austerity might simply have been a driver of economic collapse if multipliers were
large enough, but Ritschl (2013) reports that these were small. If austerity mattered, it
must have been something about the unique way Germany experienced it. Even if austerity
did not have a contractionary effect on aggregate demand, it still might have had distributional consequences that in turn affected how people voted. Austerity not only hurt the
lower middle classes and elites, by increasing tax rates on profits and income, but ostensibly also had a major impact on people’s welfare by cutting key social spending lines after
1929. Brüning was commonly known as the ‘Hunger Chancellor’, stressing how these budget
cuts threatened living conditions. There is in fact some qualitative consensus on Brüning’s
devastating legacy. Feinstein et al. (2008: 90) opine that “Brüning introduced a succession
of austerity decrees. The descent was cumulative and catastrophic.” Several authors also
noted that austerity could have contributed to political extremism. For instance, Feldman
(2005: 494) comments that “Brüning’s reliance on emergency decrees had paved the way
for a right-wing rule” and Eichengreen (2015: 139) that “Brüning’s unrelenting austerity, by
plunging the economy deeper into recession, increased political polarization”.
Hitler also viewed austerity as a springboard to power. Twelve days after Brüning enacted
his fourth and last emergency decree, Hitler issued a mass pamphlet titled The Great Illusion
of the Last Emergency Decree. He concluded the letter saying that “Although that was not
the intention, this emergency decree will help my party to victory, and therefore put an
end to the illusions of the present system”. There are also attacks on Brüning’s cabinet on
1

Other explanations invoke the Weimar Republic’s electoral system, where each party was allotted a

number of seats in the Reichstag proportional to the votes received, which cleared the path for small parties
to enter the Reichstag (Jepsen 1953). Historians also stress the animosity between the two major parties
of the left and difficulties in building lasting coalitions. However, Evans (2003) notes that proportional
representation did not, in fact, encourage the rise of the extreme right, and alternative electoral systems
might have given the Nazi party even more seats.

7

earlier fiscal plans. For instance, in October 1931 Hitler wrote an Open letter from Adolf
Hitler to the Reich Chancellor in which he asked “where has the hereby-reduced number of
unemployed been left? Where are the successes of the ‘rescue of agriculture’ ? And when,
Mister Chancellor Brüning, did the then-promised reduction of taxes finally begin?”
These pamphlets also made promises to relax the budget constraint if the Nazis were
elected. For instance, on May 1932 a pamphlet titled Emergency Economic Program of
the NSDAP offered “fundamental improvements in agriculture in general, multiple years of
taxation exemption for the settlers, cheap loans and the creation of markets by improving
transportation routes, and making them less expensive.” On the welfare system, “National
Socialism will do all it can to maintain the social insurance system, which has been driven
to collapse by the present System.”2 .

3. Austerity and the German elections
Before delving into the implications of austerity on the Nazi electoral success, it is first
necessary to review how austerity was implemented and the context of each election. Brüning
was appointed as German Chancellor by President von Hindenburg in March 1930 and
fiscal reforms were quickly implemented, with a first austerity plan in July 1930. Austerity
was implemented by emergency decree under the article 48 of the constitution, with the
Reichstag eventually consenting without formal debate. From its beginning, austerity was
highly unpopular, leading von Hindenburg to dissolve the Reichstag and call new elections.3
In the elections of September 1930, the Social Democratic Party (SPD), the political
home of the worker movement, remained as the largest party in the Reichstag (yet, moving
2

There is also evidence that austerity formed part of Goebbels’ propaganda machine. For instance, in

a speech in 2 May 1931 at the Reichstag, Goebbels very prominently also alluded to tax pressure on the
middle-class (Goebbels 1931). We thank Hans-Joachim Voth for calling this speech to our attention.
3

As Eichengreen (2018: 86) notes, “that the most dramatic cuts were imposed by decree, circumventing

normal legislative deliberation, did not foster popular admiration of the politicians then in office or enhance
the legitimacy of the constitutional system.”

8

from 29.8 percent of the total votes in May 1928 to 24.5 percent in 1930). The Center
party, which was Brüning’s party, also started to lose popularity (moving from 12.1 to 11.8
percent), and the Communist party, the main party of protest for those workers disenchanted
by the Weimar regime, managed to collect new votes (moving from 10.6 to 13.1 percent).
The German National People’s Party (DNVP), a bourgeois, xenophobe and far-right party
that shared many of the Nazi’s extremist views, declined from 14.2 percent of total votes
to 7 percent. Above all these changes, support to the Nazi party surged from almost no
support to more than 6 million voters (moving from less than 3 percent to 18.3 percent).
Despite austerity was only implemented some months in advance, the September 1930
election was a key turning point in German history, because it was seen as a withering verdict
against austerity–a message that went unheeded. As discussed by Temin (1990: 82) “. . . it
is clear that the vote of 1930 was a resounding rejection of Brüning’s policies at an early
stage.” Initially, only the Nazis (and to some extent the Communists) campaigned against
austerity, with the DNVP struggling to find a coherent response on the austerity front. For
instance, Fulda (2009: 158) reviews that for the first emergency decree, “the parliamentary
DNVP was split: while Hugenberg’s followers voted against it, the group around Westarp
decided to support it.” He also comments that when “the tension between the pro-Brüning
DNVP parliamentarians around Westarp and Hugenberg’s supporters increased. . . Goebbels
noted in his diary that the DNVP was ‘finished’: ‘All grist to our mill.’”4 As for the SPD,
Brüning’s memoirs highlight that he often turned to members of the SPD for support.
Successive emergency decrees in June 1931, October 1931 and December 1931 raised nearly
all of the main taxes controlled by the Reich (income, wage, turnover, excise duties, tariffs),
put limits to spending and exclusions from unemployment and relief benefits, and mandated
civil service pay cuts (over 50 percent of the state level spending bill according to Balderston
(1993)).

4

By July 1930, the DNVP was split in two parties, with Westarp’s followers founding the Konservative

Volkspartei (supporting Brüning’s government), and the rest commanded by Hugenberg, radicalized and
tried to approach the Nazi party.

9

By the end of May 1932, Brüning was removed from the Chancellorship and was replaced
by von Papen. The elections of July 1932 boosted Nazi popularity even more, achieving 37.3
percent of the votes. Yet, the Nazis lacked an overall majority at the Reichstag and von Papen
continued as Chancellor. In the second half of 1932, von Papen signaled the end of austerity
and started to introduce some stimulus packages, involving employment programs, tax credits
and subsidies for new employment and public works projects (Evans 2003; Feinstein et al.
2008). Despite any short-lived effect was modest in magnitude compared to the cumulative
effect of Brüning’s austerity, the easing of austerity, along with the ostensible cancellation of
War debts at the Lausanne conference and an improved economic environment,5 coincided
with a decline in Nazi vote share in the elections of November 1932 (collecting 33.1 percent
of the votes). As O’Rourke (2010) comments, “by this stage Brüning was gone, his successor
adopted some modestly stimulative policies, and there were signs of a partial recovery. Not
coincidentally, in November 1932 the Nazi share dipped to 33.1 percent; but by then it was
too late, and the Weimar Republic was doomed.”
von Papen had virtually no support in the Reichstag, and in an ill-attempt to increase
his support, he called for new elections in November of 1932. Yet, given mass discontent and
social instabilities, later on Hindenburg appointed Schleicher of the DNVP as Chancellor.6
He lasted for less than two months. Adolf Hitler was appointed chancellor on 30 January
ahead of the decisive elections of March 1933 where the Nazi party became the largest party
(with 44 percent of the votes) and built a bare working majority with the DNVP that offered
8 percent of the votes.7 These were the last elections of the Weimar Republic, and were
tarnished by violence and intimidation and might not be regarded as free and democratic.
Under Brüning’s mandate, there was a process of centralizing the fiscal policy and the
national government began to limit the ability of states to raise tax rates as well as limit
5

Between 1932 and 1933 real GDP grew by 6 percent. By comparison, real GDP fell by 8 percent between

1931 and 1932.
6

Schleicher also introduced some public works programs.

7

In the elections of 1933, the DNVP presented in the elections as part of a coalition, the Kampffront

Schwarz-Weiß-Rot, which was an electoral alliance of three parties: the DNVP, the Stahlhelm and Landbund.

10

federal authority spending (Balderston 1993).8 James (1986: 76) also commented that regional governments were “left with odious taxes and falling revenues.” Although austerity
was determined at the Reich level, the extent to which it mattered varied regionally. This
variation depended on how lower levels of government allocated their revenue to different
types of expenditure and what the sources of their tax revenues were. Around 40 percent
of the spending cuts were implemented by local authorities, mainly municipalities and the
so-called administrative divisions (Regierungsbezirke), 22 percent by the different states and
around one third by the Reich (Newcomer 1936). Hence, the impact of Reich mandated cuts
on the states varied according to a number of pre-determined fixed factors, including population and land area, number of schools, highway mileage, and the distribution of income
(Newcomer 1936: 205).9
Political affinity to Brüning’s policies might have mattered, but in essence, spending cuts
were mandated at the central level. The room for maneuver in the states was also highly
constrained. States could no longer borrow on international capital markets after 1930 and
only a small share of state spending was accounted for by local tax revenue over which a
state had control. While local politicians could potentially shift spending between categories,
the Reich increasingly dictated the way in which states should spend money, put caps on
spending categories, and in many instances, they relied heavily on targeted Reich subsidies
or transfers. States were thus also constrained both by an inability to legislate tax rates, and
by the traditional ways of re-distributing tax revenue. Our bottom line is that responding
to the recession with discretionary spending was not much of a possibility and both income
8

There were two main bases for collection and re-distributing revenue: origin and population. While the

origin base (returning revenue to the locality where it was collected) failed to take into account the local
need factor, redistribution by the population principle could be effective in terms of ‘need’. Yet, the extent
of re-distribution depended on state political bargains and most of the taxes in question were distributed on
origin basis (Wueller 1933: 38).
9

It is possible that greater unemployment also generated greater transfers via the unemployment insurance

scheme. Yet, by 1931, the period of eligibility for unemployment relief was drastically restricted and nearly
all people under 21 years were excluded from welfare benefits. These measures were offset by the end of 1931
somewhat with greater relief payments and a partial rollback of the exclusion (Balderston 1993).

11

tax10 and expenditure were largely out of the hands of state governments and local authorities.11

4. Data
We collected data from official German sources (see our Data Appendix for details). Our
analysis begins by measuring the impact of austerity on electoral outcomes at the citylevel. Data on electoral returns for the Reichstag elections are from the official publication
Statistik des Deutschen Reiches (volumes Wahlem zum Reichstag), with all the other data
at the city-level coming from the Statistisches Jahrbuch Deutscher Städte, which report data
for cities above 50,000 inhabitants (n = 98). For each city, we collected city spending data
for each fiscal year from 1929/30 to 1932/33 which includes transfers from higher levels of
government and spending by budget category, in 1,000 RM. Such detailed data at city-level
allow us to look at the type of spending and the potential mechanisms by which spending
changes can affect electoral outcomes. The fiscal years ran from 1 April to 31 March and
when we say 1929 this refers to the fiscal year 1929/30. We also collected data from the
federal transfers to cities (a variable called Überweisungen aus Reichsteuern) to construct a
Bartik-style instrument as discussed below.
To test competing explanations, we further used data on city level unemployment. Unemployment is defined as the number of people in the labor force not working and registered
in the local offices as unemployed. We proxy city economic conditions by the construction
of new residential apartment buildings. We also collected mortality data from the bulletins
of the Reichs-Gesundheitsblatt. These bulletins report detailed mortality data at the weekly
level for cities with a population larger than 100,000 inhabitants (n = 51).

10

Income tax was a key tax in the Weimar revenue system (with 20 percent of total revenue).

11

Here Newcomer (1936: 205) comments that “it is unfortunate that the equalizing factors adopted have

been vitiated in a number of instances by guarantees of pre-war income.” See also Wueller (1933: 36).

12

We also study district (kreis) level data (n = 1,024), where data on taxes, but not
spending are available. Electoral and fiscal data on taxes are from the official Statistik des
Deutschen Reiches.12 For taxes, we collected data on the number of taxpayers, total taxable
income, and total revenue for each state (in 1,000 RM) on two main federally administered
income taxes: the lohnsteuer, a withholding tax deducted at source and the einkommenssteuer, an ex-post income declaration tax only paid by middle and high rate payers. For the
‘wage tax’ (lohnsteuer ), data are available in 1928/29 and 1932/33, and for the ‘income tax’
(einkommenssteuer ) for the years 1928/29, 1929/30, and 1932/33 (see also Dell 2007). Despite missing data for some years, the available years allow us to capture the main changes in
taxation in the period of interest (September 1930 to March 1933), and rather than having
highly temporally disaggregated data, we rely on benchmark years under the assumption
that the impact of austerity is cumulative. We also collected state-level data on taxes (the
lohnsteuer and einkommenssteuer ) for the same years as in the district sample.13
From the statistical abstracts Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich, we collected
state-level data on spending, unemployment (number of people in the labor force not working), an index of hourly wages14 and a proxy economic output (generation of electricity, in
1,000 kWh). For the latter one, we use a proxy based on electricity generation, as these two
correlate closely, since the vast majority of goods and services are produced using electricity.
Other district-level data used in the data appendix, such as the number of welfare recipients,
are from Statistik des Deutschen Reiches (volume Die Öffentliche Fürsorge im Deutschen
Reich). Table A1 reports the main summary statistics on key variables.
On the magnitude of austerity, as Figure 1 shows, between 1930 and 1932 state level
real expenditure was cut by 8 percent (nominal total spending fell by about 25 percent)
12

In the Data Appendix, we show the spatial distribution of district-level income taxes.

13

For simplicity, when we say States, we also mean Prussian Provinces.

14

We created a state-level index of nominal wages averaging the monthly data from the hourly wages paid

in four occupations (construction, wood and skilled and unskilled workers in metallurgy) in 38 big cities
which have been located within each of the states.

13

and Reich level real expenditure fell by 14 percent (30 percent nominal).15 These were not
insignificant components of aggregate demand since together, state and Reich expenditure
totaled close to 30 percent of GDP in 1928/29.
[Figure 1 about here]

5. Nazi support and City-level spending
With the launch of austerity in July 1930, the number of votes for the Nazi party soared
from 6 million to 14 million between the elections of September 1930 and July 1932. Indeed,
as Figure 2 suggest, there is a close negative association between the increase in the Nazi
vote share between September 1930 and July 1932 and the change in city-level spending
between 1929/30 and 1930/31. We next explore these issues more rigorously and implement
some empirical strategies to limit biases due to endogeneity.
[Figure 2 about here]

5.1. Results
We begin our analysis reporting the results of statistical models where the dependent variable
is the level of the Nazi vote share across cities in federal elections. We use city fixed effects
throughout so that we rely on within city variation to identify of the impact of austerity on
Nazi vote share . With these specifications, our models yield a difference-in-differences with
an intensity of treatment interpretation based on:

NAZIct = α+β1ln(Expendituresct)+β2ln(Unemploymentct)+β3ln(Outputct)+µc +δt +εct

(1)

where c is a city, t is a calendar year, and NAZI denotes the vote share of the Nazi
party as measured by the ratio of the number of votes to the Nazi party over the total
15

The spending data includes transfers to other public authorities.

14

number of (valid) votes cast. Expenditures ct comprise all categories of city expenditure,
Unemployment ct is the number of registered unemployed in a city, Output ct is our proxy for
economic output in a city and εct is an error term. These control variables are expressed in
natural logarithms.16 We standardize data to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation
of one, so coefficients across models are directly comparable. We also include city fixed effects
(µc ) and fixed effects for the calendar years of 1932 and 1933 (δ t ). We report standard errors
clustered at the administrative division level. There are 44 clusters and by clustering at
the administrative division (above the city-level), we allow for arbitrary correlations of the
error term within the cluster. Additionally, many of the variables were decided above the
city-level and fixed effects already pick up city-level correlations.17
In Table 1 (column 2) we show that a one standard deviation increase in the natural
logarithm of spending is associated with a decrease in Nazi vote share (in standard deviation
terms) by from -0.42 (95% CI: -0.68 to -0.15). This specification, which pools data for the
four elections between 1930 and 1933, is robust to the inclusion of administrative division
or state by period fixed effects (columns 3 and 4).18 These lasts specifications control for
time-varying unobservable shocks or arbitrary unobserved trends at administrative division
or state level. Since shocks are likely to be highly spatially correlated, these controls mop
up the effect of spending changes after controlling for local economic and political shocks.
This table also displays the results for other competing explanations for the rise of the
Nazi party. Despite the fact that the coefficient on unemployment typically shows a positive
sign, it is only statistically significant in column 4. As Ferguson (1997: 267) notes, this is
16

We use the values of city-level government spending for fiscal year 1929/30 for the elections of September

1930, values for 1931/32 for the elections of July and November 1932 and values of 1932/33 for the election
of 1933
17

As a robustness check, throughout the paper, we also explored clustering at the city- and state-level

(unreported here), and found that spatial dependence is not a major concern in our data. For a similar
finding see Satyanath et al. 2017, footnote 22.
18

Specifically, we interact state fixed effects with a second period (1932) for the sample using 1930 and

1932 elections. For the sample that includes all elections we interact state and administrative division level
fixed effects with an indicator for each year 1932 and 1933.

15

a likely outcome, as “it is a popular misconception that because high unemployment coincided with rising Nazi support, the unemployed must have voted for Hitler. Although some
did, unemployed workers were more likely to turn to Communism than to Nazism.” When
controlling for austerity and unemployment, in most cases the economic output variable is
also not statistically significantly.
[Table 1 about here]
We next modify the outcome variable to be the vote share among other parties. This
change allows us to see how austerity affected the rest of the German political spectrum.
To also show that our results are not driven by a single election (or group of elections), we
provide the results in three separate forest plots pooling data for the elections of 1930 and
1933; elections of 1930 and 1932 (both elections); and the four elections between 1930 and
1933.
Results for the Nazi party in Figure 3 show that there is a negative and statistically
significantly association between spending and the Nazi party vote share in the different
elections between 1930 and 1933. Results for the other parties, suggest that austerity mostly
drew votes from the Center party. This is not surprising as the Center party was Brüning’s
party and the party became very unpopular for consolidating the budget. For instance,
Straumann (2019: 207) comments that “the harsh austerity measures of December 1931. . .
pushed the popularity of the Brüning cabinet down to a new low.” Results also display a
positive sign for the SPD (although not always statistically significant), and the Communist
party (when avoiding the violent elections of 1933). Results for the DNVP highlight their
lack of political position on the austerity front.
[Figure 3 about here]

16

5.2. Robustness checks
In Table A2 we also pool all elections and study the dynamics of the effects via interaction
terms. Specifically, we interacted the spending data with a dummy for each election so
we estimated 3 coefficients: 7/1932, 11/1932 and 1/1933 and then one for austerity uninteracted which corresponds to the ‘omitted’ category which is 1930. In this way, we show
that the austerity effect is stable across time, as the sample is kept stable and the reference
point still remains 1930. We further test for the validity of our estimates in different ways.19
For instance, in Table A3, we divided each of the right-hand side variables by population
to show that our fixed effects models are very likely to proxy for a stable population over
the short horizon between 1930 and 1933. Table A4 further explores the interaction of the
shock of the Depression with social structure. We interacted year fixed effects with the share
of blue-collar workers in 1925 and the share of the population identifying as Catholic or
Protestant.20 The time interactions on religious identity are significant, suggesting a role for
such interaction. However, austerity mattered in a similar way in Catholic and Protestant
areas, though the impact is higher in places with a Jewish community.21

19

We also used the data on the city number of entries to the Nazi party from Satyanath et al. (2017)

and explored the impact of austerity on joining the Nazi party. Specifically, we use the log of the number
of entries in the Nazi party in the preceding year and we focus on the inflow of people into the party rather
than on the stock of party members. Using a specification equivalent to equation (1) and pooling data from
1931-1933, the results strengthen the case that nationalist and racist ideals (Shirer 1960), became more
salient when compounded by austerity, driving people towards the Nazi ideology.
20

Using equation (1), we also split the sample for Prussian and non-Prussian cities and found that in both

cases results are negative and statistically significant, with point estimates being larger in Prussian cities.
21

In Table A5 we also show that results hold when we control for the severity of the depression using data

on the number of welfare recipients. While this variable might be colinear with spending, not controlling
for spending but for the number of recipients suggests that expectations might also have mattered. People
could also respond to perceived austerity rather than actual exposure to austerity.

17

5.3. IV and Endogeneity
One may worry that changes in spending were choice variables reflecting the (unobservable)
state of the underlying economy or the level of local political competition. Politicians could
alter spending levels in response to these and their perceptions of these and other variables
making it problematic to infer the impact of exogenous changes in spending on votes for
an extreme party like the Nazis. To deal with the potential endogeneity of expenditures,
we employ a shift share instrumental variable in the spirit of Aizer (2010) which relies on
variation at the national in “across-the-board” cuts imposed by Brüning. Consider the
following stylized equation for total government spending G in city c in fiscal year t:

Gct = GF ct + GLct

(2)

Spending in city c is composed of two components. One is federal transfers or the federally
mandated level of spending GF ct . This variable could also be construed as local spending
based on local claims to federal revenue streams where the subscript F denotes federal
transfers or mandates to city c. The other component, GLct , is based on local decision
making and local revenues. Assuming that this spending is constant, then the change in
total spending between period t and period t−1 given an (α−1) percent change in federal
spending applied to all localities (0 ≤ α ≤ 1) is given by:

%∆Gct =

GF ct−1
(α-1)
Gct−1

(3)

The absolute value of the percentage change in spending is directly related to the share of
federal spending in total city spending. That is, the larger the share of GF ct−1 in Gct−1 , the
larger the percentage fall in total spending, (%∆Gct ) for a (α-1)% change in GF ct−1 . Our
instrument is therefore the initial share of federal transfers in total city spending in 1929
interacted with year indicators represented by δ t which themselves proxy for the “acrossthe-board” nationally imposed spending cuts. This two-stage least squares approach is
reminiscent of Nakamura and Steinsson (2014) or Chodorow-Reich et al. (2012).
18

1929
To satisfy exogeneity we assume that E [( GGFCC1929
δ t )ect ]=0. In a broader survey on shift1929
)
share instruments, Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020) argue that if initial shares ( GGFCC1929

are exogenous, the Bartik-style or shift-share instrument boils down to using initial shares
(interacted with time dummies) as excluded instruments. With two sectors they also show it
is only necessary to use one sector share and this is equivalent to a Bartik approach. To satisfy
the exclusion restriction, one would have to believe that reliance on the central government
in 1928 was not related to the unobservables driving the change in Nazi vote share. As
suggested by Goldsmith-Pinkham et al. (2020), we tested this by regressing the initial share
on observables such as the share of Protestants and Catholics, levels of unemployment or
the construction of new buildings. In none of the cases were these variables statistically
significant. For relevance, the log deviation in spending from the within city mean must
be correlated with the initial dependency on the Reich transfers. This would evidently be
true unless local spending changes completely offset (orthogonal) Reich spending changes.
This is not possible since localities could not fund spending by borrowing due to financial
market dislocation and due to the fact that total tax revenue was falling due to the decline
in aggregate activity.
As Table 2 shows, using OLS the impact in terms of standard deviations in vote share for
the Nazi party associated with a one standard deviation increase in the percentage change
in spending is -0.78 (95% CI: -1.21 to -0.34) in the elections of 1930 and 1932 (both) and
-0.55 (95% CI: -0.77 to -0.34) when considering all elections.22 Results using 2SLS are just
15% larger (in absolute magnitude) than the OLS results in column 4, showing that OLS
results may not be highly biased. In Table A6 we also show the Bartik results using models
in differences.
[Table 2 about here]

22

We also checked for linearity categorizing the spending data into bins and including the dummy variables

for the bins in the model. We also explored this with bins of different sizes in the spending data. The
assumption of linearity is largely suitable.

19

5.4. Mechanisms
In Figure 4 we modified equation (1) and, instead of all city level expenditure, we study
the impact of changes in different types of expenditure. Interestingly, most of the effect
of austerity is driven by spending changes in health and wellbeing (-1.03: 95% CI: -1.53
to -0.52) and housing (-0.21: 95% CI: -0.39 to -0.03). These were among the budgets most
affected by austerity.23 The size of the effect for spending changes in health and wellbeing are
32% higher than the overall effects of the spending changes presented in the previous table,
showing that social spending changes plausibly exacerbated the suffering of the German
masses. There is also a positive effect of expenditure in construction and the Nazi vote share
between the elections of September 1930 and 1933. As we have already seen, by the end
of 1932 von Papen and Schleicher introduced some tax discounts, construction and works
programs, along with Hitler’s promise to construct an autobahn symbols of a new era of
economic competence and end of austerity (Voigtländer and Voth 2019). However, the effect
disappears when we introduce data for the austerity years and the elections of 1932.
[Figure 4 about here]
The literature also stresses that Brüning’s fiscal plans were part of a political strategy to
elicit international sympathy for German suffering putting an end to WW1 reparations.24
Coinciding with the fiscal retrenchment, mortality rates, which had been declining, started
to rise rapidly after 1932. One mechanism for the rise of populist parties is that they gain
the most votes where health fares worst. This link was outlined by some commentators at
the time. For instance, by the fall of October 1930, Hjalmar Schacht (former head of the
Reichsbank) gave an interview to the American Press saying that “If the German people are
23

As noted by Straumann (2019: 70) on the Second Emergency Decree, “the plan proposed a series

of spending cuts, notably of health insurance compensations and of revenues apportioned to states and
municipalities.”
24

This strategy, was never a clear political winner, and soon it lacked an economic rationale. By June

1931, the Hoover Moratorium had suspended Germany’s WW1 debts for one year. A year later, in July
1932, reparations were permanently postponed at the Lausanne Conference.

20

going to starve, there are going to be many more Hitlers” (The New York Times, 3 October
1930).
Next, we report suggestive evidence that the effect of spending cuts was through the
channel of higher mortality. In Table 3 we used equation (1) and also add a control for mortality. Since we use city fixed effects, mortality here can be interpreted as excess mortality,
that is within city changes or deviations of mortality from its within sample mean. Instead
of overall spending, we use only spending in health and wellbeing. Column 1 shows that
after controlling for unemployment and economic output and other fixed effects, increases
in spending are negatively and statistically related to Nazi party vote. Similarly, column 2
shows that, without controlling for spending, higher mortality is associated with higher Nazi
vote share. However, once we add the mortality control (column 3), expenditure is no longer
statistically significant and the size of the coefficient declines by 34 percent. If we remove
the deaths from cancers and a category for ill-defined causes, the coefficient for mortality
remains statistically significant at 1 percent level of confidence (column 5), but the coefficient on spending declines by more than half, and it is not statistically significant. Although
results are weaker for infant mortality, possibly because as others have noted, births to the
poorest families fall disproportionately during a recession (Dehejia and Lleras-Muney 2004),
they display a low p-value (column 7). This result further illustrates that the impact of austerity was potentially channeled through suffering (as measured by changes in mortality).
It is also interesting that the coefficients on unemployment and economic output once we
control for austerity are similar before and after we include the mortality control.
[Table 3 about here]

21

6. Nazi support and district-level taxes
6.1. Results
We next move to district-level data. Since spending data at the district level are unavailable
from national sources, we rely on within district variation in income taxes as our measure
of austerity. We assume that for an individual voter, changes in taxes have an impact
analogous, if not proportional, to cuts in spending. Both fiscal variables would presumably
have an economic and potentially psychic impact on the well-being, and political preferences
of an individual voter. Changes in tax rates would alter an agent’s budget constraint and
choices much the same as a direct change in income due to modifications of targeted transfers
or other government spending on services. Alternatively, utility derived from public good
flows could also be altered to the extent that public goods are a function of spending or the
revenue that is necessary to finance such spending.
We model the impact of austerity on Nazi vote share using the following equation:
NAZIdt = β1ln(Tax Rate (ρ)dt) + β2ln(Wagesst) + β3ln(Unemploymentst) + β4ln(Outputst) + (4)
µd + δt + εdt
where the average Tax Rate (either the average rate of income or wage taxes and denoted
by ρ) is calculated as the ratio of tax revenue divided by total declared taxable income. Tax
rates are indexed by districts d, other controls by states, s, and t is an election period
(September 1930, July 1932, November 1932 or March 1933). Since we do not have annual
data on taxes, we linked the income taxes for the fiscal year 1929/30 to the elections of
September 1930 and the taxes for the fiscal year 1932/33 to the elections of 1932 and 1933.
Since wage taxes are unavailable for the fiscal year 1929/30, we had to link the wage taxes for
1928/29 to the elections of 1930 and the taxes for 1932/33 to the elections of 1932 and 1933.
NAZI denotes the percentage point vote share of the Nazi party in the four different federal
elections. We also include district fixed effects (µd) and a fixed effect for the fiscal year 1932/33
(δt) and report standard errors clustered at the district and state level.

22

The results in Table 4 (column 1) show that the impact in terms of standard deviations
in vote share for the Nazi party associated with a one standard deviation rise in the natural
logarithm of the average tax rate is 0.16 using income taxes (95% CI: 0.78 to 0.25) and
0.19 using wage taxes (95% CI: 0.09 to 0.30). This result suggests that the Nazi party
received more votes in districts with great austerity whether austerity is measured as cuts
in government spending or rises in the tax rate.
To control for endogeneity, we also instrumented the tax rate with the level of the average
income tax rate in 1928 (column 7) interacted with time dummies. The percentage change
in the average income tax rate T is the weighted average of statutory rates with the weights
equal to the share of total taxable income within each tax bracket. Assuming constant
shares, the observed percentage change in the average tax rate, denoted by Tb for district d
in period t is given by:

Tbdt =

X

ωdb τbbt

(5)

b

where the weights, ω db , are the ratio of total taxable income in bracket, b, to total taxable
income across all brackets in an initial year and τ bt are the nationally defined statuory tax
rates for each bracket.
In 1930, under austerity, statutory income tax rates for each bracket were raised equally
nationwide. The change in the average depends on the initial shares. As Pinkham-Goldsmith
et al. (2018) show, the relevant Bartik-style instrument for this national shock to tax rates
with b shares and one time period is equivalent to using the initial shares as instruments.
The average income tax rate in 1928 is again, the sum of these shares (at the district level)
with each share being multiplied by the same constant, τ b1928 (the 1928 statutory tax rate)
across all districts. We use this initial value (interacted with period fixed effects) as the
excluded instruments. The first stage coefficient on the excluded instrument, the initial
average income tax rate, is negative and statistically significant. The negative sign is due
to the fact that the statutory tax rates rose more in proportional terms for the lowest tax
brackets than the higher tax brackets.

23

Using the initial average income tax rate as an excluded instrument, we find a positive
relationship between changes in tax rates and Nazi vote share (column 7). Results are not
dependent on clustering at the district level or at the state level. Nevertheless, the size of the
standardized coefficients using the IV are between two and three times larger those using OLS
and since wage taxes were unavailable for 1929/30 we cannot use this instrument for wage
taxes. There is no obvious reason why the point estimate on taxes using the IV approach
are so much larger than in OLS. However, there is a possibility of some heterogeneity in the
impact of tax rises such that the nationally imposed tax changes had a much larger impact
in certain kinds of districts.
In Table A7 we also use a differenced model. We further show that results are robust
to the addition of state fixed effects, which allows for differential state-level trends and
potentially mops up some of the within state correlations in the error term.25 In column 4
we weight the regressions by the level of population to emphasize the data from the larger
districts and states and eliminate undue influence from smaller states. In columns 5 and
6 we also add the lagged Nazi vote share to control for differential growth based on initial
Nazi support in 1930. Lagged values refer to the election immediately prior to the latest
election in the differenced dependent variable. Again, results are also very stable across
specifications.
In Table A8 we explore potential heterogeneity in the impact of austerity. Here we
split the sample for values above and below the median vote share for the Nazi party in
the elections of 1928 and the median values for the share of the labor force in agriculture,
industry, in civil service, those self-employed and in blue collar occupations using the census
data of 1925. When we stratify the sample, we show that rather than electoral tax rise, the
impact of austerity had a larger effect in pre-1930 Nazi strongholds, districts with a low share
of blue-collar workers, in rural, agricultural and less industrialized areas, with a higher share
of civil servants and self-employed workers. It seems that austerity was a bigger determinant
for those living in small towns or the country-side and those who were self-employed, rather
25

Results for income (0.13; 95% CI: 0.07 to 0.19) and wage taxes (0.09; 95% CI: 0.04 to 0.15) are also

statistically significant at 1 percent level of confidence using administrative division fixed effects.

24

than residents of the largest cities who were more likely to become unemployed, who turned
to the Communists.
[Table 4 about here]

6.2. Robustness checks
We pursued a number of additional robustness checks. In Figure A1 we drop one state at
a time to show that our results are not driven by a particular state. In Table A9, we also
study the impact of taxes on the vote shares for the main political parties. Additionally, in
Table A10, we use first differences to calculate the taxes as the percentage point change (the
change in the level) instead of the percentage change in average income and wage tax rates.
For another robustness check we use a policy discontinuity design at state borders a
method which uses a potentially more relevant set of control groups.26 For each election
at date t (t defined by the elections of September 1930 and July 1932), our border district
pairs data are organized to have at least two observations in each pair p (one for each
state in the pair). A given district appears in the data k times (for each election t) if it
borders k districts. In total there are 459 districts that lie along a state border and for each
border-district we match all the neighboring districts that are located on opposite sides of
the borders, yielding a total of 1,080 border-pairs.27 The district-pair match on the opposite
side of a state border is a plausible control group since while there are substantial differences
in treatment intensity of austerity, due to differing state level policies and initial conditions,
these pairs, are very similar politically and economically and approaching the border, most
controls vary smoothly, but the treatment variable jumps (Table A11). Hence, variation in
austerity at the district level across state borders would be due to differences in state level
decisions on austerity.

26

For a review of this methodology see Dube et al. (2010), Holmes (1998) and Galofré-Vilà (2020).

27

Missing data reduces somewhat the sample size from these numbers.

25

Our difference-in-differences specification is as follows:

∆NAZIdt = α + β1 ln Surplus (ρ)st + β2 ln Wagesst + β3 ln Unemploymentst + β4 ln Outputst + (6)
µp/pt + δt + εdt

where NAZI denotes the Nazi party vote share in district d in year t. To unite spending
and taxes in the same equation, we measure austerity as the fiscal Surplus: the logarithm
of the total state income taxes paid minus the logarithm of state-level expenditure. We
use income and wage taxes in alternative specifications indexed by ρ. Using a higher level
of aggregation than the district for spending and taxes makes variation in treatment more
plausible since state changes are determined by within state factors. Additionally, spending
data are only available at the state level. Along with the standard controls as in previous
equations, we use district (µd ), time fixed effects (δ t ) or district pair by year effects, and
cluster the standard errors at the state level. This level of clustering also accounts for
potential mechanical spatial correlations given the presence of districts in multiple pairs. In
Table 5 we provide four types of specifications according to whether we use district-pair fixed
effects (µp ) and district-pair fixed effects by year interactions (µpt ).
We find that the variable Surplus for the border pair sample is also positive and statistically significant using the two-way clustering or with very low p-values. For instance, a
time-varying district-pair fixed effects model using Surplus 1 gives a standardized coefficient
of 0.28 (95% CI: 0.15 to 0.42) and using Surplus 2 a coefficient of 0.23 (95% CI: 0.06 to
0.40). This well-identified piece of variation, comparing neighboring districts that straddle
state borders, produces consistent results with the full sample. In Table A12 we also obtain
consistent results by instrumenting the percentage change in the average tax rate with the
initial level of taxes paid in 1928 using district-pair and state level clustering along with
district pair fixed effects.
[Table 5 about here]

26

7. Conclusions
This paper offers econometric support for the idea that the austerity measures implemented
between 1930 and 1932 immiserized and radicalized the German electorate. Each one standard deviation increase in austerity measured in several different ways was associated with
between one quarter to one half of one standard deviation of the dependent variable. Yet,
austerity is only one factor affecting the rise of the Nazi party and there are other factors at
work such as the role of German business (Ferguson and Voth 2008), the historical roots of
antisemitism (Voigtländer and Voth 2012), the influence of social capital (Satyanath et al.
2017), banking collapse (Doerr et al. 2018), and the power of radio propaganda (Adena et
al. 2015). For a recent review see Voth (2020).
Austerity worsened the situation of low-income households and the Nazi party become
very efficient in channeling the austerity-driven German suffering and mass discontent. We
exploit this mechanism by showing that austerity was associated with higher mortality. This
reinforces the idea that, had Brüning relaxed the efforts to consolidate the budget, things
might have been different.
The corollary seems clear: even when the particular history of a country precludes a
populist extreme-right option, austerity policies are likely to produce an intense rejection
of the established political parties, with the subsequent dramatic alteration of the political
order. The case of Weimar Germany explored in this article provides a timely example that
imposing too much austerity and too many punitive conditions can not only be self-defeating,
but can also unleash a series of unintended political consequences, with truly unpredictable
and potentially tragic results.

27

References
Adena, Maja, Ruben Enikolopov, Maria Petrova, Veronica Santarosa, and Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. “Radio and the Rise of the Nazis in Prewar Germany.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics 130 no. 4 (2015): 1885-1939.
Aizer, Anna. “The Gender Wage Gap and Domestic Violence.” American Economic Review 100 no. 4 (2010): 1847-59.
Alesiana, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. Austerity: When it Works
and When It Doesn’t. Princeton University Press, 2019.
Balderston, Theo. The Origins and Course of the German Economic Crisis, November
1923 to May 1932. Haude and Spener, 1993.
Bor, Jacob. “Diverging Life Expectancies and Voting Patterns in the 2016 US Presidential
Election.” American Journal of Public Health 107 no. 10 (2017), 1560-62.
Borchardt, Knut. “Wirtschaftliche Ursachen des Scheiterns der Weimarer Republik.” In
Weimar, Selbstpreisgabe einer Demokratie, edited by Karl Dietrich Erdmann and Hagen
Schulze, 211-49. Droste, 1980.
Bromhead, Alan de, Barry Eichengreen, and Kevin H. O’Rourke. “Political Extremism in the 1920s and 1930s: Do German lessons Generalize?” The Journal of Economic
History 73 no. 2 (2013), 372-406.
Büttner, Ursula. “Politische Alternativen zum Brüningschen Deflationskurs. Ein beitrag
zur diskussion Uberökonomische Zwangslagen in der Endphase von Weimar.” Vierteljahrshefte
für Zeitgeschichte 37 no. 2 (1989), 209-51.
Chodorow-Reich, Gabriel, Laura Feiveson, Zachary Liscow, and William Gui
Woolston. “Does State Fiscal Relief During Recessions Increase Employment? Evidence
from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 no. 3 (2012), 118-45.

28

Correia, Sergio. “A Feasible Estimator for Linear Models with Multi-Way Fixed Effects.”
Unpublished manuscript, http://scorreia.com/research/hdfe.pdf, 2017.
Dehejia, Rajeev, and Adriana Lleras-Muney. “Booms, Busts, and Babies’ Health.” The
Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 no. 3 (2004), 1091-130.
Dell, Fabien. “Top Incomes in Germany throughout the Twentieth Century: 1891-1998.” In
Top Incomes over the Twentieth Century: A Contrast between Continental European and EnglishSpeaking Countries, edited by Anthony Barnes Atkinson and Thomas Piketty. Oxford University
Press, 2007.
Doerr, Sebastian, Stefan Gissler, José Luis Peydró, and Hans-Joachim Voth. “From
Finance to Extremism: The Real Effects of Germany’s 1931 Banking Crisis.” CEPR Discussion
Paper DP12806 (2018).
Dube, Arindrajit, T. William Lester, and Michael Reich. “Minimum Wage effects Across
State Borders: Estimates using Contiguous Counties.” Review of Economics and Statistics 92 no.
4 (2010), 945-64.
Eichengreen, Barry. Hall of Mirrors: The Great Depression, The Great Recession, and the Uses
-and Misuses- of History. Oxford University Press, 2015.
Eichengreen, Barry. The Populist Temptation: Economic Grievance and Political Reaction in
the Modern Era. Oxford University Press, 2018.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Tim Hatton. “Interwar Unemployment in International Perspective:
An Overview.” In Interwar Unemployment in International Perspective, edited by Barry Eichengreen and Tim Hatton, 1-59, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988.
Evans, Richard J. The Coming of the Third Reich. Penguin Press, 2003.
Falter, Jürgen, Thomas Lindenberger, Siegfried Schumann. Wahlen und Abstimmungen
in der Weimarer Republik. C. H. Beck, 1986.
Feinstein, Charles H., Peter Temin, and Gianni Toniolo. The World Economy between the
World Wars. Oxford University Press, 2008.
Feldman, Gerald D. “The Reparations Debate.” Diplomacy and Statecraft 16 (2005) 487-98.

29

Ferguson, Niall. “Constraints and Room for Manoeuvre in the German Inflation of the Early
1920s.” Economic History Review 49 no. 4 (1996), 635-66.
Ferguson, Niall. “The German Inter-War Economy: Political Choice Versus Economic Determinism.” In German History since 1800, edited by Mary Fulbrook, 270-71. Arnold, 1997.
Ferguson, Thomas, and Hans-Joachim Voth. ”Betting on Hitler – The Value of Political
Connections in Nazi Germany,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 no. 1 (2008), 101-37.
Fetzer, Thiemo. “Did Austerity Cause Brexit?” American Economic Review 109 no. 11 (2019),
3849-86.
Frey, Bruno, and Hannelore Weck. “Hat Arbeitslosigkeit den Aufstieg des Nationalsozialismus
Bewirkt?” Jahrbücher für Nationalökonomie und Statistik 196 no. 1 (1981), 1-31.
Fulda, Bernhard. Press and Politics in the Weimar Republic. Oxford University Press, 2009.
Galofré-Vilà, Gregori. “Quantifying the impact of Aid to Dependent Children: An epidemiological framework.” Explorations in Economic History, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eeh.2020.
101332, 2020.
Galofré-Vilà, Gregori, Christopher M. Meissner, Martin McKee and David Stuckler.
“The Economic Consequences of the 1953 London Debt Agreement.” European Review of Economic
History 23 no. 1, 1–29.
Goebbels, Joseph. “Tondokumente und Reden: 1931-02-05, Reichstagsrede,“ Internet Archive,
https://archive.org/details/19310205JosephGoebbelsReichstagsrede3m21s, 1931.
Goldsmith-Pinkham, Paul, Issac Sorkin, and Henry Swift. “Bartik Instruments: What,
When, Why, and How.” American Economic Review 118 no. 8 (2020), 2586-2624.
Gómez-León, Marı́a, and Herman J. de Jong. “Inequality in Turbulent Times: Income
Distribution in Germany and Britain, 1900-50.” Economic History Review 72 no. 3 (2019), 107398.
Holmes, Thomas J. “The effects of State Policies on the Location of Manufacturing: Evidence
from State borders.” Journal of Political Economy 106 no. 4 (1998), 667-705.
James, Harold. The German Slump: Politics and Economics 1924-1936. Oxford University
Press, 1986.

30

Jepsen, Charles Harold. “The Influence of the Multi-Party System on Representative Government in Germany under the Weimar Constitution (1919-1930).” Ph.D. diss., University of Oxford,
1953.
Keynes, John Maynard. The Economic Consequences of the Peace. Macmillan, 1920.
King, Gary, Ori Rosen, Martin Tanner, and Alexander F. Wagner. “Ordinary Economic
Voting Behavior in the Extraordinary Election of Adolf Hitler.” Journal of Economic History 68
no. 4 (2008), 951-96.
Nakamura, Emi, and Jón Steinsson. “Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from
U.S. regions.” American Economic Review 104 no. 3 (2014), 753-92.
Newcomer, Mabel. “Fiscal Relations of Central and Local Governments in Germany under the
Weimar Constitution.” Political Science Quarterly 51 no. 2 (1936), 185-214.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. “Lessons from the Great Depression.” EURO Intelligence, 2010.
Ponticelli, Jacopo, and Hans-Joachim Voth. “Austerity and Anarchy: Budget Cuts and
Social Unrest in Europe, 1919-2009.” Journal of Comparative Economics 48 no. 1 (2020), 1-1
Ritschl, Albrecht. “Reparation Transfers, the Borchardt Hypothesis and the Great Depression
in Germany, 1929-32: A Guided Tour for Hard-Headed Keynesians.” European Review of Economic
History 2 no. 1 (1998), 49-72.
Ritschl, Albrecht. Deutschlands Krise und Konjunktur, 1924-1934. Binnenkonjunktur, Auslandsverschuldung und Reparationsproblem Zwischen Dawes-Plan und Transfersperre. AkademieVerlag. 2002.
Ritschl, Albrecht. “Reparations, Deficits and Debt Default: The Great Depression in Germany.”
In The Great Depression of the 1930s: Lessons for Today, edited by Nicholas Crafts and Peter
Fearon, 110-39. Oxford University Press, 2013a.
Satyanath, Shanker, Nico Voigtländer, and Hans-Joachim Voth. “Bowling for Fascism:
Social Capital and the Rise of the Nazi Party.” Journal of Political Economy 125 no. 2 (2017),
478-526.
Schuker, Stephen A. American “Reparations” to Germany, 1919-1933: Implications for the
Third-World Debt Crisis, Princeton University Press, 1988.

31

Shirer, William L. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany. Simon &
Schuster, 1960.
Stögbauer, Christian, and John Komlos. “Averting the Nazi Seizure of Power: A Counterfactual Though Experiment.” European Review of Economic History 8 no. 2 (2004), 173-99.
Straumann, Tobias. 1931 Debt, Crisis, and the Rise of Hitler. Oxford University Press, 2019.
Temin, Peter. “The Beginning of the Depression in Germany.” Economic History Review 24 no.
2 (1971), 240-4
Temin, Peter. Lessons from the Great Depression. The MIT Press, 1990.
Temin, Peter, and David Vines. Keynes: Useful Economics for the World Economy. The MIT
Press, 2014.
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. “Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi Germany.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 127 no. 3 (2012):
1339-92.
Voigtländer, Nico, and Hans-Joachim Voth. “Highway to Hitler.” NBER Working Paper
No. 20150, Cambridge, MA, 2019.
Voth, Hans-Joachim. “Wages, Investment, and the fate of the Weimar Republic: A Long-Term
Perspective.” German History 11 no. 3 (1993), 265-292.
Voth, Hans-Joachim. “Roots of war: Hitler’s Rise to Power”. In The Economics of the Second
World War: Seventy-Five Years On, edited by. S. Broadberry and M. Harrison, 9-17, CEPR Press,
2020.
Wueller, Paul Hahan. “The Integration of the German Tax System.” Ph.D. diss., University of
Columbia, 1933.

32

Figure 1. Development of real per capita state spending in Germany, 1926/27-1932/33 (1926/27=100).

Figure shows the evolution of real per capita government spending between 1926/27 and 1932/33. Nominal state level expenditure as reported in James (1986) following fiscal years and accounting for transfers to other public authorities. Data were
originally collected from Official Statistics (Statistiches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich). Nominal expenditure has been
adjusted for inflation using the price index (1913/14=100) from Jürgen Sensch in HISTAT-Datenkompilation online (Preisindizes für die Lebenshaltung in Deutschland 1924 bis 2001) and for population using the data from Piketty and Zucman (Data
Appendix for Capital is Back, Table DE1).

33

Figure 2. City level change in vote for the Nazi party and spending change, 1930-1932.

Data on the y-axis is the difference in the vote share going to the Nazi party between the federal elections of September 1930
and July 1932. The x-axis shows change in total city-level government spending in percentage points (left figure) and the
change in health and wellbeing city-level government spending (right figure) in percentage points.

34

Figure 3. Impact of city expenditures on the Nazi party vote share, elections 1930, 1932
and 1933.

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the main parties in the different elections.
Models are estimated independently and adjusted for unemployment and economic output. We use the controls of 1929 for
the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933.
We use a balanced panel with robust standard errors clustered at the administrative division corresponding to 44 levels. SPD
stands for the Social Democratic Party and DNVP for the German National People’s Party. In the elections of 1933, the
DNVP presented in the elections as part of the Kampffront Schwarz-Weiß-Rot, which was an electoral alliance of three
parties: the DNVP, the Stahlhelm and Landbund. All models include city level fixed effects and the forest plot with the
elections 1930 and 1932 (both) include a fixed effect for 1931/32 and ‘all elections’ fixed effects for 1932 and 1933. We
standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.

35

Figure 4. Impact of city expenditures by budget category on the Nazi party vote share,
elections 1930, 1932 and 1933.

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections.
Models are estimated independently and adjusted for unemployment and economic output. We use the controls of 1929 for
the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933.
We use a balanced panel with robust standard errors clustered at the administrative division corresponding to 44 levels. All
models include city level fixed effects and the forest plot with the elections 1930 and 1932 (both) include a fixed effect for
1931/32 and ‘all elections’ fixed effects for 1931/32 and 1932/33. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one.

36

Table 1: Panel data on the impact of city expenditures on the Nazi party vote share, all
national elections 1930-1933.
(1)
-0.345**
(0.130)

ln Expenditures
ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
Number of observations
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect 1932
Fixed effect 1933
State × period fixed effects
Admin. division × period fixed effects

260
X
X
X

(2)
-0.415***
(0.133)
0.573
(0.361)
0.033
(0.044)
260
X
X
X

(3)
-0.351**
(0.169)
0.259
(0.183)
0.033
(0.154)
260
X

(4)
-0.353**
(0.155)
0.555***
(0.139)
-0.255**
(0.122)
260
X

X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the
different elections. Equation 1 is equivalent to the results we show in column 2. We use the controls of 1929
for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the
elections of March 1933. We estimated the linear models with many levels of fixed effects as in Correia
(2017). We balanced the sample for singleton groups and use a balanced panel with robust standard errors
(in parentheses) clustered at the administrative division level corresponding to 44 levels. We standardized
all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

37

Table 2: Impact of city expenditures on the Nazi party vote share using a Bartik instrument, national elections 1930, 1932 and 1933.

ln Expenditures
ln Unemployment
ln Economic output
F-test excluded instrument
Rubin-Anderson test (p-value)
Number of cities
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect 1931/1932
Fixed effect 1932/1933

Elections 1930 and 1932 (both)
OLS
2SLS
(1)
(2)
-0.781***
-0.896**
(0.264)
(0.444)
1.008**
1.012***
(0.412)
(0.379)
-0.014
-0.009
(0.118)
(0.093)
14.16
0.017
231
231
X
X
X
X

All elections
OLS
2SLS
(3)
(4)
-0.553***
-0.683**
(0.108)
(0.337)
0.654**
0.682***
(0.295)
(0.233)
0.020
0.019
(0.044)
(0.053)
20.69
0.042
308
308
X
X
X
X
X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the main parties in the
different elections. We use the controls of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of
July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933. The first stage coefficient on the initial
average income tax rate is negative and highly significant (-0.103; p-value= 0.000; 95% CI: -0.129 to
-0.077). We use a balanced panel. For details on the instrument see text. All models include time and city
level fixed effects. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, ***
p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

38

Table 3: Panel data on the impact of city expenditures in health and wellbeing and mortality on the Nazi party vote share, all national elections, 1930-1933.
ln Expenditures (health)

(1)
-0.237*
(0.128)

ln Mortality
ln Unemployment
ln Economic output
Number of observations
Number of clusters
R2
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect for 1932
Fixed effect for 1933
Baseline
All deaths
No deaths from cancer
Infant mortality

0.785**
(0.331)
-0.029
(0.070)
150
30
0.897
X
X
X
X

(2)

0.173**
(0.071)
0.690**
(0.290)
-0.074
(0.075)
150
30
0.895
X
X
X

(3)
-0.156
(0.129)
0.152*
(0.085)
0.726**
(0.288)
-0.069
(0.076)
150
30
0.898
X
X
X

X

X

(4)

0.232***
(0.062)
0.663**
(0.273)
-0.073
(0.072)
150
30
0.900
X
X
X

(5)
-0.101
(0.110)
0.218***
(0.071)
0.688**
(0.269)
-0.071
(0.073)
150
30
0.901
X
X
X

X

X

(6)

0.089*
(0.052)
0.739**
(0.305)
-0.028
(0.073)
150
30
0.895
X
X
X

(7)
-0.197
(0.120)
0.073
(0.053)
0.777**
(0.311)
-0.030
(0.072)
150
30
0.896
X
X
X

X

X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the
different elections. We use the controls of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of
July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933. Column 1 is the baseline specification
without controlling for mortality. In columns 2-3 the Crude Death rate is the number of deaths within a city
divided by the city level population (×1,000), in columns 4-5 from the Crude Death rate we removed deaths
from cancer and unspecified causes of death and in columns 6-7 is the Infant Mortality rate measured as the
number of deaths within a city below the age of 1 divided by the number of live births (×1,000). We use a
balanced panel with robust standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the district level corresponding to
30 administrative divisions. All models include fixed effects. We also added fixed effects for 1931/32 and
1932/33. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

39

Table 4: Panel data on the impact of district income and wage taxes on the Nazi party vote
share using a Bartik instrument, national elections 1930, 1932 and 1933.
Elections 1930
March 1933

Panel A: Income taxes
ln Income tax rate
ln Wages
ln Unemployment
ln Economic output
Number of districts
District level clustering
State level clustering
District fixed effect
Fixed effect for 1932/33
Panel B: Wage taxes
ln Wage tax rate
ln Wages
ln Unemployment
ln Economic output

Elections 1930
and 1932 (both)

All
elections

All
elections

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

2SLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

0.164***
(0.027)
0.021
(0.061)
-0.780***
(0.206)
-0.596
(0.554)
1,724
X

0.164***
(0.042)
0.021
(0.215)
-0.780
(0.615)
-0.596
(0.561)
1,724

0.080***
(0.028)
0.088
(0.057)
-0.452*
(0.234)
-1.489**
(0.643)
2,586
X

0.080**
(0.029)
0.088
(0.185)
-0.452
(0.814)
-1.489
(0.921)
2,586

0.105***
(0.024)
0.059
(0.052)
-0.567***
(0.214)
-1.154*
(0.599)
3,448
X

0.105***
(0.029)
0.059
(0.167)
-0.567
(0.694)
-1.154
(0.714)
3,448

0.286***
(0.035)
0.062
(0.042)
-0.399**
(0.166)
-1.207***
(0.333)
3,448

X
X
X

X
X

X
X
0.191***
(0.030)
0.065
(0.061)
-0.692***
(0.211)
-0.421
(0.591)
1,724
X

X
X
X
0.191***
(0.051)
0.065
(0.210)
-0.692
(0.603)
-0.421
(0.542)
1,724

X
X
0.006
(0.035)
0.088
(0.058)
-0.518**
(0.235)
-1.462**
(0.656)
2,586
X

X
X
X
0.006
(0.007)
0.088
(0.185)
-0.518
(0.752)
-1.462
(0.938)
2,586

X
X
0.069**
(0.030)
0.064
(0.051)
-0.606***
(0.219)
-0.993
(0.627)
3,448
X

0.069
(0.062)
0.064
(0.164)
-0.606
(0.659)
-0.993
(0.803)
3,448

-

Number of districts
District level clustering
State level clustering
X
X
X
District fixed effect
X
X
X
X
X
X
Fixed effect for 1932/33
X
X
X
X
X
X
Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. The average tax rate is calculated as tax revenue divided by total declared taxable income.
For wages, unemployment and economic output, we use the controls of 1929 for the elections of September
1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933. For income
taxes we use the values for 1928/29, 1929/30 and 1932/33 and for wage taxes 1928/29 and 1932/33. For
more details on the tax data see text. We use a balanced panel with standard errors clustered as stated in the
table. All models include a district fixed effects and a fixed effect for the fiscal year 1932/33. For the details
on column 7 and the instrumental variable used, see text. The F-test of excluded instrument in column 7 is
equal to 17.93 and the p-value for the Rubin-Anderson test is 0.001. The first stage results are statistically
significant at 1 percent. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one,
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

40

Table 5: The impact of state level austerity on the rise of the Nazi party in the restricted sample of
cross district-pairs located on opposite sides of the borders.

ln Fiscal Surplus 1
ln Wages
ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
ln Fiscal Surplus 2
ln Wages
ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
Num. districts
Num. clusters (states)
Num. clusters (borders)
Two-way clustering
Year FE
District FE
District-pair FE × year

District-pair fixed
effects
(1)
(2)
0.248*** 0.273***
(0.064)
(0.068)
-0.296***
(0.113)
0.154
(0.139)
-0.205
(0.128)
0.203*** 0.222***
(0.075)
(0.084)
-0.286**
(0.113)
0.195
(0.136)
-0.222*
(0.120)
3,156
3,156
27
27
401
401
X
X
X
X
X
X

Time-varying districtpair fixed effects
(3)
(4)
0.253***
0.284***
(0.067)
(0.070)
-0.343***
(0.126)
0.143
(0.150)
-0.200
(0.139)
0.204**
0.225***
(0.080)
(0.087)
-0.335***
(0.125)
0.183
(0.147)
-0.213
(0.134)
3,156
3,156
27
27
401
401
X
X
X
X
X

X

District-pair fixed
effects and district
fixed effects
(5)
(6)
0.769*** 0.370*
(0.097)
(0.196)
-0.149
(0.236)
0.330*
(0.198)
-0.005
(0.023)
0.763*** 0.433**
(0.095)
(0.190)
-0.061
(0.231)
0.309
(0.193)
-0.007
(0.019)
3,156
3,156
27
27
401
401
X
X
X
X
X
X

Time varying districtpair fixed effects,
district fixed effects
(7)
(8)
0.897***
0.252**
(0.116)
(0.123)
-0.520*
(0.304)
0.300**
(0.139)
-0.018
(0.019)
0.845***
0.184
(0.097)
(0.178)
-0.497
(0.317)
0.338**
(0.156)
-0.008
(0.016)
3,156
3,156
27
27
401
401
X
X
X
X
X

X

Dependent variable is the percentage share of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the elections of September
1930, July 1932, November 1932 and March 1933. Fiscal surplus is defined as the log of the total state revenue in income
or wage taxes minus the log of municipal plus state spending. For the years used in the controls see text. We have 459
districts that lie along a state border (the number of states is equal to 27 and the number of districts is reduced to 401 in
the models after accounting for missing data) and for each border-district we match all the neighboring districts that are
located on opposite sides of the borders, yielding a total of 1,080 ‘directed’ border-pairs. Each district that lies along a
state border, on average has 2.36 pair-districts across the border (with an associated standard deviation of 1.48). The
minimum number of pairs for a district is 1 and the maximum is 10. Fiscal surplus 1 combines government spending and
wage taxes and Fiscal surplus 2 government spending and income taxes. We use a balanced panel and the methodology
from Dube et al. (2010) for two-way clustering with standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the state and district
pair level, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

41

Data Appendix
for online publication

1

Figure A1. Cross-district models in differences for the impact of district income taxes on the main
political parties vote share. Using differences between (7/1932 and 9/1930),(11/1932 and 9/1930),
and (3/1933 and 9/1930) and dropping one state at a time.

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the different parties in the different elections. The
name of the state/province is the one excluded in the regression. The asterisk denotes a Prussian province. We use changes in district
level income taxes or wage taxes as a measure of austerity. The income tax rate is calculated as the ratio between total revenue and total
taxable income. We include state level fixed effects with standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the district level. We standardized
all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.

Table A1: Main Descriptive Statistics
State and district level data
Vote cast for the Nazi party1
Election September 1930
Election July 1932
Election November 1932
Election March 1933
Control variables2
∆ Municipal spending
∆ State spending
∆ Municipal plus State spending
∆ Income tax rate (district level data)
∆ Wage tax rate (district level data)
∆ Wages
∆ Unemployment
∆ Generation of electricity
City level data
Vote cast for the Nazi party1
Election September 1930
Election July 1932
Election November 1932
Election March 1933
Control variables2
∆ City total spending
∆ Unemployment
∆ Construction of new buildings

Mean

SD

Min

Max

N

18.84
39.00
34.93
47.14

8.96
14.48
13.38
12.11

2.20
7.77
5.33
13.29

58.80
83.00
76.42
83.01

30
30
30
30

-11.68
-15.84
-13.21
17.20
-20.70
-20.50
28.17
-1.37

4.40
4.44
2.05
21.11
8.27
3.26
8.41
6.30

2.81
2.81
-6.57
-58.28
-63.33
-16.44
15.67
-29.85

-24.12
-21.92
-18.46
96.67
19.83
-30.41
39.70
6.93

30
30
30
583
558
30
30
30

18.04
33.50
29.31
39.61

5.86
8.69
8.06
7.29

6.75
16.71
12.96
4.40

33.39
50.71
49.77
56.31

67
67
67
67

-5.55
8.91
-64.81

27.53
16.58
22.92

45.00
-60.38
-98.42

-143.57
52.42
20.00

67
67
67

1
In percentages, 2 percentage change and per thousand between 1929/30 and 1932/33). All variables
have been adjusted for missing values. Control variables are calculated as percentage changes of
nominal values. Tax rates are calculated as tax revenue divided by declared, taxable income. For the
income taxes we use the percentage change between 1929 and 1932 and for wage taxes the percentage
change between 1928 and 1932. For unemployment we report the change between 1930 and 1932 as city
level data begin in 1930. The differences in the change in unemployment are due to how unemployment
is being measured. In the state level panel unemployment is defined as a worker who is part of the labor
force but not working and in the second panel using city level data it needs to be registered in the local
offices. For reference the cumulative decline in the German CPI between 1928 and 1932 was 22.5% while
the aggregate decline in German GDP between 1928 and 1932 was about 30%.

Table A2: Panel data on the impact of dynamic effects of city expenditures on the Nazi party
vote share, all elections.
ln Expenditures
ln Expenditures × Election July 1932
ln Expenditures × Election November 1932
ln Expenditures × Election March 1933

(1)
-2.724**
(0.834)
-0.106
(0.169)
-0.090
(0.123)
-0.227
(0.223)

ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
Number of observations
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect 1931/1932
Fixed effect 1932/1933

308
X
X
X

(2)
-1.314**
(0.443)
-0.047
(0.111)
-0.030
(0.081)
-0.120
(0.120)
-0.589*
(0.207)
-0.987***
(0.121)
308
X
X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use the
controls of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March
1933. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the administrative division level corresponding to 44 levels and we standardized all
variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A3: Impact of city expenditures on the Nazi party vote share, elections 1930, 1932
and 1933, with population adjusted controls.

ln Expenditure
ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
Number of observations
RHS variables pop. adjusted
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect 1931/1932
Fixed effect 1932/1933

Elections 1930
and March 1933
(1)
(2)
-0.337** -0.080*
(0.149) (0.047)
1.094
0.235**
(1.011) (0.112)
0.036
0.037
(0.072) (0.053)
154
154
X
X
X
X

X

Elections 1930
and 1932 (both)
(3)
(4)
-0.781*** -0.115*
(0.215)
(0.065)
1.008**
0.426***
(0.412)
(0.097)
-0.014
0.426***
(0.118)
(0.097)
231
231
X
X
X
X
X

All
elections
(5)
-0.553***
(0.108)
0.654**
(0.295)
0.020
(0.044)
308
X
X
X

(6)
-0.098***
(0.029)
0.271***
(0.079)
0.024
(0.029)
308
X
X
X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use the
controls of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March
1933. We use a balanced panel with robust standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the administrative division level corresponding to
44 levels. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

184

X
X
X

X
X
X

-1.52**
(0.58)
-0.52**
(0.23)
-0.92***
(0.13)

184

-2.85**
(1.04)

(2)

X
X
X

184
X
X

-0.80***
(0.22)
0.27
(0.28)
-0.04
(0.05)

(3)

X
X

184

-1.17***
(0.39)
-0.51***
(0.18)
-0.45***
(0.13)

(4)

Blue collars

184
X
X
X
X
X
X

-0.80***
(0.23)
0.27
(0.29)
-0.04
(0.05)

(5)

X
X
X

184
X
X

-0.62***
(0.10)
0.11
(0.19)
-0.05
(0.04)

(6)

X
X

184

-1.05***
(0.31)
-0.50***
(0.17)
-0.46***
(0.13)

(7)

Catholics

184
X
X
X
X
X
X

-0.62***
(0.10)
0.11
(0.20)
-0.05
(0.04)

(8)

X
X
X

184
X
X

-0.49***
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.19)
-0.03
(0.04)

(9)

X
X

184

-1.05**
(0.32)
-0.50***
(0.17)
-0.46***
(0.13)

(10)

Protestants

184
X
X
X
X
X
X

-0.49***
(0.11)
-0.02
(0.19)
-0.03
(0.04)

(11)

X
X
X

184
X
X

-0.82***
(0.14)
0.41
(0.27)
0.01
(0.05)

(12)

X
X

184

-1.17***
(0.33)
-0.51***
(0.17)
-0.45***
(0.13)

(13)

Jewish

184
X
X
X
X
X
X

-0.82***
(0.14)
0.41
(0.27)
0.01
(0.05)

(14)

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use the unemployment and economic output data of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of
July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933. The other control variables (share of blue collars, Catholics, Protestants and Jewish) are for 1925. We use a balanced panel with robust standard errors (in parentheses)
clustered at the administrative division level corresponding to 44 levels. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Number of observations
Col. head×time dummy for 1932
Col. head×time dummy for 1933
Col. head×election
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect for 1931/32
Fixed effect for 1932/33

ln Economic output

ln Unemployment

ln Expenditures

(1)

Baseline

Table A4: Panel data on the impact of city expenditures and social structure on the Nazi party vote share, all elections.

Table A5: Panel data on the impact of city expenditures and welfare recipients on the Nazi party vote
share, elections 1930, 1932 and 1933.
Sept. 1930 and March 1933
ln Expenditures

(1)
-0.360**
(0.146)

1.020
(0.996)
0.032
(0.071)
156
X

-0.205
(0.148)
1.140
(0.984)
0.040
(0.066)
156
X

(3)
-0.320**
(0.146)
-0.177
(0.134)
1.132
(1.008)
0.028
(0.071)
156
X

X

X

X

ln Welfare recipients
ln Unemployment
ln Economic Output
Number observations
City level fixed effect
Fixed effect 1931
Fixed effect 1932

(2)

Sept. 1930 and 1932 (both)
(4)
-0.778***
(0.213)

1.004**
(0.409)
-0.014
(0.117)
234
X
X

(5)

-0.025
(0.121)
0.972**
(0.420)
-0.046
(0.128)
234
X
X

(6)
-0.780***
(0.215)
0.013
(0.106)
1.012**
(0.421)
-0.013
(0.116)
234
X
X

All elections
(7)
-0.560***
(0.108)

0.636**
(0.292)
0.019
(0.044)
312
X
X
X

(8)

-0.107
(0.122)
0.518*
(0.298)
0.019
(0.043)
312
X
X
X

(9)
-0.547***
(0.113)
-0.066
(0.105)
0.635**
(0.293)
0.017
(0.043)
312
X
X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use the controls of 1929 for the
elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March 1933. Data from the number of Welfare
recipients are from the Statistik des deutschen Reichs, Band 421 (Die öffentliche Fürsorge im Deutschen Reich) and refers to the number of public welfare
recipients in open care (Die öffentliche Fúrsorge). We use a balanced panel with robust standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the administrative
division level corresponding to 44 levels. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A6: Cross-city models in differences for the impact of city spending on the Nazi party
vote share. Using differences between (9/1930 and 7/1932), (9/1930 and 11/1932) and
(11/1932 and 3/1933).

% ∆ Expenditures

OLS
(1)
-0.235***
(0.047)

1st stage
(2)
0.456***
(0.057)

234

234

X

X

2SLS
(3)

OLS
(4)

1st stage
(5)

2SLS
(6)

-0.276**
(0.130)

-0.255***
(0.046)
0.347**
(0.145)
-0.014
(0.062)
234

0.454***
(0.056)
0.334**
(0.019)
0.102*
(0.056)
234

X

X

-0.290**
(0.132)
0.360**
(0.156)
-0.011
(0.063)
234
0.023
0.013
0.000
X

% ∆ Unemployment
% ∆ Economic Output
Number of observations
Kleibergen-Paap
Anderson-Rubin
Hansen
Time election fixed effect

234
0.024
0.017
0.000
X

Dependent variable is the change in the percentage share (×100) of valid votes received by the Nazi party at the city level. We use the
controls of 1929 for the elections of September 1930, 1931 for the elections of July and November 1932 and 1932 for the elections of March
1933. We estimated the following model: ∆ Nazidt = α + β1(%∆ Average tax rate (a)s/dt) + β2(%∆ Wagesst) + β3(%∆
Unemploymentst) + β4(%∆ Economic Outputst) + edt. The average rate of income or wage taxes (denoted by a) is calculated as the
ratio of tax revenue divided by total declared taxable income. Tax rates are indexed by districts d, or states, s, t is an election period
(September 1930, July 1932, November 1932 or March 1933). Since we do not have annual data on taxes, we linked the income taxes for
the fiscal year 1929/30 to the elections of September 1930 and the taxes for the fiscal year 1932/33 to the elections of 1932 and 1933. Since
wage taxes are unavailable for the fiscal year 1929/30, we had to link the wage taxes for 1928/29 to the elections of 1930 and the taxes for
1932/33 to the elections of 1932 and 1933. Nazi denotes the percentage point vote share of the Nazi party in the four different federal
elections, the difference ∆ is taken between the three later elections and the initial election of September 1930. We use a balanced panel
with robust standard errors (in parentheses) clustered at the administrative division level corresponding to 44 levels. For the description
of the instrument see text. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one , *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

Table A7: Cross-district models in differences for the impact of district income and wage taxes on the
Nazi party vote share. Using differences between (7/1932 and 9/1930), (11/1932 and 9/1930), and
(3/1933 and 9/1930).

Panel A: Income taxes
%∆ Avg. Income tax rate
%∆ Wages
%∆ Unemployment
%∆ Economic output

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

OLS

2SLS

2SLS

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

0.116***
(0.029)
0.039
(0.029)
-0.086***
(0.030)
-0.067*
(0.036)

0.116***
(0.031)
0.039
(0.094)
-0.086
(0.095)
-0.067
(0.049)

0.135***
(0.030)
0.060
(0.056)
-0.282***
(0.056)
-0.225
(0.466)

0.114***
(0.030)
0.032
(0.028)
-0.095***
(0.030)
-0.067*
(0.036)

0.454***
(0.092)
0.043
(0.093)
-0.048
(0.101)
-0.072
(0.050)

2,586

2,586

2,586

0.108***
(0.032)
0.062
(0.096)
-0.033
(0.081)
-0.044
(0.033)
0.368***
(0.067)
2,586

0.454***
(0.073)
0.043
(0.032)
-0.048
(0.034)
-0.072**
(0.036)

2,586

0.108***
(0.027)
0.062**
(0.027)
-0.033
(0.024)
-0.044
(0.034)
0.368***
(0.019)
2,586

2,586
0.000
0.000
0.014

X

X

X

2,586
0.000
0.000
0.000
X

Lagged Nazi vote share
Number of districts
Anderson-Rubin
Stock-Wright
Kleibergen-Paap
Admin. div. level clust.
State level clustering
State fixed effects
Population weighted
Panel B: Wage taxes
%∆ Avg. Wage tax rate
%∆ Wages
%∆ Unemployment
%∆ Economic output

X
X

X
X

0.065**
(0.028)
0.048*
(0.029)
-0.086***
(0.031)
-0.063*
(0.037)

0.065
(0.058)
0.048
(0.092)
-0.086
(0.090)
-0.063
(0.050)

0.066**
(0.027)
0.085
(0.072)
-0.288***
(0.066)
-0.366
(0.729)

0.071***
(0.028)
0.042
(0.029)
-0.093***
(0.030)
-0.062*
(0.037)

2,586
X

2,586

2,586
X

2,586
X

Lagged Nazi vote share
Number of districts
Admin. div. level clust.
State level clustering
State fixed effects
Population weighted

X

X

X

0.072***
(0.022)
0.073***
(0.027)
-0.030
(0.024)
-0.039
(0.035)
0.372***
(0.019)
2,586
X

0.072*
(0.040)
0.073
(0.095)
-0.030
(0.080)
-0.039
(0.032)
0.372***
(0.069)
2,586
X

X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use district level income or
wage taxes as a measure of austerity. Lagged values refer to the election immediately prior to the latest election in the differenced dependent variable. The
income tax rate is calculated as the ratio between total revenue and total taxable income. The first stage in columns (7) and (8) of Panel A displays a
coefficient of -0.411 and and standard error of 0.018, with an associated p-value of 0.000. We cluster standard errors (in parentheses) as stated in the table.
We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

1,251
X
X

Number of districts
Baseline controls
State fixed effects

1,335
X
X

0.178***
(0.042)
1,308
X
X

0.175***
(0.038)

(3)

Below

1,278
X
X

0.046
(0.039)

(4)

Above

Blue collar

1,272
X
X

0.035
(0.058)

(5)

Below

1,314
X
X

0.080***
(0.030)

(6)

Above

Agriculture sector

1,281
X
X

0.109***
(0.032)

(7)

1,305
X
X

0.075
(0.048)

(8)

Industry sector
Below
Above

1,233
X
X

0.079**
(0.037)

(9)

Below

1,353
X
X

0.090**
(0.043)

(10)

Above

Civil servant sector

1272
X
X

0.039
(0.049)

(11)

Below

1314
X
X

0.098***
(0.031)

(12)

Above

Self-employed

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in a district. Nazi vote share is measured in the elections of 1928. All the other
outcomes are measured in 1925 (in shares). We use district level income taxes as a measure of austerity. The income tax rate is calculated as the ratio between total revenue and
total taxable income. Robust standard errors clustered at the district level. We standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, *
p<0.1.

0.069
(0.045)

(2)

(1)

%∆ Avg. Income tax

Above

Below

Nazi vote share

Table A8: Cross-district models in differences for the impact of district income taxes on the main political parties vote share. Using differences
between (7/1932 and 9/1930), (11/1932 and 9/1930), and (3/1933 and 9/1930).

Table A9: Cross-district models in differences for the impact of district income and wage
taxes on the main political parties vote share. Using differences between (7/1932 and
9/1930), (11/1932 and 9/1930), and (3/1933 and 9/1930). Non-standardized coefficients.
Nazi
(1)

SPD
(2)

KPD
(3)

Zentrum
(4)

DNVP
(5)

Other
(6)

-0.009*
(0.005)
2,586
X
X
X

0.004
(0.005)
2,586
X
X
X

-0.048**
(0.018)
2,586
X
X
X

-0.074***
(0.024)
2,586
X
X
X

-0.025
(0.015)
2,586
X
X
X

-0.069
(0.042)
2,586
X
X
X

Panel A: Income taxes
%∆ Avg. Income tax rate
Number of districts
Standard controls
State level fixed effects
District level clustering
%∆ Avg. Wage tax rate
Number of districts
Standard controls
State level fixed effects
District level clustering

0.050***
(0.017)
2,586
X
X
X
Panel B:

0.006
-0.003
(0.004) (0.002)
2,586
2,586
X
X
X
X
X
X
Wage taxes

0.097**
(0.039)
2,586
X
X
X

0.062
(0.039)
2,586
X
X
X

0.010
0.016)
2,586
X
X
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the different parties in the different elections. We use
district level income or wage taxes as a measure of austerity. The tax rate is calculated as the ratio between total revenue and total taxable
income. We cluster standard errors (in parentheses) as stated in the table. All models include state level fixed effects with standard errors
clustered at the state level. Clustering at the district level report very similar results. SPD (Sozialdemokratische Partei ) is the Social
Democratic party; KPD (Kommunistische Partei Deutschlands ) the Communist party; and Zentrum (Deutsche Zentrumspartei ) the
Center party, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Table A10: Cross-district models in differences for the impact of district income and wage taxes
on the Nazi party vote share using percentage point change instead of percentage change in income
and wage taxes. Using differences between (7/1932 and 9/1930), (11/1932 and 9/1930), and
(3/1933 and 9/1930)).

Avg. taxes
%∆ Wages
%∆ Unemployment
%∆ Econ. output
Number of districts
District level clust.
State level clustering

Average Income taxes
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
0.093*** 0.087*** 0.093*** 0.087***
(0.033)
(0.033)
(0.025)
(0.028)
0.039
0.039
(0.029)
(0.093)
-0.092***
-0.092
(0.030)
(0.093)
-0.067*
-0.067
(0.036)
(0.048)
2,586
2,586
2,586
2,586
X
X
X
X

Average Wage taxes
(5)
(6)
(7)
0.118*** 0.115*** 0.018**
(0.026)
(0.027)
(0.057)
0.055*
(0.029)
-0.079***
(0.031)
-0.063*
(0.038)
2,586
2,586
2,586
X
X
X

(8)
0.115*
(0.057)
0.055
(0.088)
-0.079
(0.092)
-0.06
(0.050)
2,586
X

Dependent variable is the percentage share (×100) of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the different elections. We use income level
wage taxes as a measure of austerity. Taxes are calculated as the percentage point change instead as percentage change. We cluster standard
errors (in parentheses) at the district level in columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 and at the state level in columns 3, 4, 7 and 8. The method of estimation is
least squares and we standardized all variables with a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

36.034
35.253
3.669
23.854
11.358
39.971
91.295
8.175
25.544
0.451
6.426
7.994
-1.515
-1.582
-2.080
-1.834
-2.280
2.764
29.170
6.708
15.840

232
232
232
232
232
232
232
232
232
232
192
192
253
253
253
253
253
257
257
257
257

(2)

(1)

(3)

D2

2.648
30.163
6.478
15.469

-1.743
-1.804
-2.305
-1.971
-2.384

36.025
35.803
3.633
23.868
10.779
40.379
91.033
8.144
26.168
0.458
6.544
7.922

Mean

2.601
12.988
7.117
20.674

0.507
0.504
0.509
0.307
0.255

18.488
13.328
1.318
7.868
5.207
11.457
4.869
2.861
31.996
0.575
3.346
2.219

(4)

D1
(5)

D2

2.425
13.727
6.001
21.567

0.207
0.200
0.211
0.309
0.273

17.960
14.739
1.592
7.817
5.184
12.057
8.347
2.960
30.613
0.841
3.019
2.288

SD

0.202
1.256
0.061
0.155

-2.412
-2.614
-3.198
-2.966
-3.323

0.685
4.170
0.574
8.576
2.406
13.213
37.118
2.055
0.404
0.000
1.554
3.575

(6)

D1
(7)

D2

0.144
1.665
0.445
0.189

-2.412
-2.614
-3.198
-2.966
-3.323

0.255
8.825
0.855
9.912
2.534
11.346
39.062
2.971
0.650
0.000
1.202
3.457

Min

12.323
56.014
42.534
75.278

2.726
2.637
2.173
-1.600
-2.120

83.649
68.056
9.094
43.130
28.850
69.042
97.945
20.517
98.380
2.283
16.142
15.312

(8)

D1
(9)

D2

13.976
54.911
30.590
77.063

-1.218
-1.313
-1.835
-0.939
-1.281

78.536
75.209
10.935
48.313
29.446
72.287
130.388
20.517
98.425
10.471
21.750
18.600

Max

0.578
-1.227
0.542
0.278

6.896
6.761
6.705
4.620
3.745

0.008
-0.674
0.317
-0.033
1.505
-0.664
0.443
0.161
-0.324
-0.119
-0.562
0.494

(10)

t-stat

0.564
0.221
0.589
0.781

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001

0.994
0.501
0.752
0.974
0.134
0.507
0.658
0.872
0.746
0.905
0.575
0.622

(11)

p-value

t-test

We are using a balanced sample adjusting for missing data between variables in districts and pair districts. We report the t-statistic (column 10) and the corresponding two-tailed p-value
(column 11). When p-values are above 0.1 (10% level of confidence) we conclude that the mean difference between border districts are not different from 0. In the ‘Social, cultural and economic
controls’, data from the census of 1925 refer to the number of male wage earners employed in the different occupations. Data are originally from the census of 1925 and 1933 collected by Falter
and Gruner (1981). For the ‘Fiscal controls’, for definitions of the fiscal variables see text.

Social, cultural and economic controls
Agriculture, forestry and fishery, 1925
Industry and manufacturing, 1925
Civil service, army and clergy, 1925
Self-employed workers, 1925
White-collar workers, 1925
Blue-collar workers, 1925
Employed in all occupations, 1925
Unemployed or with no occupation, 1925
Catholic population, 1925
Jew population, 1925
Unemployed, 1933
Full-time occupation, 1933
Fiscal controls
Fiscal surplus 1928 (using income taxes)
Fiscal surplus 1929 (using income taxes)
Fiscal surplus 1932 (using income taxes)
Fiscal surplus 1928 (using wage taxes)
Fiscal surplus 1932 (using wage taxes)
Electoral outcomes in May 1928
Nazi party vote share
Social Democratic Party
Communist party
Centre Party

D1

Num.
districts

Table A11: Social, economic, religious and political structure between border districts located on opposite sides of the border, percentages of total population.

Table A12: Restricted sample of cross district-pairs located on opposite sides of the borders
using the initial level of taxes as an instrument.
Income taxes

(1)
0.345***
(0.079)

(2)
0.345***
(0.115)

1,989
0.000
0.000
X

1,989
0.000
0.001

Wages
Unemployment
Economic output
Number of districts
Anderson Rubin
Kleibergen-Paap
Pair district clustering
State level clustering
Pair fixed effects

X

(3)
0.350***
(0.081)
-0.450*
(0.246)
0.015**
(0.007)
0.676***
(0.119)
1,989
0.000
0.000
X

(4)
0.350***
(0.124)
-0.450
(0.480)
0.015
(0.019)
0.676***
(0.226)
1,989
0.001
0.001

(5)
0.194**
(0.079)

1,989
0.008
0.000
X

(6)
0.210***
(0.079)
-0.966***
(0.212)
-0.008
(0.009)
0.809***
(0.108)
1,989
0.004
0.000
X

X

X

X

Dependent variable is the percentage share of the valid votes cast going to the Nazi party in the elections of July 1932, November
1932 and March 1933. For the years used in the controls see text. We cluster standard errors (in parentheses) at the district or
state levels noted. We instrumented the change in the level of taxes paid with the taxes paid in 1928. The first stage always shows
the expected negative sign at it is statistically significant at 1%, *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.

Data Sources
We begin explaining our sources on the city-level data on electoral results, control variables,
expenditures, population, unemployment, new residential apartments, and mortality. Data
on electoral returns for the Reichstag elections of September 1930, 1932 (July and November)
and March 1933 at the city level are from the official publication Statistik des Deutschen
Reiches. These data have been previously used by other authors including Satyanath et al.
(2017), and were initially collected and used by Falter et al. (1986). We used the updates
made by Satyanath et al. (2017) to Falter’s data which accounts for, amongst other things,
changes in the names of cities across time.
Population, unemployment, number of new apartments, expenditure and taxes are newly
collected from the Statistical Yearbooks of the German Municipalities. Until 1934 these
statistical yearbooks were published as Statistisches Jahrbuch deutscher Städte and after
1934 under the name of Statistisches Jahrbuch deutscher Gemeinden. Data for all these
variables were available for cities above 50,000 inhabitants reporting a panel of 98 cities.
Although unemployment data were available for 248 cities we adjust the panel to cities
above 50,000 inhabitants (when spending data and other controls are all available). For
some 6 cities data were not reported for all the years (1928-1932) since they were close
to the threshold of 50,000 inhabitants. For instance, data for the city of Neuß are only
reported for 1931, 1932 and 1933 when the population was above 50 thousand individuals:
54.8 in 1931, 55.5 in 1923 and 55.8 in 1933. The same appears in the city of Ratibor with a
population (in thousands) in 1931 of 50.5, 50.7 in 1932 and 51.8 in 1933.
Spending data (Ausgaben Insges. Einschl. Umlagen in 1,000 RM) are reported by fiscal
years, which runs from the first day of April in a year to the last day of March in the following
year. Data adds the ordinary and extraordinary budget and all level of expenditure. In the
statistical analysis we removed the city of Solingen (an independent city Stadtkreise in the
state of North Rhine-Westphalia) as a potential outlier. Regarding spending data by budget
category, General Administration includes expenditures on general administration, police
and security. Education combines spending on elementary school, secondary schools, middle
schools, higher schools and other school systems including spending on science and art and
church. Health and wellbeing adds data on healthcare and healthcare facilities, welfare and
relief. Construction adds construction management and civil entering, spending on transport
and general economic development. Spending on public infrastructures adds data on street
cleaning and lighting, parks, cemeteries, cleaning of canals, sewage and drainage and finally,
Housing combines data on housing and settlement. For the later years instead of the totals
for these five categories data were reported in more disaggre-gated categories. However, to
have a consistent panel we just add the more disaggregated categories into these 5 meaningful
categories reported in 1929.
Population data refers to the level of population (nationals and non-nationals) at the beginning of the year (1st of January), with the exception of 1933 that was reported at 16 June
1933. Unemployment data are given at the end of the year (31 December) with the exception
of 1933 that was reported at 28 February of 1934. A worker is defined as unemployed if the

worker is part of the labor force but not working and it is registered in the local offices as
an unemployed person. To proxy economic output we use the yearly construction of new
apartments on residential buildings (Neuerstellte Wohnungen in Wohngebauden). We note
that the construction of new residential apartments moved closely with the development
GDP (for instance see Ritschl 2013a, Tab. 4.4).
We use the weekly bulletins of the Reichs-Gesundheitsblatt to collect a new city level panel
of weekly high-resolution mortality data for over 23 causes of death. Weekly data have been
aggregated into yearly data and are available for cities with a population larger than 100,000
inhabitants. In total the panel is based on 51 cities. Since the Reichs-Gesundheitsblatts
also provide population figures (instead of weekly reported population figures change every
two-three months) we calculate crude death rates with the mid-year population weighting
the number of deaths of a certain cause by the city-population (in thousands). We also use
the data on infant deaths (deaths below the age of 1 not including stillbirths) to calculate
the city level infant mortality rates weighting the infant deaths by the number of city births
which are also reported in the health bulletins.
We next move to district level data. Data on electoral returns for the Reichstag elections
of September 1930, 1932 (July and November) and March 1933 at the district (kreis) level
are from the official publication Statistik des Deutschen Reiches (Wahlen zum Reichstag’s
volumes). Data were initially collected and used by Falter et al. 1986. We used the updates
made by Satyanath et al. (2017) to Falter’s data which accounts for, amongst other things,
changes in district borders.
Income taxes are newly collected form Die Einkommen- und Körperschaftsteuerveranlagungen
and wage taxes are newly collected from Der Steuerabzug vom Arbeitslohn (which both are
reported under the official Statistik des Deutschen Reichs). The Reich statistical books provide state and district (kreis) level data on the number of taxpayers, total taxable income,
and total revenue (in 1,000 RM) on income and wage taxes. For income taxes at the district
level we use the data from Teil I Abschnitt A, Einkommensteuerveranlagung, Steuerpichtige,
Einkunfte und festgesetzte Steuer and for wage taxes at the district level the data from Teil
I Abschnitt A, Lohnsteuerpichtige, (soweit nicht veranlagt): Steuerbelastete, Steuerbefreite,
Unbesteuerte. In the next page we show the spatial distribution of the change in income
taxes between 1929/1932.
Government spending data are newly collected from Die Ausgaben und Einnahmen der
offientlichen Verwaltung im Deutschen Reich (which are reported under the official Statistik
des Deutschen Reichs). These books provide state level data on central, state and municipal spending (in 1,000 RM). Data for unemployment are the number of unemployed
workers in a state as given in the official Statistisches Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich. A
worker is deffined as unemployed if the worker is part of the labour force but not working.
For each year we created a state-level index of nominal wages arithmetically averaging the
monthly data from the hourly wages paid in four occupations: construction (Bauarbeite),
wood (Holzarbeiter ) and skilled and unskilled workers in metallurgy (Metallarbeiter ). This
index is based on 38 big cities that consistently reported data between 1929 and 1933 and
each city has been located within each of the states. Data are in Rentenpfennig (Rf) (1

Rentenmark = 100 Rentenpfennig) and were newly collected from the official Statistisches
Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich. Throughout we use the natural logarithm of this index in
a state or the percentage change.1
Economic output is proxied by the generation of electricity under the assumption that the
vast majority of manufactured goods and services are produced using electricity. Data are at
the state level, measured in 1,000 kWh and were newly collected from the official Statistisches
Jahrbuch für das Deutsche Reich. Throughout we use the natural logarithm of this variable
or percentage changes.

1

The 38 cities are: Aachen, Altona, Augsburg, Barmen, Berlin, Bochum, Brandenburg, Braunschweig,
Bremen, Breslau, Chemnitz, Dortmund, Dresden, Duisburg, Dusseldorf, Erfurt, Essen, Frankfurt a. M.,
Gelsenkirchen, Hagen, Halle a. S., Hamburg, Hannover, Karlsruhe, Kassel, Kiel, Köln, Königsberg, Leipzig,
Magdeburg, Mannheim, Munchen, Nürnberg, Remscheid, Solingen, Stettin, Stuttgart, and Wuppertal.

18

