                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE COSTS OF (SUB)SOVEREIGN DEFAULT RISK:
                          EVIDENCE FROM PUERTO RICO

                                         Anusha Chari
                                          Ryan Leary
                                          Toan Phan

                                      Working Paper 24108
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w24108


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  December 2017




We thank seminar participants at the Federal Reserve Board and conference participants at the
Interdisciplinary Sovereign Debt Research and Management Conference (DebtCon) in Geneva
for helpful comments and suggestions. We thank Mitu Gulati, Ju Hyun Kim, Violeta Sosa,
Christoph Trebesch, and John Walter for helpful discussions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond or the Federal Reserve System.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Anusha Chari, Ryan Leary, and Toan Phan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Costs of (sub)Sovereign Default Risk: Evidence from Puerto Rico
Anusha Chari, Ryan Leary, and Toan Phan
NBER Working Paper No. 24108
December 2017
JEL No. F3,F4,G15,H2,H3

                                           ABSTRACT

Puerto Rico’s unique characteristics as a U.S. territory allow us to examine the channels through
which (sub)sovereign default risk can have real effects on the macroeconomy. Post-2012, during
the period of increased default probabilities, the cointegrating relationship between real activity in
Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland breaks down and Puerto Rico spirals into a significant decline.
We exploit the cross-industry variation in default risk exposure to identify the impact of changes
in default risk on employment. The evidence suggests that there are significantly higher
employment growth declines in government demand and external finance dependent industries.
An additional real effect of default anticipation is that heightened default risk Granger causes
Puerto Rico’s austerity measures. An event study analysis using government bond yields and
stock returns confirms that news of increased default risk increases the cost of capital for the
Puerto Rican government and for publicly traded Puerto Rican firms.


Anusha Chari                                           Toan Phan
301 Gardner Hall                                       The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
CB#3305, Department of Economics                       701 E Byrd St.
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill            Richmond, VA 23219
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                                  and University of North Carolina Chapel Hill
and NBER                                               toanvphan@gmail.com
achari@unc.edu

Ryan Leary
CB #3305, Department of Economics
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill NC 27599
rleary@live.unc.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w24108
1       Introduction
The global financial crisis and the subsequent debt crises highlight the heightened levels
of sovereign default risk across the developed world. A large literature in international
economics investigates the costs of sovereign default and default risk.1 This paper uses
Puerto Rico’s debt crisis to develop a novel identification strategy to extract the real costs
of (sub)sovereign default risk.
    For most countries, it is difficult to isolate changes in sovereign default risk from changes
in banking and/or currency crises risk or from the impact of government interventions in-
volving private debt contracts. For example, in the most widely studied case of default of
Argentina in 2001, the sovereign default crisis was inextricably linked to a concurrent bank-
ing and currency crisis (Perez (2015); Hébert and Schreger (2017)). In the case of Greece,
the government intervened in the financial system, declaring a bank holiday, limiting deposit
withdrawals, and imposing controls on capital outflows (Arellano et al. (2015)). Although
Greece remained on the euro, the possibility of exit constituted ex-ante currency crisis risk.
    Several factors make the case of Puerto Rico unique. First, as a U.S. territory, Puerto
Rico cannot by law abandon the U.S. dollar, effectively eliminating currency crisis risk (U.S.
Constitution, Article I, Sections 8 and 10). Second, Puerto Rico’s banks are protected by
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and comprise a small share of the U.S. banking
sector, thereby preventing bank runs and systemic financial risk. Further, according to the
Puerto Rico Federal Relations Act of 1950 and the Contracts Clause of the U.S. Constitution,
the Puerto Rican government does not have the legal authority to intervene in the banking
system to limit deposit withdrawals or impose capital controls. The risk of a banking crisis
is therefore de minimis. Third, Puerto Rican data standards conform to the U.S. mainland.
An important advantage is that Puerto Rican data on macro-indicators such as employment
are available at higher frequencies and disaggregated at the industry level. Puerto Rico’s
unique characteristics allow us to examine the channels through which (sub)sovereign default
can have real effects on the macroeconomy.
    We argue that Puerto Rico embodies a set of attributes that make it possible to treat it
as an interesting (sub)sovereign. First, it has a constitution, and the ability to tax and create
laws on local matters. In almost all of these aspects, Puerto Rico is very much a sovereign
akin to U.S. states. However, in some respects it is more sovereign than U.S. states. For
example, its subsidiaries, such as municipalities, cannot file for bankruptcy under Chapter 9
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code. Legally, while it is less clear what kind of sovereign immunity

    1
    For example, Borensztein and Panizza (2009), Yeyati and Panizza (2011), Cruces and Trebesch (2013),
Hébert and Schreger (2017). The related literature provides a more comprehensive list.

                                                  2
Puerto Rico has, it likely has some (Gulati and Weidemaier (2016)). Given its unique status
as a U.S. territory, and similar to sovereign nations, the path to restructuring Puerto Rico’s
debt is therefore particularly unclear.
    There are of course some ways in which Puerto Rico is not quite as sovereign as, for
example, Greece. While local Puerto Rican laws govern Puerto Rico’s bonds, Puerto Rico
cannot-in contrast to Greece-quite so easily change its laws to reduce its debt. While it
may have some latitude, the Contracts Clause provides U.S. constitutional protection on
government interference with private contracts that constrain it more than the European
laws perhaps constrained Greece (Commonwealth of Puerto Rico v. Franklin California
Tax-Free Trust et al., October 2015). In addition, enforcement is a real possibility in the
case of Puerto Rico, where unpaid creditors can go to court with a real possibility of obtaining
recovery, assuming there are some assets. Finally, while there is no possibility of an IMF
bailout, there is always the possibility of a federal bailout, which could perhaps be much
more significant.2
    Specifically, this paper examines the real effects of anticipation of Puerto Rico’s default.
First, using activity for the mainland U.S. as a control, we investigate whether the dete-
rioration in Puerto Rico’s credit rating and credit spreads that occurred after 2012 led to
a significant divergence in Puerto Rico’s real economic activity from the rest of the U.S..
Second, we use an approach similar to Rajan and Zingales (1998) to establish that increased
default risk reduces employment in industries that are ex ante more exposed or sensitive to
a default event due to greater dependence on external finance. We use this methodology to
address the concern that declines in economic activity may drive increased default proba-
bility and thus confound identification of the effect of default probability on employment.
Similarly, we investigate whether increased default risk reduces employment in industries
more exposed to government demand.
    Third, we use an event study framework to investigate whether changes in Puerto Rico’s
credit risk affected yields on government debt or the stock returns of public Puerto Rican
firms. We identify changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk using ratings actions on Puerto Rican
debt and legal events related to the legal rights of Puerto Rican government entities to
restructure their debt. Standard event-study assumptions allow us to causally identify the
effect of changes in sovereign risk on the cost of capital.
    The main findings are as follows. First, while the U.S.’ private employment, economic
activity, and investment spending improved significantly post-2012, Puerto Rico’s did not.
Specifically, difference-in-difference estimates suggest that average quarterly private employ-
ment growth, economic activity growth, and investment spending growth were significantly
   2
       We are grateful to Mitu Gulati for clarifying many of these details about Puerto Rico’s sovereign status.

                                                        3
lower for Puerto Rico compared to the U.S. mainland post-2012 relative to the pre-2012 pe-
riod. This divergence coincides with the increased credit spreads on Puerto Rican debt and
the declining credit ratings that preceded Puerto Rico’s default. These results establish that
increased (sub)sovereign risk coincided with a negative and significant aggregate divergence
of Puerto Rico’s economy from the rest of the U.S. mainland.
    Second, increased default probabilities are associated with lower employment growth in
industries that are relatively more exposed to Puerto Rican government demand and more
dependent on external finance. These findings are both statistically and economically signif-
icant. Further, the magnitude of the negative effect of default risk on employment growth
in government-demand-dependent industries increases when the government undertakes aus-
terity measures. One potential rationale for these results is that agents learn about future
government policy when they observe how austerity measures respond to increased default
risk. We also find that increased default risk Granger causes austerity, indicating the govern-
ment may undertake austerity in response to borrowing constraints or to reassure investors.
    Last, we find that negative credit events are associated with significant increases in credit
spreads on Puerto Rican debt and significant decreases in stock returns for Puerto Rican
firms. These findings show that increased credit risk significantly increased the cost of capital
for the Puerto Rican government and Puerto Rican firms.
    Related literature: Our paper is closely related to the empirical literature on the costs
of sovereign default. To the best of our knowledge, our paper is the first to estimate the
economic costs of the risk of default in the case of Puerto Rico. By using high-frequency
data, our analysis complements Hébert and Schreger (2017), who exploit a legal ruling to
estimate the cost of the risk of default in the case of Argentina. Our case study of Puerto
Rico also complements Zettelmeyer et al.’s (2013) case study of the recent Greek default
episode.
    Our paper adds to the earlier literature that uses data at lower frequencies. For sur-
veys of this literature, see Borensztein and Panizza (2009), Tomz and Wright (2013), and
Reinhart and Trebesch (2016). For instance, Yeyati and Panizza (2011) suggest that output
contractions tend to precede defaults and that output starts growing after the quarter in
which the default took place, indicating that the costs of default are likely to be driven by
anticipation. Arteta and Hale (2008) and Fuentes and Saravia (2011) document that default
episodes are associated with declines in foreign credit to the defaulting countries’ private sec-
tor and declines in foreign direct investment. In contrast, using longer historical data, Tomz
and Wright (2010) find that sovereigns rarely defaulted and expropriated foreign investment
at the same time. Cruces and Trebesch (2013) document that defaults with larger haircuts
are associated with longer periods of exclusion from international financial markets. On the


                                               4
political side, Borensztein and Panizza (2009) and Livshits et al. (2014) find that sovereign
defaults are associated with increases in the turnovers of incumbent politicians.
    Our paper is also related to the large theoretical literature on sovereign debt, which can
be traced back to Eaton and Gersovitz (1981) and Bulow and Rogoff (1989). More recent
quantitative models include Aguiar and Gopinath (2006), Arellano (2008), Mendoza and Yue
(2012), and Perez (2015); for a recent survey, see Aguiar et al. (2014).
    We conduct several robustness checks to confirm our benchmark results. We find that the
results are robust to substituting yield spreads on Puerto Rican debt for the imputed default
probabilities and restricting the sample to the post-U.S. financial crisis period. We control
for industry-level exposures to recession risk, the population and housing price declines in
Puerto Rico, as well as different types of industry-level shocks, and we find that the main
results are robust to these alternative specifications. Finally, we find that our benchmark
event study results are robust to controlling for overlapping event windows, alternative event
windows, and estimation periods for the market model.
    The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 provides a brief historical background and
discusses a timeline of the Puerto Rican debt crisis. Section 3 presents the data. Section
4 documents a breakdown of a cointegrating relationship between Puerto Rico’s economic
growth and that of the mainland U.S. after 2012. Section 5 establishes the relationship
between default risk and employment growth in industries relatively more dependent on
external finance and government demand. Section 6 presents additional tests and robustness
checks. Section 7 concludes.


2        Background: The Puerto Rican Debt Crisis
Puerto Rico officially became a U.S. Commonwealth in 1952. Since then, the island has
operated under U.S. judicial, monetary, and tariff systems after being ceded to the U.S. in
1898 at the end of the Spanish-American War. About the size of Ireland, Puerto Rico had a
dense population of 3.5 million in 2014 (if it were a state, Puerto Rico would be the 29th most
populous state). The island’s GDP experienced several decades of catch-up growth relative
to the mainland after World War II, especially after the passing of several tax reform acts,
particularly the passage of Section 936 of the Tax Reform Act of 1976. Section 936 granted
federal tax exemptions to U.S. corporations on income originating in U.S. territories.3 At
the same time, the Puerto Rican government granted foreign subsidiaries a tax exemption
on state taxes if the income was repatriated in the form of dividends. Given the attractive
tax breaks, a number of U.S. mainland-based corporations established subsidiaries in Puerto
    3
        See Collins et al. (2007)

                                              5
Rico. However, in 1996, given concerns about tax avoidance, the Clinton administration
signed legislation that phased out Section 936, to be fully repealed by 2006. Meanwhile, the
triple tax exempt status of Puerto Rican debt and Puerto Rico’s constitutional guarantee
that general obligation debt be paid before any other liability fueled an increase in Puerto
Rico’s debt-to-GNP ratio.
    Following the repeal of Section 936, multinational investment in Puerto Rico declined
sharply and the economy fell into a recession from which it is yet to recover. Yields on
Puerto Rican debt began rising sharply as Puerto Rico’s debt surpassed 100% of GNP
in 2012; yields spiked sharply in 2013, with subsequent years being marked by continued
downgrades of Puerto Rico’s credit rating, which reached junk status in 2014. Puerto Rican
yields continued to increase in 2014 and 2015, making it more costly for Puerto Rico to roll
over its debt and indicating increased risk of default.
    Despite the impending default, Puerto Rico is not allowed access to Chapter 9 of the
U.S. Bankruptcy Code under which municipalities of U.S. states, like Detroit, can declare
bankruptcy and restructure their debt. Nevertheless, the Contracts Clause of the U.S. Con-
stitution prevents states from passing local laws binding creditors to accept losses. However,
Puerto Rico passed several local laws aimed at creating a legal framework for agencies of
Puerto Rico to restructure their debt, most notably the Puerto Rico Public Corporations
Debt Enforcement and Recovery Act of June 28, 2014. The law was modeled after Chapter
9 of the U.S. bankruptcy code. Puerto Rico argued that if its status as a nonstate prevented
it from accessing Chapter 9, then it should also be exempt from the Contracts Clause that
applies to states.
    On June 28, 2015, the governor of Puerto Rico announced that the $72 billion stock
of debt was not payable,4 and on June 29, 2015, Standards and Poors (2015) downgraded
the general obligation bonds of Puerto Rico to ‘CCC-’ and wrote, “The downgrades are
based on our view that a default, distressed exchange, or redemption of the commonwealth’s
debt appears to be inevitable within the next six months absent unanticipated significantly
favorable changes in the issuers’ circumstances.” Meanwhile, the U.S. district court in Puerto
Rico, the U.S. First Circuit Court of Appeals, and ultimately the Supreme Court on June
13, 2016, struck down the Puerto Rico Public Corporations Debt Enforcement and Recovery
Act, determining that Puerto Rico was a state for purposes of the Contracts Clause and not
a state for purposes of access to Chapter 9. Following the Supreme Court ruling, the matter
of Puerto Rico’s inevitable inability to meet its obligations was left to the U.S. Congress.
    On June 30, 2016, the U.S. Congress passed PROMESA, establishing a formal legal

   4
     http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/29/business/dealbook/puerto-ricos-governor-says-islands-debts-
are-not-payable.html

                                                  6
framework for Puerto Rico to restructure its debt. Puerto Rico formally defaulted the next
day, missing $779 million dollars in payments on its general obligation debt. PROMESA
placed a stay on any litigation against Puerto Rico relating to default and established a court-
supervised restructuring process based on Chapter 9, with the additional stricture that any
restructuring plan must be the most favorable legally obtainable by creditors. PROMESA
also placed Puerto Rico’s budget under the authority of a seven-person oversight board with
the goal of balancing Puerto Rico’s budget.
    The story of the run up to Puerto Rico’s default provides unique data and identification
and yet is not unfamiliar. Puerto Rico’s final default on June 30, 2016, was preceded by
several years of economic malaise and legal and political uncertainty relating to the form that
Puerto Rico’s default would take. Figures 1 and 2 show that Puerto Rico is no exception
to the pattern of pre-default declines in activity that are typically observed for several years
prior to sovereign defaults in emerging markets. Figure 2 also shows that yields on Puerto
Rico’s debt increased substantially in the years preceding its default, indicating significant
anticipation. The data are consistent with the hypothesis of Yeyati and Panizza (2011)
that the typically observed pattern of pre-default declines in output and employment are
likely driven by default anticipation “independently of whether or not the country ultimately
decides to validate it.”


3       Data
3.1     Macro Data
To assess the effect of Puerto Rico’s crisis on the cointegrating relationship of Puerto Rico’s
economy with the U.S., we collect macroeconomic data for Puerto Rico and the U.S. from
2006 until the most recent available, which varies by series. Data on U.S. quarterly season-
ally adjusted real GDP in chained 2009 dollars comes from the Federal Reserve Economic
Data (FRED) and runs from 2006:Q1-2016:Q2. As quarterly Puerto Rican GDP data are
not available, we measure quarterly Puerto Rican economic activity using the monthly GDB
economic activity index, aggregated to the quarterly level using averages, and seasonally
adjusting the data with Census X-13.5 The economic activity index is also available from
2006:Q1 to 2016:Q2 and tracks the behavior of four major monthly economic indicators:
total nonfarm payroll employment, cement sales, gasoline consumption, and electric power
generation. Data on total private employment from the U.S. and Puerto Rico are available

    5
     Census X-13 fits an ARIMA model to a time series to perform a seasonal adjustment.      See
https://www.census.gov/srd/www/x13as/

                                               7
from 2006:Q1 to 2016:Q2 and comes from the BLS Employment, Hours, and Earnings sec-
tion of the Current Employment Statistics Survey. We aggregate the raw monthly data to
quarterly values by taking the average and again seasonally adjusting with Census X-13.
Data on annual real investment spending for Puerto Rico and the U.S. come from the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook and are available from 2006 to 2015.
    To document the credit crunch in Puerto Rico, we retrieve data on quarterly call reports
from the FDIC for the five banks headquartered in Puerto Rico: Banco Santander Puerto
Rico, Scotiabank de Puerto Rico, FirstBank Puerto Rico, Oriental Bank, and Banco Popular
de Puerto Rico. We collect data on total assets, commercial and industrial loans, and bank
exposure to states and political subdivisions in the U.S. via direct loans and ownership of
securities, and total capital. We do not have complete data indicating what share of these
items are associated with Puerto Rican government entities as opposed to other U.S. issuers.
However, as Oriental Bank also files 10-K reports with the SEC, we confirm that all of
Oriental’s exposure to states and political subdivisions in the U.S. comes from Puerto Rican
municipal issuers.
    We extract data on Puerto Rico’s annual fiscal balance from the “Statement of Revenue,
Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances: Governmental Funds” in Puerto Rico’s finan-
cial statements. Total revenues and expenditures are adjusted to remove intergovernmental
transfers, debt service/issuance costs, and interest revenues. We then convert these nominal
series to 2016 dollars using U.S. CPI. To investigate the effect of Puerto Rico’s discretionary
fiscal balance, we calculate the cyclically adjusted primary balance (CAP B) as detailed in
Fedelino et al. (2009). CAP B measures the structural or discretionary component of the
government primary balance (revenues minus expenditures) by accounting for the cyclical
nature of automatic spending stabilizers and revenues. The cyclical adjustment is accom-
plished by measuring the output gap and adjusting the primary balance as follows:

                                     CAP B         R  G
                                           = capb = −                                                (1)
                                      Yp           Y  Yp

where Y is output, Yp is potential output, R is government revenues, and G is government
expenditures.6 R and G are derived from Puerto Rico’s financial statements and adjusted
as noted above. To calculate Y and Yp we rely on two data sources and an HP filter. Puerto
Rico’s Government Development Bank has data on Puerto Rico’s annual GNP from 2008-
2015, while the World Bank has Puerto Rico’s annual GNI from 1960-2013. We convert both
series to 2016 dollars using U.S. CPI. As the HP filter’s calculation of Yp is most reliable

   6
     Note this equation requires standard assumptions on the elasticities of revenue and expenditure with
respect to the output gap. See Fedelino et al. (2009).

                                                   8
with a long time series and away from the beginning and end of the time series, we fit the
HP filter with the standard annual sensitivity parameter (λ = 100) to the log of Puerto
Rico’s real GNI from 1990-2015. As Puerto Rico’s GNI is not available in 2014 and 2015, we
interpolate GNI in 2014 and 2015 using 2013 log real GNI and the growth rate in log real
GNP in 2014 and 2015.7 We construct Yp by extracting the trend in log real GNI from the
HP filter’s output and taking its exponent. With these data, we calculate capb as described
in equation (1).


3.2     Industry-level Data
In order to study the effect of default risk on employment across industries according to
exposure to default risk, we collect data on industry-level employment in manufacturing,
industry-level dependence on external finance, and industry-level dependence on government
demand for all available time periods from 2000-2016. Data on the monthly employment of
Puerto Rican manufacturers at the three digit NAICS level comes from the BLS Quarterly
Census of Employment and Wages and is available from 2000 to 2016. This provides data on
19 manufacturing industries. More granular levels of the NAICS classification system reduce
the coverage of manufacturing employment in Puerto Rico. We seasonally adjust the time
series of employment for each three digit industry using the Census X-13 program.
    To measure dependence on external finance at the three digit NAICS level, we use the
method described in Rajan and Zingales (1998). That is, we calculate the ratio:

                                               CAP EX − CF OP ER
                               EXT F IN =                                                             (2)
                                                    CAP EX

where CAP EX is total capital expenditures and CF OP ER is total cash flows from oper-
ations of a given firm over the period 2000-2015. We calculate the ratio for all U.S. firms
in the Compustat database over the period 2000-2015, taking the median for each industry
at the three digit NAICS level. See Appendix A.1 for a more detailed description of the
construction of EXT F IN . Table A.1 shows EXT F IN for the three-digit NAICS manufac-
turing industries for which we have Puerto Rican employment data. For robustness, we also
utilize the pre-crisis estimation period of 1995-2005 and the narrower period of 2005-2015 to
calculate EXT F IN . The two alternative estimation periods have correlations of over 0.9
with the benchmark period.
    Data to measure the dependence on Puerto Rican government demand (GOV ) of each
three digit NAICS manufacturing industry come from the 2012 Economic Census of Island
   7
     The log growth rates in GNP and GNI are correlated 0.81 where the time series overlap, so we consider
this a reasonable approach.

                                                    9
Areas of the U.S. Census Bureau. The Census provides the share of products shipped and
contract receipts within Puerto Rico by class of customer for manufacturing industries and
the value of products shipped and contract receipts by product destination for manufac-
turing industries, including the share shipped within Puerto Rico. To calculate GOV , we
multiply each industry’s share of Puerto Rican products shipped and contract receipts to
the Commonwealth government by the industry’s share of products shipped and contract
receipts within Puerto Rico to arrive at each industry’s share of total sales to the Puerto
Rican government.


3.3     Financial Market Data
To measure the default risk of the Puerto Rican government, we use the credit triangle
method of White (2013) and credit default swap spread data from JP Morgan’s Markit
to calculate the five-year risk neutral cumulative default probability on the debt of the
Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.8 That is, the probability of default within five years. The
raw data are daily and run from May 2008 to November 2015. Although the data include
spreads on contracts ranging from six months to 30 years, there are substantial gaps for all
horizons except five years.9 Due to these gaps, we use the spreads and recovery rates on
five-year credit default swaps to approximate the default probability implied by the five year
contract as follows:

                                                            S5
                                                          λ=                                              (3)
                                                          1−R
                             P (default within 5 years) = 1 − exp(−5λ)                                    (4)

where λ is the hazard rate, S5 is the par spread paid for five years of insurance against
default, and R is the average recovery rate reported by dealers contributing to Markit. We
then generate ∆DEF as the change in the monthly average of the probability of default.
    To measure the effect of changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk on private borrowing costs,
we collect stock return data for publicly traded companies with primary operations in Puerto
Rico. There are four publicly traded companies with primary operations in Puerto Rico and
a time series of returns covering the span of the rating and legal events we use to identify
changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk. These are: OFG Bancorp (OFG), Banco Popular
(BPOP), First Bancorp (FBP), and the health insurer Triple-S Management Corp. (GTS).

   8
      The credit triangle method assumes the premium leg of the CDS contract is paid continuously and the
hazard rate is constant.
    9
      The gaps for contract lengths other than five years results from the fact that the five-year contract is
the most popular contract length and the resulting low trading frequency for less popular contract lengths.

                                                     10
We collect daily return data on these four firms and the S&P 500 index from 2010-2016.
Of course, these four companies are not a representative sample of firms in Puerto Rico.
However, this feature is an advantage for our identification strategy. As publicly traded
companies with audited financial statements, these companies are large and transparent,
thus allowing relatively frictionless access to U.S. capital markets. For such firms, we can
reasonably treat the supply of funds as perfectly elastic at the risk-adjusted rate.
    To measure the effect of changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk on public borrowing costs,
we collect data on the yields of all general obligation debt issued by the Commonwealth of
Puerto Rico outstanding during some part of the 2010-2016 period from Bloomberg. We
treat stale observations of yield as missing values. That is, if the reported yield of a security
does not change on a given day, this is classified as a missing observation.10 We exclude
insured bonds as these embed the credit risk of the insurer. We also exclude bonds that are
pre-refunded, as these bonds become risk free when refunded. This results in a sample of
471 securities that meet these restrictions and have yield data during at least some of the
events we use to identify changes in credit risk. For each security issue, we compute the
daily yield spread as the difference between the tax-adjusted yield on the issue and the yield
on a Treasury security with the same number of months remaining until maturity, retrieved
from FRED.11


4        Diverging Growth Rates between Puerto Rico and the
         U.S. Mainland
In this section, we examine real economic activity in Puerto Rico relative to the U.S. main-
land. First, we observe that the spike in Puerto Rican yields beginning in 2013 coincides with
a decline in the Puerto Rican economy and constitutes a divergence from its close correla-
tion with the U.S. mainland until then. We then formally test whether the data support the
hypothesis that the cointegrating relationship between Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland
breaks down post-2012.
    Figure 1 plots Puerto Rico’s real GNP growth along with U.S. real GNP growth, Puerto
Rico’s debt-to-GNP ratio, and its credit rating. Figure 1 shows that beginning in 2006,
Puerto Rico’s economic growth slowed down significantly as investment in Puerto Rico de-
clined following the full repeal of Section 936. Puerto Rico’s GNP growth continued its

    10
     This is standard practice in the finance literature. See for example, Duffee (1998).
    11
     The time to maturity is matched using a cubic spline interpolation of the Treasury yield curve. See
Appendix A.2 for a description of the process used to adjust the yields of Puerto Rican securities for their
tax benefit.

                                                    11
decline through 2008 and with the compounding shock of the U.S. financial crisis reached a
trough in 2009. Despite the dual shocks of the repeal of Section 936 and the U.S. financial
crisis, Puerto Rico’s GNP growth rate began increasing from 2010 to 2012, reaching a posi-
tive growth rate in 2012 for the first time since 2006. However, in 2012 Puerto Rico’s debt
surpassed 100% of GNP with subsequent years marked by continued downgrades of Puerto
Rico’s credit rating, which reached junk status in 2014. Post-2012, GNP growth rates turned
negative once again. The continuing contraction was a striking divergence from the contin-
ued recovery of U.S. GNP growth, which Puerto Rico was tracking, albeit anemically. The
data suggest that Puerto Rico’s credit deterioration coincides with a divergence of Puerto
Rico’s close ties to U.S. real economic activity.
    Figure 2 uses Puerto Rican and U.S. monthly private employment along with the raw
yield on five-Year Puerto Rican general obligation debt to present a closer look at Puerto
Rico’s recovery from the dual shocks of the repeal of section 936 and the U.S. financial crisis.
Similar to Figure 1, this more granular plot shows that Puerto Rico began to recover from the
expiration of Section 936 and the U.S. financial crisis in 2010. Puerto Rican normalized log
private employment appears to track U.S. private employment into 2012. However, in 2012
and 2013, private employment stagnates while yields on Puerto Rican debt increased. In
mid-to-late 2013, yields spiked and employment began a sharper decline. It appears that the
increase in Puerto Rican yields coincides with a drop in Puerto Rican private employment.
This reduction in Puerto Rican employment seems to break the cointegrating relationship
with U.S. employment that existed before the period of increased yields. Puerto Rican yields
continued to rise in 2014 and 2015, making it more costly for Puerto Rico to roll over its
debt and indicating an increased risk of default.
    Although Figures 1 and 2 merely provide visual hints that anticipation of Puerto Rico’s
default coincides with a decline in Puerto Rico’s aggregate real activity, the data are sugges-
tive of the hypothesis that Puerto Rico’s economic decline was not a result of a mainland
shock. Further, if the hypothesis that anticipation of Puerto Rico’s default led to a decline
in aggregate activity holds, we would expect that the timing of the divergence of Puerto
Rico’s activity from that of the U.S. mainland coincides with an increase in Puerto Rico’s
default risk. We can test whether the aggregate data are consistent with the hypothesis that
anticipation of default coincides with a decline in real aggregate activity in Puerto Rico.
    To do so, we conduct a difference-in-difference analysis of quarterly private employment
growth, quarterly economic activity growth, and annual investment spending growth for
2006-2012 versus post-2012.12 Our control group for the post-2012 period begins in 2006

  12
    As Section 3.1 describes, economic activity growth is quarterly real GDP growth for the U.S. and
quarterly growth in the economic activity index from Puerto Rico’s GDB for Puerto Rico.

                                                12
as we attempt to identify the effect of Puerto Rico’s increased default anticipation on the
cointegrating relationship between Puerto Rico’s economy and the U.S. economy following
the repeal of Section 936. Therefore we limit the pre-2012 period to the years following the
full repeal.
    In columns 1 and 4 of Table 1, we regress the growth rates of private employment, eco-
nomic activity, and investment spending on a constant for the period 2006-2012 for Puerto
Rico and the U.S. mainland, respectively.13 The data indicate a substantial economic con-
traction in both Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland for the 2006-2012 period. Columns 2
and 5 examine real activity in the post-2012 period.14 The coefficient estimates suggest that
while the U.S mainland began its recovery from the global financial crisis during this period,
Puerto Rico’s private employment, economic activity, and investment spending continued
to contract. The estimates in Column 3 confirm that Puerto Rico’s economic contraction
continued in the post-2012 period. In contrast, the specification in Column 5 shows that
the recovery in U.S. real GNP, private employment, and investment spending growth in the
post-2012 period is highly statistically significant compared to the pre-2012 period.
    Finally, Column 7 presents the difference-in-difference estimates for Puerto Rico less the
U.S. mainland for all three variables. The results confirm that the difference in private
quarterly employment growth in Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland pre- and post-2012
is -0.42% and significant at the 1% level. That is, Puerto Rican employment growth from
2013Q1-2016Q2 was -0.42% lower than the rate predicted by its benchmark relationship with
U.S. employment growth from 2006Q1-2012Q4. Similarly, Puerto Rican activity growth from
2013Q1-2016Q2 was -0.34% lower than the predicted rate from its relationship with U.S.
activity growth from 2006Q1-2012Q4, significant at the 5% level. Puerto Rican investment
growth post-2012 was -1.4% below the rate predicted by its relationship with U.S. investment
growth pre-2012, significant at the 5% level.
    The data confirm that in the post-2012 period, the cointegrating relationship of real
activity in Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland appears to break down. The data appear
consistent with the hypothesis that the continued contraction in Puerto Rico’s economy
post-2012 was due to Puerto Rico specific shocks, rather than shocks originating from the
U.S. mainland. Further, recall that in the post-2012 period there was a significant increase
in anticipation of a Puerto Rican default. In what follows, we investigate the potential
channels through which increased default anticipation can have real effects on Puerto Rico’s
economy.
  13
     Data on employment growth and activity growth is quarterly, while investment spending growth is
measured annually.
  14
     The data are from 2013Q1 to 2016Q2 for private employment growth and economic activity growth,
and the period from 2013 to 2015 for annual growth in investment spending.

                                                13
5    The Real Effects of Sovereign Default Risk
Section 4 provides suggestive evidence that an increase in the risk of default is associated
with decline in economic activity, particularly in employment. However, problems of reverse
causality plague studies that examine whether finance matters for the real economy or how
financial crises affect the real economy (e.g., Levine (2005); Mendoza and Terrones (2008);
Laeven and Valencia (2013)). To identify causality, we test two hypotheses that rely on
alternative theoretical mechanisms through which sovereign default risk may affect the real
economy.
    The credit channel: We hypothesize that an increase in sovereign default risk dispro-
portionately affects industries that are more dependent on external finance. We adopt a
difference-in-difference approach used by Rajan and Zingales (1998) to study the effects of
finance on growth and subsequently by Dell’Ariccia et al. (2008) to study the real effects
of banking crises. Our premise is that an increase in sovereign default risk could have a
negative effect on real economic activity especially if during periods of heightened sovereign
default risk there are more adverse consequences for external finance dependent industries.
    Intuitively, an increase in sovereign default risk can hurt the supply of credit to Puerto
Rican firms. If Puerto Rican banks tend to hold Puerto Rican government debt on their
balance sheets, then an increase in sovereign default risk could adversely impact the balance
sheets of these banks and their ability to provide credit to the local economy. Several
theoretical papers in the recent literature suggest that this mechanism is prominent behind
the “deadly embrace” between the balance sheets of the governments and the financial sector
in European economies during recent financial crises (see, inter alia, Farhi and Tirole (2017)).
The contraction in the supply of credit could in turn negatively affect firms in industries that
are typically more dependent on bank loans for their financing.
    One may argue that since Puerto Rico is an open economy that is financially integrated
with the U.S. mainland, firms located in Puerto Rico can still seek external finance in the form
of loans or equity/debt issuance from non-Puerto Rican banks. Thus, the effect on the local
supply of credit may have limited effects on firms located in Puerto Rico. However, evidence
suggests that rating agencies tend to have sovereign ceiling policies, which require that firms’
ratings remain at or below the rating of their country of domicile (e.g., Almeida et al. (2017)).
Under these policies, a downgrade in the rating of the Puerto Rican government bond could
negatively affect the ratings of firms located in Puerto Rico, thus negatively affecting firms
that are more dependent on external debt. An increase in the perceived risk of firms could
also have a negative spillover effect on the ability of firms to seek external finance through
equity issuance. To evaluate the plausibility of this mechanism, we will test an additional


                                               14
hypothesis that an increase in the risk of (sub)sovereign default is associated with negative
cumulative abnormal returns for listed Puerto Rican firms.
    The austerity channel: We hypothesize that an increase in sovereign default risk will dis-
proportionately affect industries that are more dependent on government demand. Our con-
jecture is that an increase in sovereign default risk would negatively affect the government’s
borrowing capacity and increase the probability of fiscal austerity implying that industries
that are more dependent on government spending would be hurt more severely during a
period of heightened sovereign default risk. To evaluate the plausibility of this transmission
channel, we will also test an additional hypothesis that an increase in (sub)sovereign default
risk is associated with an increase in the interest rates of bonds issued by the government of
Puerto Rico.


5.1    The Credit Channel
We now evaluate the hypothesis that an increase in (sub)sovereign default risk dispropor-
tionately affects industries that are more dependent on external finance. As industry output
is only available at the annual frequency while employment is available at the monthly fre-
quency, we focus on the latter for more powerful tests of the effect of default risk.
    Summary statistics: Average monthly employment growth for manufacturing industries
above the median dependence on external finance is -0.42%, while employment growth is
-0.28% on average for industries below the median of dependence on external finance during
the sample period. Figure 3 presents normalized log employment in manufacturing industries
above and below the median of dependence on external finance and default probability.
Figure 3 shows that employment in manufacturing industries more dependent on external
finance declines relatively more than employment in industries less dependent on external
finance and that employment in all manufacturing industries decline overall. Further, the
relative decline in employment in sensitive industries seems to follow increased default risk,
suggesting that it may be an important driver of the decline in employment over this period.
    Regression analysis: In our benchmark specification, we regress employment growth in
industry i in month t on 12 lags of changes in (sub)sovereign default probabilities and a
term that captures the interaction of external finance dependence in industry i with changes
in default probability in month t. We also control for each industry’s lagged share of to-
tal private employment to allow for convergence in each industry’s share of total private




                                             15
employment.15 The specification also includes industry and month fixed effects to capture
any time-invariant industry characteristics and any industry-invariant month effects.16 The
standard errors are clustered by industry. We estimate the following benchmark regression:
                                                 12
                                                 X
              ∆Eit = αi + µt + νSHit−1 +               δt−j ∗ EXT F INiU S ∗ ∆DEFt−j + it                   (5)
                                                 j=1

where αi and µt are fixed effects; ∆DEFt is the change in the monthly average of default
probability in month t; EXT F INiU S is the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure of dependence
on external finance for industry i; and SHit−1 is the share of total private employment of
industry i in month t − 1.
    The set of coefficients δ captures the relationship between dependence on external finance
and employment given changes in the probability of default. We exclude contemporaneous
values of ∆DEF to avoid contemporaneous correlation. Following Borensztein and Panizza
(2010) and given the relatively high frequency of our data, we use several lags of the interac-
tion term to allow some time for changes in financing constraints to affect employment. The
coefficient on SHit−1 indicates whether industries comprising a larger share of total private
employment tend to have lower growth rates.
    We include 12 lags of the interaction term as the effects are insignificant beyond the
12th lag. For robustness, we include three lags of the industry-level employment growth
rate (∆Eit ).17 This approach controls for autocorrelation in employment growth rates and
potential serial autocorrelation in the errors of the benchmark specification. As an additional
robustness check, we use the change in the monthly average yield spread of Puerto Rican
five-year bonds in place of the change in default probability. The results remain robust to
these tests.
    Of course, the primary challenge to any attempt to identify the causal effect of increased
default risk on employment is reverse causality. That is, increases in the risk of default may
be a consequence of declining economic growth. However, in our benchmark specification,
the identification strategy relies on differences in employment growth rates across industries
in a given month. Therefore, reverse causality is a concern only if the relative growth of any
given industry in a given month affects the probability of default. In our view, this is far
less plausible than reverse causality in the aggregate.
   15
      Note that as the lagged share of total private employment contains a transformed lag of the dependent
variable, it may be correlated with industry fixed effects. Nickel (1981) shows that this bias is of order 1/T .
In our estimation, T = 90, so this bias is minimal for our case. Judson and Owen (1999) show the bias
is about 8% of the true value for the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable for T=30. However, the
expected bias on exogenous regressors, our primary interest, is only about 1-3% of the true value for T=30.
   16
      This methodology is motivated by Rajan and Zingales (1998), Dell’Ariccia et al. (2008), Borensztein
and Panizza (2009), and Borensztein and Panizza (2010).
   17
      We use three lags of Eit because optimal lag selection information criteria selected three lags as optimal.

                                                       16
    Figure 3 shows the path of DEF over the period of data availability. Table 2 presents
summary statistics for Puerto Rican manufacturing industries and the change in default
probabilities over the sample period, which runs from June 2008 to November 2015 given
the availability of CDS data. The data show that default probability increases by 0.92
percentage points in an average month. The relative ranking of EXT F IN by industry is
the relevant measure and is relatively stable over time.18 The average monthly employment
growth rate is -0.44% for Puerto Rican manufacturing industries over the sample period.
    The results are in Table 3. In column 1, we regress employment growth on a constant and
SHit−1 , excluding fixed effects. The constant term indicates that the average employment
growth rate is -0.37%, for a given value of SHit−1 . The unconditional effect of SHit−1 is
statistically insignificant in predicting employment growth.
    In column 2, we include industry fixed effects and SHit−1 is negative and significant at
the 1% level. The negative coefficient on SHit−1 indicates that employment in industries
that comprise a larger share of total employment tends to grow at slower rates, once we
control for industry fixed effects. The finding is consistent with the hypothesis that industry
level shares of total employment tend to converge over time. Specifically, the coefficient of
-2.3 indicates that a one standard deviation increase in share of total private employment is
associated with a reduction in monthly employment growth of 1.7%. This is a substantial
effect, given the average monthly employment growth rate of -0.44%.19
    In column 3, we control for time fixed effects, 12 lags of the interaction of dependence on
external finance and the change in monthly default probability. For brevity, we show only
the sum of the interaction terms and a test for joint significance of the interaction terms.20
The sum of the coefficients on the interaction terms is negative and the interaction terms
are jointly significant at the 1% level. The results are consistent with the hypothesis that
increased default risk is associated with relatively lower employment growth in industries
more dependent on external finance.
    Table 4 summarizes the economic significance of the interaction terms using specification
3 of Table 3. Table 4 shows that if ∆DEF is at the 25th percentile (-1.9 pp) for the prior
12 months and SHt−1 is at its sample average, monthly employment growth for industries
at the 25th and 75th percentiles of external finance dependence is predicted to be 0.08%
and 0.11%, respectively. Thus, for low values of default risk in the prior year, employment
   18
      See Appendix A.1. Note that negative average values for this indicator are typical in decades following
the original calculations for the 1980s. See Klingebiel et al. (2006).
   19
      Note that the median within-industry standard deviation in the share of total private employment is
5% of the figure for the full sample.
   20
      Table A.2 of appendix A.3 shows the full specification. The results show that all of the individually
significant coefficients are negative, with the largest and most statistically significant coefficient occurring
on the third lag of the interaction term.

                                                      17
growth is predicted to be 0.03 percentage points higher for industries at higher values of
external finance dependence than for industries at lower percentiles-the difference amounts
to 6.8% of the monthly average employment growth rate of -0.44%.
    Next, we conduct the same sensitivity analysis for high values of ∆DEF at the 75th
and 90th percentiles for the prior 12 months. If ∆DEF is at the 75th percentile (3.4
pp) for the prior 12 months, employment growth is predicted to be 0.05 percentage points
lower for an industry at the 75th percentile than for an industry at the 25th percentile of
dependence on external finance. The magnitude of this difference is 11.0% of the monthly
average employment growth rate. Finally, if ∆DEF is at the 90th percentile (9.0 pp) for
the prior 12 months, employment growth is predicted to be 0.13 percentage points lower for
an industry at the 75th percentile than for an industry at the 25th percentile of external
finance dependence which is 29.1% of the monthly average employment growth rate. The
coefficients also allow us to predict that monthly employment growth in an industry at the
75th percentile of external finance dependence is 0.08 percentage points lower than in an
industry at the 25th percentile when the default probability is at the 75th rather than the
25th percentile. The magnitude of this effect amounts to 17.3% of the monthly average
employment growth rate of -0.44%.

5.1.1   Default Risk and Bank Lending

The previous subsection provides evidence in support of the hypothesis that an increase in the
risk of sovereign default disproportionately affects employment in industries that are more
dependent on external finance. The findings rest on the premise that increased sovereign
default risk affects the supply of credit via an adverse impact on the balance sheets of Puerto
Rican banks that hold Puerto Rican government debt. Following the increased financing
constraints associated with increased sovereign default risk, we suggest that banks reduce
lending, which disproportionately affects industries more dependent on external finance.
Alternatively, the cost of external finance in general increases as yields on Puerto Rican debt
go up as default risk increases.
    To confirm the data are consistent with the hypothesis that Puerto Rico’s crisis and
increased default risk are associated with a contraction in credit, we investigate the relation-
ship between default risk and banking in Puerto Rico using balance sheet data for Puerto
Rican banks from the FDIC. Figure 4 shows that commercial and industrial loans as a per-
centage of GNP declined by 35.9% from 2008 through 2015. This is notable as these loans
are directly relevant for our investigation of the effect of the credit channel on employment in
manufacturing. Further, loans to Puerto Rican municipal entities total about 40% of capital
in Puerto Rico’s banks, indicating that Puerto Rican banks are highly exposed to the Puerto

                                              18
Rican government.21 The data suggest that losses on holding Puerto Rican government debt
would create substantial constraints on bank lending in Puerto Rico.
    To formally test the relationship between default risk and lending, we conduct Granger
causality tests on the monthly first difference in default probability (∆DEF ) and the quar-
terly first difference in commercial and industrial loans as a percentage of GNP (∆CIL) as
follows:
                                       4
                                       X                   12
                                                           X
                     ∆CILt = αi +            β∆CILt−k +           δt−j ∆DEFt−j + it                   (6)
                                       k=1                  j=1
                                       4
                                       X                   12
                                                           X
                    ∆DEFt = αi +             γ∆CILt−k +           ηt−j ∆DEFt−j + it                   (7)
                                       k=1                 j=1


where we include the prior four quarters of changes in commercial and industrial lending and
the prior four quarters of changes in default probability in both tests (note that k indexes
quarters not months). We conduct Wald tests of the hypotheses H0 : δ1 = ... = δ12 = 0 and
H0 : γ1 = ... = γ4 = 0. The F statistic of 4.71 reported in Table 5 shows that the set of
coefficients δ are jointly significant at the 1% level. That is, that default risk Granger causes
commercial and industrial lending. The sum of the coefficients of -0.017 indicates that the
data are consistent with the hypothesis that increased default risk for Puerto Rico reduces
commercial and industrial lending by Puerto Rican banks. The F statistic of 0.24 indicates
that the set of coefficients γ are not jointly significant and suggests that commercial and
industrial lending do not Granger cause default risk.


5.2     The Government Spending Channel
We now evaluate the hypothesis that an increase in (sub)sovereign default risk disproportion-
ately affects industries that are more dependent on government demand. As in the previous
analysis, we focus on employment growth as the dependent variable.
    Summary statistics: Figure 5 presents normalized log employment in manufacturing
industries above and below the median of dependence on government demand and default
probability. Figure 5 shows that employment in manufacturing industries more dependent
on government demand declines relatively more than employment in industries that are less
dependent, while there is an overall decline in employment in all manufacturing. Further,
the relative decline in employment in sensitive industries appears to follow increased default
risk. Figure 6 presents normalized log employment in manufacturing industries above and

  21
     As noted in Section 3.1, we can only confirm these figures on loans to U.S. political subdivisions are
loans to Puerto Rican municipal entities for Oriental Bank.

                                                    19
below the median of dependence on government demand and capb. Figure 6 shows that
austerity measures by Puerto Rico (increased capb) also seem to coincide with decreased
employment in more sensitive industries.
    Regression analysis: In the benchmark specification we regress employment growth in
industry i in month t on 12 lags of changes in (sub)sovereign default probabilities and a
term that captures the interaction of government demand dependence in an industry i with
changes in default probability in month t. We also control for each industry’s lagged share
of total private employment to allow for convergence in each industry’s share of total private
employment.22,23 The specification also includes industry and month fixed effects to capture
any time-invariant industry characteristics and any industry-invariant month effects. The
standard errors are clustered by industry. We estimate the following benchmark regression:

                                             12
                                             X
          ∆Eit = αi + µt + νSHit−1 +                δt−j ∗ GOVi ∗ ∆DEFt−j + β ∗ GOVi
                                              j=1
                                                                                                            (8)
                                          12
                                          X
                    ∗ ∆capbprioryear +          γt−j ∗ GOVi ∗ ∆DEFt−j ∗ ∆capbprioryear + it
                                          j=1


where αi and µt are fixed effects; ∆DEFt is the change in the monthly average of default prob-
ability in month t; GOVi is dependence on government demand for industry i; ∆capbprioryear
is the annual first difference in the cyclically adjusted primary balance (expressed as a per-
centage of potential output) and SHit−1 is the share of total private employment of industry
i in month t − 1.
    The set of coefficients δ captures the relationship between dependence on government
demand and employment given changes in the probability of default. β captures the rela-
tionship between dependence on government demand and employment given changes in the
cyclically adjusted primary balance. The set of coefficients γ captures the relationship be-
tween dependence on government demand and employment given changes in the probability
of default and the cyclically adjusted primary balance. That is, heterogeneity in the effect of
fiscal policy based on changes in default risk. We exclude contemporaneous values of ∆DEF
and ∆capb.
    After estimating (8), we conduct Granger causality tests on ∆capb and ∆DEF to capture

   22
      Note that as the lagged share of total private employment contains a transformed lag of the dependent
variable, it may be correlated with industry fixed effects. Nickel (1981) shows that this bias is of order 1/T .
In our estimation, T = 90, so this bias is minimal for our case. Judson and Owen (1999) show the bias
is about 8% of the true value for the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable for T=30. However, the
expected bias on exogenous regressors, our primary interest, is only about 1-3% of the true value for T=30.
   23
      This methodology is motivated by Rajan and Zingales (1998), Dell’Ariccia et al. (2008), Borensztein
and Panizza (2009), and Borensztein and Panizza (2010).

                                                       20
the lead lag relationship between default risk and fiscal policy as follows:

                                                              12
                                                              X
                  ∆capbannual = αi + β∆capbprioryear +               δt−j ∆DEFt−j + it                 (9)
                                                               j=1
                                                              12
                                                              X
                       ∆DEFt = αi + β∆capbprioryear +                δt−j ∆DEFt−j + it                (10)
                                                               j=1


    The Granger causality tests reported in Table 6 reveal that default risk Granger causes
Puerto Rico’s cyclically adjusted primary balance and indicate that increased default risk
drives austerity. The data suggest that Puerto Rico’s cyclically adjusted primary balance
does not Granger cause default risk. Puerto Rico’s pre-default austerity measures may
therefore form a real effect of default anticipation. That is, the results are consistent with
the hypothesis that the government responds to increased default risk with austerity, either
to reassure markets or due to the increased financing constraints associated with default risk.
    Table 7 presents summary statistics for Puerto Rican manufacturing industries, the
change in default probabilities, and the change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance.
The data show that default probability increases by 0.92 percentage points in an average
month. The average change in the cyclically adjusted primary balance is 0.07 percentage
points. Puerto Rican manufacturers depend on the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico for an
average of 1.9% of total sales. The average monthly employment growth rate is -.36% for
Puerto Rican manufacturing industries over the sample period.24
    Table 8 presents the estimates from the benchmark specification of equation (8). In
Column 1, we regress employment growth on a constant, SHit−1 , and a series of 12 lags of
the interaction of dependence on government demand and the change in monthly default
probability. For brevity, we show only the sum of the interaction terms and a test for joint
significance of the interaction terms.25 The sum of the coefficients on the interaction terms
is negative, and the interaction terms are jointly significant at the 1% level. The results are
consistent with the hypothesis that increased default risk is associated with relatively lower
employment growth in industries more dependent on government demand. In column 2, we
control for an interaction of the prior year first difference in capb and GOV . The coeffi-
cient is statistically significant at the 1% level and indicates that increased capb (austerity)
is associated with relatively lower employment growth in government demand dependent
industries. In column 3, we combine the independent variables of columns 1 and 2 with a

  24
      Note that this differs slightly from the average employment growth rate in the credit channel section.
This is due to the fact that the data on dependence on government demand are available for only 17 of the
19 industries seen in the credit channel section.
   25
      Table A.3 of appendix A.4 shows the full specification.

                                                    21
triple interaction of ∆DEF , GOV , and ∆capbprioryear . The coefficient on the triple inter-
action is jointly significant at the 1% level and indicates that the negative effect of default
risk on employment growth in industries relatively more dependent on government demand
increases when the government undertakes austerity measures. Similarly, the negative effect
of austerity on employment growth in industries relatively more dependent on government
demand increases when default risk increases.
    Table 9 summarizes the economic significance of the interaction terms using specification
1 of Table 8. The economic magnitude of the effect is significant. Table 9 shows that if
∆DEF is at the 25th percentile (-1.9 pp) for the prior 12 months and SHt−1 is at its sample
average, monthly employment growth for industries at the 25th percentile of dependence
on government demand is predicted to be -0.12%. Similarly, monthly employment growth
at the 75th percentile of government demand is predicted to be 0.02% if ∆DEF is at the
25th percentile for the prior 12 months. Thus, if ∆DEF is at the 25th percentile for the
prior 12 months, employment growth is predicted to be 0.15 percentage points higher for the
industry at the 75th percentile of dependence on government demand than in the industry
at the 25th percentile of dependence on government demand. The magnitude of this effect
amounts to 40.3% of the monthly average employment growth rate of -0.36%.
    Next, we conduct the same sensitivity analysis for high values of default risk when ∆DEF
is at the 75th and 90th percentiles over the prior 12 months. If ∆DEF is at the 75th per-
centile, employment growth is predicted to be 0.3 percentage points lower for an industry
at the 75th percentile of government demand dependence than in an industry at the 25th
percentile. The magnitude of this effect amounts to approximately three-quarters of the av-
erage monthly employment growth rate of -0.36%. Finally, if ∆DEF is at the 90th percentile
(9.0 pp), the employment growth difference between industries at the 75th percentile and
industries at the 25th percentile is predicted to be 0.68 percentage points. The magnitude
of this fall is nearly double the average monthly employment growth rate. Our estimates
also predict that employment growth differential between industries at the 75th and 25th
percentiles of government demand dependence will be 0.4 percentage points lower when the
default probability is at the 75th percentile rather than the 25th percentile-the magnitude
is comparable to the average monthly employment growth rate.
    Table 10 conducts the same exercise for the marginal effect of the cyclically adjusted
primary balance, ∆capb, as Table 9 does for ∆DEF , using specification 2. The results show
that higher values of ∆capb (austerity) are associated with relatively lower employment
growth in more government demand dependent industries. We observe this pattern for
the 75th and 90th percentiles of ∆capb, which are high levels of austerity. The findings
indicate that austerity leads to contractionary effects on employment in government demand


                                              22
dependent industries. The estimates predict that when ∆capb is at the 75th percentile,
employment growth is expected to be .13% lower in the industry at the 75th percentile of
dependence on government demand versus the industry at the 25th percentile.
    To get a better understanding of the relative marginal effects of default risk and fiscal
policy, we use specification 3 of Table 8 to calculate the impact of a one standard deviation
increase in ∆capb when the value of ∆DEF is at the sample average and of a one standard
deviation increase in ∆DEF when ∆capb is at its sample average. The results are in Figure
7. Figure 7 shows that a one standard deviation in ∆capb does not have a significant
effect on employment growth when ∆DEF is at its mean. In contrast, a one standard
deviation increase in ∆DEF is associated with a significantly reduced employment growth
rate when ∆capb is at its sample mean. The magnitude of this effect increases for more
government demand dependent industries. Similar to Table 9, Figure 7 shows that a one
standard deviation increase in ∆DEF is associated with -2.5% employment growth at the
90th percentile of dependence on government demand. The results suggest that default risk
has a significant effects on employment growth when fiscal policy is at its sample average.
    To further investigate the interaction of default risk and fiscal policy, we use specification
3 of Table 8 to calculate the marginal effects of a one standard deviation increase in ∆capb
for different values of ∆DEF and of a one standard deviation increase in ∆DEF for changes
in ∆capb. The results are in Figures 8 and 9. Figure 8 shows that the marginal effect of
∆DEF is always negative and higher in magnitude for industries at the 75th percentile of
GOV versus the industries at the 25th percentile. The magnitude of the difference between
the 75th and 25th percentile of GOV increases when ∆capb increases. That is, we observe
a stronger contractionary effect of default risk on employment growth in more sensitive
industries when the government implements austerity measures. Figure 8 shows that a one
standard deviation increase in ∆DEF is associated with -3.1% employment growth at the
90th percentile of ∆capb and the 75th percentile of GOV versus -0.6% employment growth
at the 90th percentile of ∆capb and the 25th percentile of GOV . This difference is six times
the average monthly employment growth.
    So far, the results support the hypothesis that austerity measures are significant when
combined with increased default risk. One potential rationale for these results is that agents
learn about future government policy when they observe austerity measures in response to
increased default risk. To investigate whether the data further support this hypothesis, we
estimate (9) and (10) to determine if the data show that changes in default risk Granger
cause fiscal policy measures or vice versa. First, we estimate (9) and find that the set of
coefficients δ have a positive sum and are jointly significant at the 5% level. Thus, we
find that changes in default risk appear to Granger cause changes in fiscal policy. Further,


                                               23
the positive sum of the coefficients indicates that increased default risk is associated with
austerity measures. Second, we estimate (10) and find that β is not statistically significant.
The finding suggests that changes in fiscal policy do not Granger cause changes in default
risk. The results support the hypothesis that governments may enact austerity measures
when default risk rises to either stave off default or because borrowing constraints become
binding when default risk rises.
    Overall, the results suggest that employment growth falls in industries that are more
exposed to default risk via the government demand channel relative to those less exposed.
Recall that average monthly employment growth for manufacturing industries above the
median dependence on government demand is -0.58% while employment growth is -0.30%
on average for industries below the median of dependence on government demand during
the sample period. The estimates in this section suggest that increased default risk drives
austerity and explains the relative decline in employment growth in more government demand
dependent industries. The evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that default risk is an
important driver of the decline in Puerto Rican employment over the sample period.


5.3       The Effects of Default Risk on Private and Public Borrowing
          Costs
The previous subsections provide evidence in support of the hypotheses that an increase in
the risk of sovereign default disproportionately affects industries that are more dependent on
external finance or government demand. These hypotheses were based on the premise that
changes in sovereign default risk are transmitted to changes in the borrowing costs for the
private sector and for the public sector. In this section, we provide some evidence for this
conjecture.
    First, we use an event study to test the hypotheses that a decline in the perceived
creditworthiness of the Puerto Rican government is correlated with an increase in yields on
government debt and an increase in the cost of capital for publicly traded Puerto Rican firms.
In particular, we examine the reaction of spreads, yields, and stock returns to news about
rating actions and legal events related to Puerto Rican credit risk with the assumption that
markets are semi-strong form efficient.26 To estimate the effect of rating and legal events
on the cost of capital, we first calculate the expected return of all publicly traded Puerto
Rican firms using the market return model with the log return on the S&P 500 as the




  26
       See Mackinlay (1997) and Andrade et al. (2001).

                                                    24
benchmark market index.27 With the parameters of the market model in hand, we compute
cumulative abnormal returns for each firm over a three-day window. Similarly, we investigate
the effect of our events on the tax-adjusted yield spreads of the general obligation debt of
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. We compute the change in the tax-adjusted spread for
each maturity as:

                                            ∆Smt = Smt − Smt−1 ,                                             (11)

where Smt is the difference between the tax-adjusted yield on Puerto Rican general obligation
bond m and a U.S. treasury of the same maturity on day t. For each bond m and event
j ∈ J where J is the set of legal and rating events.

5.3.1     Event Identification

To identify changes in the perceived creditworthiness of Puerto Rico, we study two types
of events that convey news about Puerto Rico’s creditworthiness. First, we identify rating
actions on Puerto Rican government debt.28 This includes general obligation (GO) debt of
the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico as well as the debt of public companies which rely on
the Commonwealth for financial support. General obligation debt is backed by the full faith
and credit of the Commonwealth and the Puerto Rican constitution requires it to be paid
before any other obligations.
    The following notable public companies are agencies of the Commonwealth; the Puerto
Rican Government Development Bank (GDB), the Puerto Rico Sales Tax Financing Corpo-
ration (COFINA), the Puerto Rican Electric Power Authority (PREPA), the Puerto Rican
Aqueduct and Sewer Authority (PRASA), the Puerto Rican Highway and Transit Author-
ity (PRHTA), the Puerto Rican Employees Retirement System (PRERS), the University
of Puerto Rico (UPR), the Puerto Rican Public Finance Corporation (PRPFC), and the
Puerto Rican Housing Finance Authority (PRHFA).29 Rating actions on these agencies may
be important for the perceived creditworthiness of the Commonwealth because they have
either explicit or implicit guarantees from the Commonwealth. Indeed, the rating agencies
   27
      We estimate the market model from 2000 through 2005 for OFG, BPOP, and FBP and from the first
available data on December 10, 2007, through December 4, 2009, (30 trading days before the first event in
the sample) for GTS.
   28
      Rating actions include affirmations of credit rating, changes in credit rating, and changes in outlook. A
rating action is classified as negative if it is either a decrease in credit rating or a negative change in outlook
and the opposite for positive changes. Neutral actions are no change in rating or outlook.
   29
      These agencies would be classified as municipalities of Puerto Rico if it were a state and issue much of
Puerto Rico’s outstanding debt. Various smaller agencies also rely on the Commonwealth and rating actions
on these always coincide with rating actions of one of the major agencies listed. Thus, no news events are
omitted by restricting attention to these major agencies.

                                                        25
often downgrade the debt of these agencies and the Commonwealth simultaneously due to
these guarantees.
    Added to the rating actions, we identify legal events that are relevant to Puerto Rico’s
creditworthiness. These legal events include the passage of, and legal proceedings regarding,
three laws. First, the “Puerto Rico Public Corporations Debt Enforcement and Recovery
Act” was enacted by Puerto Rico on June 28, 2014, and attempted to create a legal framework
for agencies of Puerto Rico to restructure their debt. The law was modeled after Chapter 9 of
the U.S. bankruptcy code under which municipalities of U.S. states can declare bankruptcy
and restructure their debt.30 Second, the “Debt moratorium and Financial Recovery Act,”
enacted by Puerto Rico on April 6, 2016, attempted to allow Puerto Rico to suspend payment
on its debt.
    Third, the “Puerto Rico Oversight, Management, and Economic Stability Act” (PROMESA),
enacted by the United States on June 30, 2016, and described above, creates a bankruptcy-
like legal framework for Puerto Rico to restructure its debt. The passage of these three laws
and events related to their litigation are relevant to the likelihood of a default because they
are all related to creating a legal framework to allow Puerto Rico to restructure.31 In Ap-
pendix A.5, we describe our system for classifying these three laws and related legal actions
as credit positive, negative, or neutral. Finally, we identify bankruptcy filings, grantings,
and dismissals for U.S. towns, cities, and counties that occur during our sample of rating
actions as municipal events. In the online appendix, we list the rating, legal, and municipal
events.32
    We calculate cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) for each firm i and each event j and
changes in spreads (∆Smt ) for each event j and bond m. We estimate the effect of each class
of event on stocks by regressing CAR on a constant. Note that the rating and legal events
we wish to study are common to all firms. Therefore we cluster the standard errors by firm.
   30
      As we discussed previously, the federal bankruptcy code both reserved this right for states and mandates
that states can not pass laws binding creditors to accept losses. Puerto Rico argued unsuccessfully that its
status as a nonstate, which proscribed it from using the former also exempted it from the latter.
   31
      These events include passage of the laws, filings of suits against the laws, decisions to hear a case, oral
arguments before the court, the court’s decision, and other relevant proceedings. Minor legal events such as
distribution of material for conference or the setting of an argument date are not included.
   32
      For the online appendix, please click here. We also document our system for classifying the sign and
types of events and cases thereof in Appendix A.6. Section 6 discusses the effects reclassification on the
benchmark results. The online appendix lists the full sample of events and their classifications. We use
the most restrictive possible event window of one day for robustness in Section 6. Using three-day event
windows creates a number of overlapping event windows due to events occurring with less than the required
two trading days needed between them to prevent overlap. In such cases, we expand the three-day event
windows to contain the overlapping events, until we obtain the smallest possible window which gives us one
pre-event day and one post-event day in the enlarged window which does not overlap with the window of
another event. In Section 6, we use two additional approaches for handling the overlap of the three-day event
windows. The results are qualitatively the same as the benchmark results.

                                                       26
Similarly, we estimate the effect of the events on yield spreads by regressing C∆S for all
bonds in the dataset on a constant, clustering the standard errors by bond.

5.3.2    Results

The results are in Table 11. The results of the event study for the full sample of events show
a statistically significant cumulative abnormal return of -0.9% and a statistically significant
cumulative change in spread of 8.81 basis points, indicating that the set of events is associated
with an increase in the cost of capital for the Puerto Rican government and for Puerto Rican
firms. Further, negative events are associated with a statistically significant cumulative
abnormal return of -1.6% and a statistically significant cumulative change in spread of 8.4
basis points. Negative rating actions on nongeneral obligation debt are not associated with
a statistically significant cumulative abnormal return or a statistically significant cumulative
change in spread. This indicates that bad news about the credit risk of Puerto Rico’s
agencies does not significantly impact the cost of capital for the Puerto Rican government
or for Puerto Rican firms.33
    In contrast, negative rating actions on general obligation debt are associated with a
statistically significant cumulative abnormal return of -4.1% and a statistically significant
cumulative change in spread of 16.2 basis points. Similarly, negative legal events are associ-
ated with a statistically significant cumulative abnormal return of -3.8% and a statistically
significant cumulative change in spread of 20.2 basis points. Positive events are associated
with statistically significant cumulative abnormal returns of 0.33% and statistically signif-
icant cumulative change in spread of 8.6 basis points. The increase in spreads is not the
expected result but is far smaller in magnitude than the increases seen for negative general
obligation rating events and negative legal events. Neutral and mixed events show no signifi-
cant effect on cumulative abnormal returns and are associated with a statistically significant
cumulative change in spreads of about 9.9 and 9.3 basis points, respectively.
    The results in this section confirm that adverse news about Puerto Rico’s creditworthi-
ness significantly increases the cost of capital for the government and for private companies.
Our earlier findings that an increase in the risk of sovereign default disproportionately affects
industries that are more dependent on external finance or government demand are theoret-
ically based on the transmission of sovereign default risk to public and private borrowing
costs. Thus, the results in this section support these conclusions.



  33
     Note however, that general obligation rating actions often coincide with rating actions on agencies and
are classified as general obligation rating actions.

                                                    27
6        Robustness
We conduct several tests to ensure the robustness of our results. These results are omitted
from the main paper for brevity and are available in the online appendix.34
    An alternative measure of default probability: To ensure our results are robust to alterna-
tive measures of financial distress for the Puerto Rican government, we substitute the change
in the monthly average yield spread of Puerto Rican five-year securities for the change in
default probability for the credit channel and the government spending channel. The bench-
mark results remain qualitatively the same.35
    Restricting the sample to the post GFC Period: One concern about our benchmark results
is that spreads on Puerto Rican CDS spreads may have increased and employment may
have declined relatively more in external finance and/or government spending dependent
industries during the global financial crisis. Indeed, evidence suggests that banking crises
have a more adverse impact on the value added of external finance dependent industries
(see Dell’Ariccia et al. (2008)). For this reason, we repeat our benchmark specifications and
restrict the sample to the year 2010 and thereafter. The benchmark results are qualitatively
unaffected. Also, note that including the crisis period in our estimations attenuates the
magnitudes of our coefficient estimates.
    Alternative calculation periods for EXT F IN U S and GOV : To ensure our results are
not sensitive to the estimation period used to calculate dependence on external finance, we
also repeat our benchmark specifications using the pre-crisis estimation period of 1995-2005
and the narrower period of 2005-2015 to calculate EXT F IN U S . Similarly, we estimate our
benchmark specifications using the average of the GOV measure from the 2012 Economic
census and the 2007 Economic Census. Our results remain robust.
    Recession risk: Another potential concern about our benchmark estimates is that in-
creased risk of recession may be the cause of increased default probabilities. If true, this
could explain relatively lower employment growth in external finance-dependent industries.
This follows because lenders may know that recessions have a relatively larger negative
impact on the activity of external finance-dependent industries and restrict quantities or in-
crease prices of loans to more exposed industries. Similarly, recession risk could also explain
relatively lower employment growth in industries more dependent on government spending
as agents may expect that recessions have a differential impact on the employment in these
industries.
    To allow for these possibilities, we control for each industry’s sensitivity to the wider
    34
     For the online appendix, please click here.
    35
     The sample of yield spreads for our results begins in 2001. However, the results are robust to restricting
the sample to the period used in the benchmark results.

                                                      28
economy. We compute ∆DEFt ∗ CY Ci where CY Ci is the sensitivity of employment growth
in industry i to economic growth in Puerto Rico. To estimate CY Ci , we perform simple
regressions of employment growth on growth in the Puerto Rican Economic Activity Index
from January 1990 through December 2007.36 We use the coefficients from these regressions
as a measure of CY Ci and include 12 lags of DEFt ∗ CY Ci in our benchmark models. The
benchmark results remain robust.
    Industry-specific shocks: We also address the potential endogeneity of industry-specific
shocks. It is conceivable that there is a correlation between increases in Puerto Rican default
probabilities and negative U.S. mainland-wide shocks to certain manufacturing industries,
especially if such industries represent an outsized portion of Puerto Rico’s tax base. If such
industries also tend to be more dependent on external finance or government demand, this
would bias our benchmark results. To control for this possibility, we include 12 lags of
U.S. growth of industrial production and employment in each industry in our benchmark
models.37 The results indicate that our benchmark results are robust.
    Puerto Rican industry-specific shocks: Industry-specific shocks unique to Puerto Rico are
another potential endogeniety concern if they occur in industries that represent a relatively
large share of Puerto Rico’s tax revenues, affect default risk, and occur in industries more
reliant on external finance or government spending. We do not have data on industry-specific
shares of Puerto Rican tax revenues. However, we posit that industries that comprise a larger
share of Puerto Rico’s private employment would also tend to make up a relatively larger
share of Puerto Rico’s tax revenues. If this endogeneity problem exists, we would expect
that industries that are more dependent on external finance or government demand and make
up a relatively larger share of Puerto Rico’s private employment may drive our benchmark
findings.
    To test this hypothesis, we generate an indicator HEXT F IN , which takes the value of one
when an industry has both above the median dependence on external finance and above the
median share of total private employment. We also we generate an indicator HGOV which
takes the value one when an industry has both above the median dependence on external
government spending and above the median share of total private employment. We include
12 lags of the interaction HEXT F IN ∗ EXT F INiU S ∗ ∆DEFt in our benchmark model for the
external finance channel and of the interaction HGOV ∗ GOVi ∗ ∆DEFt in our benchmark
  36
      We use the period beginning with the first available employment data and ending just before the sample
for our benchmark regression to prevent endogeniety of the CY Ci measure to employment growth.
   37
      U.S. industrial production is only available for 16 of the 19 manufacturing industries in our benchmark
sample. In addition, production in six of these industries is aggregated with another industry, providing only
13 unique monthly series. For example, industrial production for the industries 311 and 312 are reported
as the sum of the two. We seasonally adjust growth in industrial production and U.S. employment using
Census X-13.

                                                     29
model for the government spending channel. The results are consistent with the hypothesis
that industry-specific shocks unique to Puerto Rico do not appear to drive our benchmark
results.
    Population shocks: We also consider the possibility that Puerto Rico’s population de-
cline drove default risk and employment declines in industries more dependent on external
finance or government spending. To control for this possibility, we include the interaction
∆P OPprioryear ∗ EXT F IN U S in our benchmark model for the external finance channel and
the interaction ∆P OPprioryear ∗ GOV in our benchmark model for the government spending
channel, where ∆P OPprioryear is the growth rate of Puerto Rico’s population in the prior
year.38 Our benchmark results are robust.
    Housing price shocks: The housing price decline in Puerto Rico is another major char-
acteristic of the crisis that could drive default risk and employment declines in industries
more dependent on external finance or government spending. To control for this possibility,
we include four lags of the interaction ∆HP ∗ EXT F IN U S in our benchmark model for the
external finance channel and four lags of the interaction ∆HP ∗ GOV in our benchmark
model for the government spending channel, where ∆HP is the quarterly growth rate of
Puerto Rico’s housing price index.39 Our benchmark results are robust.
    Interactions between the credit channel and the government spending channel: A further
potential concern about our benchmark results is that dependence on external finance may
be related to dependence on government spending. If so, our benchmark estimates for the
credit channel and the government spending channel may suffer from omitted variable bias.
For this reason, we control for the external finance channel in our government spending
specifications. The results are similar to the benchmark for each channel except that the
magnitude increases. The sum of the coefficients on the external finance interactions are
about three times the benchmark specifications and increase in joint significance. The sum
of the coefficients on the government spending interactions also increase in magnitude and
joint significance.
    Alternative lags of the dependent variable: In the benchmark specifications for the credit
channel and the government spending channel.40 This approach controls for autocorrelation
in employment growth rates and serial correlation in the benchmark errors. The benchmark
results are qualitatively the same.
    Event study checks: We also conduct a number of tests to ensure the robustness of our

  38
      We retrieve annual population in Puerto Rico from WDI.
  39
      We retrieve the purchase-only quarterly, seasonally adjusted housing price index for Puerto Rico from
the FHFA.
   40
      We chose three lags because optimal lag selection information criteria select three lags as optimal and
because the standard errors of the regressors stabilize at the third lag.

                                                     30
event study estimations. We begin by repeating our benchmark event study using three-day
windows, which may overlap, rather than using larger windows where overlap occurs. We
also repeat our benchmark event study exercise using one-day windows. In addition, we
use a more traditional estimation window for the market model beginning 280 trading days
before each event and ending 30 days before it to calculate the abnormal return. Further, we
extend the estimation window to use all pre-2010 data for all four firms. The results remain
robust to all these alternative specifications.


7    Conclusion
This paper uses Puerto Rico’s debt crisis to develop a novel identification strategy to extract
the real costs of (sub)sovereign default risk. We use Puerto Rico as a case study because
Puerto Rico’s unique characteristics as a U.S. territory allow us to examine the channels
through which (sub)sovereign default risk can have real effects on the macroeconomy.
    Puerto Rico’s (sub)sovereign default crisis differs from existing cases of sovereign default.
Specifically, Puerto Rico’s unique legal relationship with the United States effectively elim-
inates the risk of a currency crisis, a banking crisis, or government interference in private
contracts, which make it difficult to isolate default risk other instances of sovereign default.
An important advantage is the availability of Puerto Rican data on macro-indicators such
as employment at higher frequencies and disaggregated at the industry level.
    We examine the real effects of anticipation of Puerto Rico’s default in several ways. First,
using activity for the mainland U.S. as a control, we investigate whether the deterioration
in Puerto Rico’s credit rating and credit spreads that occurred after 2012 led to a significant
divergence in Puerto Rico’s real economic activity from the rest of the U.S.. We find that
post-2012, during the period of increased default probabilities, the cointegrating relationship
between real activity in Puerto Rico and the U.S. mainland breaks down and Puerto Rico
experiences a significant decline. While these results do not causally link default anticipation
and Puerto Rico’s economic decline, they establish that increased (sub)sovereign risk coin-
cided with a negative and significant aggregate divergence of Puerto Rico’s economy from
the rest of the U.S. mainland.
    Second, we use an approach similar to Rajan and Zingales (1998) to establish that in-
creased default risk reduces employment in industries that are ex-ante more exposed or
sensitive to a default event due to greater dependence on external finance or government de-
mand. We use this approach to address the concern that declines in economic activity may
drive increased default probability and thus confound identification of the effect of default
risk on employment. We find that increased default probabilities lead to lower employment

                                               31
in sectors that are relatively more dependent on external finance and exposed to Puerto
Rican government demand. These findings are both statistically and economically signifi-
cant. Further, the magnitude of the negative effect of default risk on employment growth in
government demand dependent industries increases when the government undertakes aus-
terity measures. One potential rationale for these results is that agents learn about future
government policy when they observe austerity measures respond to increased default risk.
We also find that increased default risk Granger causes austerity, indicating the government
may undertake austerity in response to borrowing constraints or to reassure investors.
    Finally, we use an event study framework to investigate whether changes in Puerto Rico’s
credit risk affected yields on government debt or the stock returns of public Puerto Rican
firms. We identify changes in Puerto Rico’s credit risk using rating actions on Puerto Rican
debt and legal events related to the legal rights of Puerto Rican government entities to
restructure their debt. We find that negative credit events are correlated with significant
increases in credit spreads on Puerto Rican debt and significant decreases in stock returns
for Puerto Rican firms. These findings show that increased credit risk significantly increased
the cost of capital for both the Puerto Rican government and for Puerto Rican firms.
    The lessons learned from Puerto Rico’s crisis apply on a smaller scale to state and mu-
nicipal governments throughout the United States. Tax preferences can create large-scale
economic bubbles, tax-exempt bonds can inflate debt levels, and delaying comprehensive tax
reform can cause substantial fiscal problems when a shock arrives (e.g., the global financial
crisis) that increases government default risk. When default risk increases, losses to banks
result in increased financing costs and reduced investment. Increased default risk following
such a shock can also drive the government to cut spending, which can reduce output and
employment, especially in industries directly reliant on government demand. Importantly,
firms can anticipate government spending cuts and reduce hiring when default risk increases.
    While the literature explores the effects of default risk on financial intermediation, existing
models that embed sovereign default risk do not allow for demand-driven recessions. For
example, we find that a government demand channel operates for the case of Puerto Rico.
To incorporate the demand channel, future extensions of theoretical models could embed
New Keynesian frictions into small open economy models with sovereign default risk.




                                                32
References
Aguiar, M., Amador, M., et al. (2014). Sovereign debt. Handbook of International Economics,
  4:647–687.

Aguiar, M. and Gopinath, G. (2006). Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account.
  Journal of International Economics, 69(1):64–83.

Almeida, H., Cunha, I., Ferreira, M. A., and Restrepo, F. (2017). The real effects of credit ratings:
  The sovereign ceiling channel. The Journal of Finance, 72(1):249–290.

Andrade, G., Mitchell, M., and Stafford, E. (2001). New evidence and perspectives on mergers.
  Journal of Economic Perspectives, 15(2):103–120.

Arellano, C. (2008). Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies. The American
  Economic Review, 98(3):690–712.

Arellano, C., Atkeson, A., and Wright, M. (2015). External and public debt crises. In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2015, Volume 30. University of Chicago Press.

Arteta, C. and Hale, G. (2008). Sovereign debt crises and credit to the private sector. Journal of
  International Economics, 74(1):53–69.

Babina, T., Jotikasthira, C., Lundblad, C., and Ramadorai, T. (2017). Heterogeneous taxes and
  limited risk sharing: Evidence from municipal bonds. https://ssrn.com/abstract=2579350.

Borensztein, E. and Panizza, U. (2009). The costs of sovereign default. IMF Staff Papers, 56(4):683–
  741.

Borensztein, E. and Panizza, U. (2010). Do sovereign defaults hurt exporters? Open Economic
  Review, 21:393–412.

Bulow, J. and Rogoff, K. (1989). Sovereign debt: Is to forgive to forget? The American Economic
  Review, 79(1):43–50.

Collins, S. M., Bosworth, B. P., and Soto-Class, M. A. (2007). The economy of Puerto Rico:
  restoring growth. Brookings Institution Press.

Cruces, J. J. and Trebesch, C. (2013). Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics, 5(3):85–117.

Dell’Ariccia, G., Detragiache, E., and Rajan, R. G. (2008). The real effects of banking crises.
  Journal of Financial Intermediation, 17:89–112.




                                                 33
Duffee, G. (1998). The relation between treasury yields and corporate bond yield spreads. The
  Journal of Finance, 53(6):2225–2241.

Eaton, J. and Gersovitz, M. (1981). Debt with potential repudiation: Theoretical and empirical
  analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, pages 289–309.

Farhi, E. and Tirole, J. (2017). Deadly embrace: Sovereign and financial balance sheets doom loops.
  The Review of Economic Studies, page rdx059.

Fedelino, A., Ivanova, A., and Horton, M. (2009). Computing cyclically adjusted balances and
  automatic stabilizers. Technical Notes and Manuals.

Fuentes, M. and Saravia, D. (2011). Are sovereign defaulters punished?        Sovereign Debt: From
  Safety to Default, 605:149.

Gulati, G. M. and Weidemaier, M. C. (2016). Differing perceptions? market practice and the
  evolution of foreign sovereign immunity. UNC Legal Studies Research Paper, 2739423.

Hébert, B. and Schreger, J. (2017). The costs of sovereign default: Evidence from argentina.
  American Economic Review, 107(10):3119–45.

Judson, R. and Owen, A. (1999). Estimating dynamic panel data models: A guide for macroe-
  conomists. Economic Letters, 65:9–15.

Klingebiel, D., Kroszner, R. S., and Laeven, L. (2006). Banking crises, financial dependence and
  growth. Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper Series, 5623.

Laeven, L. and Valencia, F. (2013). The real effects of financial sector interventions during crises.
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 45(1):147–177.

Levine, R. (2005). Finance and growth: theory and evidence. Handbook of Economic Growth,
  1:865–934.

Livshits, I., Phan, T., and Trebesch, C. (2014). Sovereign default and political turnover. Working
  paper.

Mackinlay, C. (1997). Event studies in economics and finance. Journal of Economic Literature,
  35:13–39.

Mendoza, E. G. and Terrones, M. E. (2008). An anatomy of credit booms: Evidence from macro
  aggregates and micro data. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Mendoza, E. G. and Yue, V. Z. (2012). A general equilibrium model of sovereign default and
  business cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, page qjs009.


                                                 34
Nickel, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 49(6):1417–1426.

Perez, D. (2015). Sovereign debt, domestic banks and the provision of public liquidity. Working
  paper.

Rajan, R. and Zingales, L. (1998). Financial dependence and growth. The American Economic
  Review, 88(3):559–586.

Reinhart, C. M. and Trebesch, C. (2016). Sovereign debt relief and its aftermath. Journal of the
  European Economic Association, 14(1):215–251.

Schwert, M. (2017). Municipal bond liquidity and default risk. The Journal of Finance, 72(4):1683–
  1722.

Standards and Poors (2015). Puerto Rico GO rating lowered to ’CCC-’ from ’CCC+’; Outlook is
  negative on likelihood of default or distressed exchange. Press Release.

Tomz, M. and Wright, M. L. (2013). Empirical research on sovereign debt and default. Annu. Rev.
  Econ., 5(1):247–272.

Tomz, M. and Wright, M. L. J. (2010). Sovereign theft: Theory and evidence about sovereign default
  and expropriation, the natural resources trap: Private investment without public commitment.

White, R. (2013). The pricing and risk management of credit default swaps, with a focus on the
  isda model. OpenGamma Quantitative Research.

Yeyati, E. L. and Panizza, U. (2011). The elusive costs of sovereign defaults. Journal of Development
  Economics, 94(1):95–105.

Zettelmeyer, J., Trebesch, C., and Gulati, M. (2013). The Greek debt restructuring: an autopsy.
  Economic Policy, 28(75):513–563.




                                                 35
                                                             Table 1: Puerto Rico and U.S. Growth
                                   (1)               (2)                       (3)                       (4)               (5)                       (6)                      (7)
      Dependent              P.R. Growth       P.R. Growth       Post-2012 Growth Relative         U.S. Growth       U.S. Growth       Post 2012 Growth Relative
      Variable                [2006-2012]         [2013-]        to Pre-2012 Growth (P.R.)         [2006-2012]          [2013-]        to Pre-2012 Growth (U.S.) Diff-in-Diff
      Private                   -.0034**          -.0021*                    .0013                     -.00004         .0054***                  .0055***                 -.0042***
      Employment                  (.020)           (.061)                    (.233)                     (.978)           (.000)                    (.000)                   (.001)
      Growth
      N                            28                14                        14                        28                14                        14                       14
      Economic                 -.0055***         -.0059***                   -.0005                    .0024*          .0053***                  0.0029**                 -.0034***
      Activity                   (.000)            (.000)                    (.674)                    (.094)            (.000)                   (.016)                    (.008)
      Growth
      N                            28                14                        14                        28                14                        14                       14
      Investment                 -.0149           -.0158**                   -.0009                    -.0038          .0097***                  .0135***                  -.0144**
      Spending Growth            (.140)             (.042)                   (.812)                    (.690)            (.002)                    (.001)                    (.050)
36




      N                             7                  3                        3                         7                 3                         3                         3
     Notes: Each column represents a regression of the variable listed on a constant. Column 1 shows the results of regressing either quarterly or annual log growth rates for 2006-2012
     on a constant for P.R. Column 2 shows the results of the same exercise for 2013Q1-2016Q2 in the case of the first two variables, and 2013-2015 in the case of the third. Column
     3 regresses the difference between the post-2012 growth rates and the pre-2013 average on a constant. I.e. a regression of the difference between the variable in column 2 and the
     average of the variable in column 1 on a constant. Columns 4-6 conduct an identical exercise for the U.S. Column 7 shows the difference in the difference for PR relative to the
     US or the difference between the variable in column 3 and the variable in column 6. P-Values are in parentheses.
     ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
                       Table 2: Summary Statistics: The Credit Channel
                           Mean      Median      Std. Dev.     25th pctile     75th pctile     Obs.
        ∆DEF               0.0092    0.0026        0.0828        -0.0192          0.0341         90
        EXT F IN U S      -0.3951    -0.4496       0.5802        -0.6572         -0.2014         19
        ∆E                -0.0044    -0.0031       0.0347        -0.0134         0.0049        1,710
        SH                 0.0064    0.0031        0.0075        0.0018           0.0078       1,710
      Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year cumulative default prob-
      ability for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. EXT F IN U S is the Rajan and Zingales (1998)
      measure of sector-level dependence on external finance, calculated for the 2000-2015 period.
      ∆E is the sector-level monthly employment growth rate. SH is the sector-level share of total
      private employment.



Table 3: Increased Default Probability is Associated with Statistically Significant Lower
Employment Growth in Industries More Dependent on External Finance
                                                                   (1)            (2)             (3)
  Constant                                                    -0.0037***       0.0110**       0.0189**
                                                               (0.0009)        (0.0044)       (0.0078)
  SHt−1                                                         0.0301        -2.3129***     -2.7585***
                                                               (0.0877)        (0.7042)       (0.7085)
  P12
     j=1   EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−j                                                              -0.0313
  Observations                                                    1,501          1,501          1,501
  Sector Fixed Effects                                              N              Y              Y
  Time Fixed Effects                                                N              N              Y
  F test EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEF jointly significant                                               25.90***
  Prob>F                                                                                        0.0000
 Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year cumulative default probability for
 the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. EXT F IN U S is the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure of sector-
 level dependence on external finance, calculated for the 2000-2015 period. This table presents the ag-
 gregated coefficient on 12 lags of the EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEF variable. Appendix Table A3 presents the
 dis-aggregated coefficients on the 12 lags. SHt−1 is the lagged sector-level share of total private employ-
 ment. The model is estimated using OLS. ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10%
 levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by industry.




                                                    37
Table 4: Increased Default Probability is Associated with Economically Significant Lower
Employment Growth in Industries More Dependent on External Finance
                                                              ∆DEF        ∆DEF               ∆DEF
                                                             25th pctile 75th pctile        90th pctile
  EXT F IN U S 25th pctile                                     0.0008          0.0019         0.0031
  EXT F IN U S 75th pctile                                     0.0011          0.0015         0.0018
  Difference                                                   0.0003         -0.0005         -0.0013
  Percent of average monthly employment growth                  6.8%           11.0%           29.1%
                                                                               ¯ + P12 δt−j
 Notes: Each figure in the body of the table comes from this formula: α̂+ν̂ ∗ SH         ˆ ∗EXT F IN U S ∗
                                                                                    j=1
 ∆DEF . The cells vary according to values of EXT F IN U S and ∆DEF . The coefficients used are from
 the benchmark regression in Table 3 Column 3.



         Table 5: Default Risk Granger Causes Commercial and Industrial Lending
                                                               ∆CILt        ∆DEFt
                    Constant                                 -0.0014*** 0.0062
                                                              (0.0005)  (0.0108)
                    P12
                          ∆DEFt−j                               -0.017   -0.8538
                    P4j=1
                      k=1 ∆CILt−k                              -0.1541    1.6753
                    Observations                                  79           79
                    F test ∆DEF jointly significant            4.71***        1.01
                    Prob>F                                     0.0000        0.4548
                    F test ∆CIL jointly significant             2.14*         0.24
                    Prob>F                                     0.0858        0.9156
                   Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year
                   cumulative default probability for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
                   ∆CIL is the quarterly first difference in commercial and industrial
                   loans as a percentage of GNP. The model is estimated using OLS.
                   ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
                   respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses.




                                                   38
    Table 6: Default Risk Granger Causes Discretionary Fiscal Policy
                                                    ∆capbannual      ∆DEFt
          Constant                                   0.0036***       0.0046
                                                      (0.0012)      (0.0104)
          P12
               ∆DEFt−j
             j=1                                       0.2637        -1.0163
          ∆capbprioryear                               0.0282        0.5656
                                                      (0.0282)      (0.8880)
          Observations                                   79            79
          F test ∆DEF jointly significant              2.27**         1.18
          Prob>F                                       0.0178        0.3142
         Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year
         cumulative default probability for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
         ∆capb is the annual first difference in the cyclically adjusted primary
         balance. The model is estimated using OLS. ***, **, and * indicate
         significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard er-
         rors are in parentheses.



            Table 7: Summary Statistics: The Demand Channel
             Mean       Median     Std. Dev.      25th pctile     75th pctile      Obs.
 ∆DEF        0.0092     0.0026       0.0828         -0.0192         0.0341           90
 ∆capb       0.0007     -0.0037      0.0130         -0.0073         0.0140            7
 GOV         0.0191     0.0139       0.0187         0.0058          0.0281           17
 ∆E         -0.0036     -0.0031      0.0292         -0.0123         0.0048         1,343
 SH          0.0059     0.0030       0.0070         0.0018          0.0074         1,343
Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year cumulative de-
fault probability for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. ∆capb is the first difference in
the cyclically adjusted primary balance (expressed as a percentage of potential output).
GOV measures industry-level dependence on government demand. ∆E is the sector-level
monthly employment growth rate. SH is the sector-level share of total private employ-
ment.




                                          39
Table 8: Increased Default Probability & Austerity Associated with Significantly Lower
Employment Growth in Government Demand Dependent Industries
                                                                             (1)            (2)            (3)
   Constant                                                               0.0116         0.0024     0.0154*
                                                                         (0.0076)       (0.0035)    (0.0086)
   SHt−1                                                                -2.2381***        -.3906  -2.7585***
                                                                         (0.6420)       (0.4102)    (0.6194)
   GOV ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                -4.1315***    2.1801
                                                                                        (1.7557)    (1.9881)
   P12
    j=1 GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−j                                                     -3.3875                    -6.8103
   P12
    j=1 GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−j ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                             -283.9732
   Observations                                                             1,343         2,907           1,343
   Sector Fixed Effects                                                       Y             Y               Y
   Time Fixed Effects                                                         Y             Y               Y
   F test GOV ∗ ∆DEF jointly significant                                  5.67***                       9.95***
   Prob> F                                                                 0.0009                       0.0000
   F test GOV ∗ ∆DEF ∗ ∆capbprioryear jointly significant                                              108.47***
   Prob> F                                                                                               0.0000
  Notes: ∆DEF is the change in the monthly average of the five-year cumulative default probability for the Com-
  monwealth of Puerto Rico and runs from June 2008 to November 2015. GOV measures sector-level dependence on
  government sales from the 2012 Economic Census. ∆capbprioryear is the prior year first difference in the cyclically
  adjusted primary balance, expressed as a percentage of potential output. SHt−1 is the lagged sector-level share of
  total private employment. This table presents the aggregated coefficient on 12 lags of the EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEF
  variable and ∆capbprioryear ∗ ∆DEF . Appendix Table A4 presents the dis-aggregated coefficients on the 12 lags
  of the interaction terms between GOV and ∆capbprioryear with ∆DEF . The model is estimated using OLS. ***,
  **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and
  are clustered by industry.



Table 9: Increased Default Probability is Associated with Economically Significant Lower
Employment Growth in Industries More Dependent on Government Demand
                                                                     ∆DEF        ∆DEF                  ∆DEF
                                                                    25th pctile 75th pctile           90th pctile
  GOV 25th pctile                                                     -0.0012           -0.0023          -0.0034
  GOV 75th pctile                                                     0.0002            -0.0049          -0.0102
  Difference                                                           0.0015           -0.0026          -0.0068
  Percent of average monthly employment growth                         40.3%             71.2%           188.9%
                                                                              ¯ + P12 δt−j
 Notes: Each figure in the body of the table comes from this formula: α̂+ν̂∗ SH         ˆ ∗GOV ∗∆DEF .
                                                                                   j=1
 The cells vary according to values of GOV and ∆DEF . The coefficients used are from the benchmark
 regression in Table 8 Column 1.




                                                         40
Table 10: Austerity is Associated with Economically Significant Lower Employment Growth
in Industries More Dependent on Government Demand
                                                               ∆capb       ∆capb              ∆capb
                                                             25th pctile 75th pctile        90th pctile
  GOV 25th pctile                                               0.0003         -0.0002          -0.0004
  GOV 75th pctile                                               0.0009         -0.0015          -0.0025
  Difference                                                    0.0007         -0.0013          -0.0020
  Percent of average monthly employment growth                  18.7%           35.8%            56.3%
                                                                                 ¯ + P12 δt−j
 Notes: Each figure in the body of the table comes from this formula: α̂ + ν̂ ∗ SH         ˆ ∗ GOV ∗
                                                                                      j=1
                                    P12
 ∆DEF + β̂ ∗GOV ∗∆capbprioryear + j=1 γt−j ˆ ∗GOV ∗∆DEF ∗∆capbprioryear . The cells vary according to
 values of GOV and ∆capb. The coefficients used are from the benchmark regression in Table 8 Column 2.



                   Table 11: Event Study: Three Day Window Benchmark
                                              CAR        C∆S     Observations
         All Events                                 -0.0087**      8.8089***        372:14,386
                                                   (0.002216)       (1.1379)
         Negative Events                           -0.0162***      8.3891***         200:8,150
                                                    (0.0022)        (0.8667)
         Negative Non-GO Ratings Events              0.0042          0.9453          108:4,378
                                                     (0.004)        (0.7728)
         Negative GO Ratings Events                 -0.0408**      16.1850***        72:2,985
                                                     (0.0072)       (1.3055)
         Negative Legal Events                       -0.0384*      20.2285***          20:787
                                                     (0.0146)       (4.2431)
         Positive Events                            0.0033**       8.6225***         60:2,101
                                                    (0.0006)        (2.5692)
         Neutral Events                               -0.0019      9.9154***         80:2,944
                                                     (0.0038)       (1.5276)
         Mixed Events                                 -0.0013      9.2752***         32:1,191
                                                     (0.0058)       (2.9655)
       Notes: ***, **, and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Each
       variable is a regression on a constant for the indicated stratum of events. Standard errors
       are clustered by firm for CAR and by bond for C∆S. CAR is expressed as the sum of log
       differences in stock price, and C∆S is expressed in basis points.




                                                   41
                                                  Figure 1: Puerto Rico GNP vs. U.S. GNP




                                                                                                                              110
                                                                                                             BB+
                                                             Full Repeal of               S&P Rating
                            .04
                                                                                                             (Junk)
                                                             Sec. 936                                                 CCC+
                                                                                                    BBB
                                                                                                                         CC




                                                                                                                              100
                                                                                  BBB        BBB-         BBB-
                                                                                         BBB-
           GNP Growth (%)
                     .02


                                                                                  BBB-




                                                                                                                              P.R. Debt/GNP
                                                                                                                                        90
                                                                           BBB-
             0




                                                                                                                                80
                                                              BBB
                                                        A-           BBB
                            -.02




                                                                                                                              70
                                                  A-
                                             A-

                                        A
                                    A




                                                                                                                              60
                            -.04




                                   2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
                                                                    P.R. Fiscal Year

                                                       P.R. GNP Growth                        U.S. GNP Growth
                                                       P.R. Debt/GNP



                                                        Figure 2: Employment and Yields
           .05




                                                                                                                                  15
Normalized Log Employment




                                                                                                                                  10
                  0




                                                                                                                                         YTM (%)
    -.05




                                                                                                                                  5
           -.1




                                                                                                                                  0




                            2008         2009      2010       2011      2012   2013             2014        2015       2016
                                                                          Year

                                          U.S. Private Employment            P.R. Private Employment
                                          YTM: Commonwealth of Puerto Rico 5 Year GO Debt (%)



                                                                              42
Figure 3: Employment by Dependence on External Finance and Default Probability




                                                                                                                                                                                         1
                           0




                                                                                                                                                   5-Year Cumulative Default Probability
  Normalized Log Employment
                       -.1




                                                                                                                                                                              .8
                -.2




                                                                                                                                                                    .6
         -.3




                                                                                                                                                          .4
  -.4




                                                                                                                                                   .2
                           -.5




                                                         2008   2009    2010        2011       2012        2013       2014     2015        2016
                                                                                                Year

                                                                  Employment: High Dep. on Ext. Fin.        Employment:
                                                                  Default Probability                Low Dep. on Ext. Fin.



                                                                   Figure 4: Banking and Puerto Rico’s Crisis
      Def. Prob. (%), P.R. Gov't Debt (% Bank Capital)




                                                                                                                                                   .1
                                                 1




                                                                                                                                                                    .09
                                                                                                                                                   Comm. Loans (% GNP)
                             .6         .8




                                                                                                                                                           .08
                    .4




                                                                                                                                                   .07
         .2




                                                                                                                                                   .06




                                                         2008   2009     2010       2011        2012           2013   2014       2015        2016
                                                                                                Year

                                                                  Default Probability: Quarterly (left axis)            P.R. Gov't Debt as %
                                                                  Comm. Loans: % GNP (right axis)                       Bank Capital (left axis)




                                                                                                  43
Figure 5: Employment by Dependence on Government Demand and Default Probability




                                                                                                                                             1
                 0




                                                                                                       5-Year Cumulative Default Probability
     Normalized Log Employment




                                                                                                                                  .8
                      -.2




                                                                                                                        .6
         -.4




                                                                                                       .2     .4
                 -.6




                                 2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013     2014    2015     2016
                                                               Year

                                           Employment: High Dep. on Gov.             Employment:
                                           Default Probability               Low Dep. on Gov.



    Figure 6: Employment by Dependence on Government Demand and Austerity
                 0




                                                                                                       -.07
     Normalized Log Employment




                                                                                                               -.08
                      -.2




                                                                                                       CAPB/Yp
                                                                                                        -.09
         -.4




                                                                                                       -.1
                                                                                                       -.11
                 -.6




                                 2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013     2014    2015     2016
                                                               Year

                                           Employment: High Dep. on Gov.              Employment:
                                           CAPB/Yp                           Low Dep. on Gov.



                                                               44
                                             Figure 7: Marginal Effects of Austerity and Default Risk


                                   0
             Employment Growth (%)
         -.04  -.03  -.02
                       -.05 -.01




                                       10         20         30          40        50        60      70         80         90
                                                                              GOV Percentile

                                                          MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ DEF              90% C.I.
                                                          MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ capb             90% C.I.




                                            Figure 8: Marginal Effects of Default Risk Across Austerity
            0
Employment Growth (%)
 -.03   -.02-.04-.01




                                  10            20         30          40       50        60         70        80          90
                                                                         Δ capb Percentile

                                               MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ DEF, 25th pctile GOV              90% C.I.
                                               MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ DEF, 75th pctile GOV              90% C.I.




                                                                                 45
                                        Figure 9: Marginal Effects of Austerity Across Default Risk

                  .02        .01
          Employment Growth (%)
        -.02   -.01
                  -.03 0




                                   10      20        30       40      50        60         70   80      90
                                                                Δ DEF Percentile

                                         MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ capb, 75th pctile GOV    90% C.I.
                                         MFX: 1 Std. Dev. Increase in Δ capb, 25th pctile GOV    90% C.I.




A             Data Construction
A.1                    Construction of Industry Level Dependence on External Fi-
                       nance
Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we base our calculation of industry-level dependence
on external finance on firm-level data from Compustat. Given our benchmark sample period
of 2008-2015 and our sample period used in robustness checks of 2001-2015, we calculate
dependence on external finance for 2005-2015 and 2000-2015. We use the 2000-2015 calcu-
lation period in our benchmark results as this extended period reduces fluctuations related
to the financial crisis. For an additional robustness check, we also calculate dependence on
external finance for the years 1995-2005, capturing pre-crisis dependence on external finance.
    As a first step, we merge the Compustat annual fundamentals database with the CRSP
database based on firm cusip numbers and years. Following Rajan and Zingales (1998), we
use CRSP SIC codes to classify each firm’s industry.41 Then, we match each four-digit SIC
code in the merged Compustat-CRSP database with NAICS three-digit industry codes using

  41
       Although CRSP does provide NAICS codes, they are only available beginning in 2004.

                                                                      46
        Table A.1: External Finance Dependence Across United States Manufacturers
                                                                                     External     External     External
                                                                                   Dependence   Dependence   Dependence
 NAICS Code         Industrial Sector                                               2000-2015    2005-2015    1995-2005
 315                Apparel Manufacturing                                            -1.1710      -1.5495      -0.5531
 323                Printing and Related Support Activities                          -1.1321      -1.5563      -0.4805
 316                Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing                         -1.0902      -1.5862      -0.2819
 321                Wood Product Manufacturing                                       -0.7230      -0.8197      -0.2726
 311                Food Manufacturing                                               -0.6711      -0.7194      -0.4889
 326                Plastics and Rubber Products Manufacturing                       -0.6572      -0.9288      -0.2062
 335                Electrical Equipment_ Appliance_ and Component Manufacturing     -0.5638      -0.6961      -0.0826
 336                Transportation Equipment Manufacturing                           -0.5637      -0.8203      -0.1092
 327                Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing                        -0.5215      -0.6989      -0.1295
 332                Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                           -0.4496      -0.6718       0.1046
 324                Petroleum and Coal Products Manufacturing                        -0.4441      -0.5795      -0.2895
 331                Primary Metal Manufacturing                                      -0.3813      -0.7437      -0.2090
 333                Machinery Manufacturing                                          -0.3021      -1.0246       0.2885
 322                Paper Manufacturing                                              -0.2329      -0.5081       0.4896
 339                Miscellaneous Manufacturing                                      -0.2014      -0.7525       0.4058
 337                Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing                      -0.1022      -0.7456       0.4691
 334                Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing                     0.0108      -1.0150       0.5639
 312                Beverage and Tobacco Product Manufacturing                        0.1276      -0.3693       0.5041
 325                Chemical Manufacturing                                            1.5617       1.1730       1.4019
 Average                                                                             -0.3951      -0.7691       0.0592
 Correlation with                                                                                  0.9140       0.9268
 2000-2015



the concordance tables provided by the Census. If four-digit SIC codes are not matched, we
match them at the three-digit and then the two-digit level. With each firm matched with
one or more NAICS three-digit industries, we calculate each firm’s dependence on external
finance using the following formula:

                                                      CAP X − CF OP ER
                                     EXT F IN =                                                                  (12)
                                                           CAP X

where CAP X is total capital expenditures and CF OP ER is total cash flows from operations
of a given firm over each of the periods of calculation discussed above. The calculation of
CAP X and CF OP ER follow Rajan and Zingales (1998). Finally, we take the median value
of EXT F IN for U.S. firms in each NAICS three-digit industry. Table A.1 shows industry
medians of dependence on external finance for each three-digit NAICS manufacturing indus-
try for which we have Puerto Rican employment data, ranked using the benchmark period
2000-2015. Note that average dependence on external finance is lowest during the periods
2000-2015 and 2005-2015, which include the financial crisis, indicating a tendency for firms
to retain cash flow from operations rather than invest in capital expenditures. However,
note the ranking of industries by dependence on external finance is fairly stable, and that
the measure is highly correlated across the three calculation periods.




                                                          47
A.2     Tax Adjustment
We compute the tax-adjusted yield using the following formula:

      1 − τ = (1 − τ f ed )(1 − τ state−weighted )(1 − P Rshare) + (1 − τ P R )(P Rshare)   (13)
                  yit
        yitT A =                                                                            (14)
                 1−τ

where τ f ed is the federal top marginal income tax rate, τ state−weighted is the population and
incentive weighted average state top marginal income tax rate, τ P R is Puerto Rico’s top
marginal income tax rate, yit is the raw yield on the Puerto Rican security, and yitT A is the
tax-adjusted yield on a Puerto Rican security. The first term adjusts for the fact that state
income tax payments are deductible from federal taxable income for residents of U.S. states
(see Schwert (2017)). Puerto Rican residents do not pay federal income tax, so the second
term does not contain a correction for this deduction. In order to arrive at the tax-adjusted
yield, we need assumptions regarding the residence of holders of Puerto Rico’s debt and their
tax rates.
    First, we compute the average top marginal state income tax rate of mainland U.S.
residents holding Puerto Rican debt. As we do not have data on geographical holdings
of Puerto Rican debt, we assume that Puerto Rican debt is held by mainland residents
according to each state’s population and tendency to hold tax exempt debt, which enjoys
the same tax benefits as Puerto Rican debt held in each state using the following formula:

                                                            50
                                                            X
                                      state−weighted
                                  τ                    =          ti wi                     (15)
                                                            i=1
                                                        P opi si
                                                 wi = P50                                   (16)
                                                       i=1 P opi si


where ti is the top marginal income tax rate in state i, P opi is the population of state i and
si is the share of the total municipal debt of state i held by state funds from Babina et al.
(2017). We find τ state−weighted = 6.86%.
    We also need an assumption regarding the share of Puerto Rican municipal debt held by
Puerto Rican residents (P Rshare). We do not have any data on this share, so we assume
Puerto Rican residents hold 50.58% of Puerto Rican municipal debt. This figure follows
Babina et al. (2017), who find that state funds hold an average of 50.58% of state debt
held by all funds in the U.S. states with the highest state income tax rates and hence the
greatest incentives to hold local debt. Puerto Rico’s top marginal income tax rate of 33%
would make it the state with the highest top marginal income tax rate. The federal income


                                                       48
tax top marginal tax rate was 35% from the beginning of the sample through 2012, and
39.6% thereafter. For robustness, we repeat the benchmark results assuming that all Puerto
Rican municipal debt is held by mainland investors in the state with the highest income tax
(California 13.3%), by investors in a state with an income tax rate of 0%, of which there are
several, and by Puerto Rican residents. The results are robust to all of these alternatives.




                                             49
A.3    External Finance Channel: Dis-aggregated Lags

Table A.2: Increased Default Probability is Associated with Statistically Significant Lower
Employment Growth in Industries More Dependent on External Finance
                                                                               (1)            (2)             (3)
             Constant                                                     -0.0037*** 0.0110**             0.0189**
                                                                           (0.0009)   (0.0044)            (0.0078)
             SHt−1                                                          0.0301   -2.3129***          -2.7585***
                                                                           (0.0877)   (0.7042)            (0.7085)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−1                                                                        0.0295
                                                                                                          (0.0441)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−2                                                                        -0.0147
                                                                                                          (0.0133)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−3                                                                      -0.0339***
                                                                                                          (0.0114)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−4                                                                        -0.0069
                                                                                                          (0.0212)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−5                                                                       -0.0187*
                                                                                                          (0.0104)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−6                                                                        -0.0008
                                                                                                          (0.0092)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−7                                                                        0.0051
                                                                                                          (0.0202)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−8                                                                        -0.0029
                                                                                                          (0.0028)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−9                                                                        0.0109
                                                                                                          (0.0138)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−10                                                                       -0.0183
                                                                                                          (0.0237)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−11                                                                       0.0117
                                                                                                          (0.0079)
             EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEFt−12                                                                       0.0077
                                                                                                          (0.0068)
             Observations                                                    1,501           1,501          1,501
             Sector Fixed Effects                                              N               Y              Y
             Time Fixed Effects                                                N               N              Y
             F test EXT F IN U S ∗ ∆DEF jointly significant                                               25.90***
             Prob>F                                                                                        0.0000
            Notes: This table presents disaggregated coefficients on all 12 lags on the EXT F IN U S variable inter-
            acted with ∆DEF . Table 3 presents the summation of the coefficients on the 12 lags. ∆DEF is the
            change in the monthly average of the five-year cumulative default probability for the Commonwealth of
            Puerto Rico. EXT F IN U S is the Rajan and Zingales (1998) measure of sector-level dependence on ex-
            ternal finance, calculated for the 2000-2015 period. SHt−1 is the lagged sector-level share of total private
            employment. The model is estimated using OLS. ***,**,and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and
            10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by industry.




                                                               50
A.4    Government Demand Channel: Dis-aggregated Lags

Table A.3: Increased Default Probability and Austerity are Associated with Statistically Sig-
nificant Lower Employment Growth in Industries More Dependent on Government Demand
                                                                                                       (1)           (2)            (3)
                         Constant                                                                   0.0116          0.0024   0.0154*
                                                                                                   (0.0076)       (0.0035)  (0.0086)
                         SHt−1                                                                    -2.2381***       -0.3906 -2.2528***
                                                                                                   (0.6420)       (0.4102)  (0.6194)
                         GOV ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                    -4.1315**   2.1801
                                                                                                                  (1.7557)  (1.9881)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−1                                                               -0.5352                     -0.8477*
                                                                                                    (0.3883)                     (0.4273)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−2                                                             -1.3099**                    -2.4579**
                                                                                                    (0.5517)                     (0.9241)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−3                                                                0.3883                      0.1233
                                                                                                    (0.5235)                     (0.7205)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−4                                                               -0.9426                   -1.8671***
                                                                                                    (0.5887)                     (0.6350)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−5                                                              0.5832**                      0.0415
                                                                                                    (0.2345)                     (0.3918)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−6                                                               -1.0592                      -1.1126
                                                                                                    (0.7718)                     (0.7054)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−7                                                               -0.5001                       0.0907
                                                                                                    (0.4634)                     (0.7654)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−8                                                               -0.3141                      -0.1884
                                                                                                    (0.3053)                     (0.2785)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−9                                                               0.0909                       -0.2080
                                                                                                    (0.6757)                     (0.5577)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−10                                                              -0.0580                      -0.6486
                                                                                                    (0.5809)                     (0.7644)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−11                                                              -0.1724                      -0.2171
                                                                                                    (0.5049)                     (0.6867)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−12                                                              0.4416                       0.4816
                                                                                                    (0.3930)                     (0.3401)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−1 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          -15.1763
                                                                                                                                (48.7624)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−2 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                        -126.9472*
                                                                                                                                (63.0551)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−3 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                           -8.2246
                                                                                                                                (69.0388)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−4 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          -79.4172
                                                                                                                                (46.1591)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−5 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          -44.1985
                                                                                                                                (44.3249)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−6 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                           -6.2832
                                                                                                                                (36.0750)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−7 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          91.8706
                                                                                                                                (90.3562)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−8 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                            6.6506
                                                                                                                                (19.6297)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−9 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          -23.1996
                                                                                                                                (54.0526)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−10 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                         -83.9926
                                                                                                                                (66.4269)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−11 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                         10.8382
                                                                                                                                (25.3079)
                         GOV ∗ ∆DEFt−12 ∗ ∆capbprioryear                                                                          -5.8934
                                                                                                                                (25.8329)
                         Observations                                                                 1,343         2,907          1,343
                         Sector Fixed Effects                                                           Y             Y              Y
                         Time Fixed Effects                                                             Y             Y              Y
                         F test GOV ∗ ∆DEF jointly significant                                      5.67***                      9.95***
                         Prob> F                                                                     0.0009                       0.0000
                         F test GOV ∗ ∆DEF ∗ ∆CAP Bprioryear jointly significant                                                108.47***
                         Prob> F                                                                                                  0.0000
                        Notes: This table presents disaggregated coefficients on all 12 lags on the GOV variable. Table 6 presents the sum-
                        mation of the coefficients on the GOV variable interacted with ∆DEF . ∆DEF is the change in the monthly aver-
                        age of the five-year cumulative default probability for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and runs from June 2008
                        to November 2015. GOV measures sector-level dependence on government sales from the 2012 Economic Census.
                        ∆CAP Bprioryear is the prior year first difference in the cyclically adjusted primary balance, expressed as a percent-
                        age of potential output. SHt−1 is the lagged sector-level share of total private employment. The model is estimated
                        using OLS. ***,**,and * indicate significance at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively. Standard errors are in
                        parentheses and are clustered by industry.




                                                                               51
A.5     Legal Event Classification
Unlike ratings actions, legal events are not by definition good or bad news for Puerto Rico’s
creditworthiness. The first step in classifying the legal events is to classify the laws themselves
as good or bad news for Puerto Rico’s creditworthiness. With these classifications, we then
classify legal proceedings against a law by how they affect the expected outcome of the case.
First, we classify the "Puerto Rico Public Corporations Debt Enforcement and Recovery
Act" and the "Debt Moratorium and Financial Recovery Act" as credit negative events, or
bad news about Puerto Rico’s creditworthiness. We make this judgment for several reasons.
First, Puerto Rico passed these laws intending to create a legal framework allowing Puerto
Rico to default, signaling an inability to meet its obligations or unwillingness to do so.
Further, the terms were of course relatively favorable for Puerto Rico. Second, the ratings
agencies expressly downgraded Puerto Rican debt due to these laws. Third, major holders
of Puerto Rico’s debt sued to attempt to overturn these laws. The latter clearly indicates
the belief of lenders that the laws were credit negative. With these classifications, we classify
any filing of a legal case against these laws as credit positive, indicating news of an increased
probability the laws will be overturned. Similarly, attempts by Puerto Rico to have rulings
against the laws overturned via appeal and the decision of a court to hear an appeal are
credit negative, indicating news of an increased probability that the laws will be upheld.
Arguments before the court are judged based upon publicly available information, including
the transcripts of the arguments and news coverage. If the questions asked by judges during
oral arguments indicate they intend to overturn these laws or uphold a ruling against them,
this is classified as credit positive and vice versa. We complement our own reading of oral
arguments with contemporaneous opinions of legal scholars regarding what the arguments
reveal about the likely outcome of the case. Regarding other important legal events such as
filings by Puerto Rico, its creditors, and friends of the court, there is no objective way to
determine the strength of the argument and hence their likely influence on the outcome of
the case. Searches of news sources provided no meaningful contemporaneous legal opinions
about the likely effect of these filings. These events are classified as neutral, meaning we do
not have a sign for the news conveyed by the event.
     We classify the passage of PROMESA by the United States as credit positive for several
reasons. First, the law received positive commentary from the funds that hold Puerto Rican
debt, indicating they believe it improved their recovery rates. Second, Moody’s reviewed it
favorably in an issuer comment and considered it credit positive. Third, there is the law
itself and its contrast with the Chapter 9 process undergone by insolvent mainland munici-
palities. Municipal bankruptcies under Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code differ significantly
from bankruptcies of private entities. Broadly, Chapter 9 is significantly more lenient for

                                                52
the debtor, stemming in part from the sovereign rights of states as defined in the Tenth
Amendment to the United States Constitution. Under Chapter 9, assets of municipalities
can not be seized and liquidated, nor can their operating decisions such as expenditures and
raising of revenue be interfered with as part of a settlement or the litigation. Further, only
the municipality itself may file a restructuring plan with the court. The process outlined in
PROMESA is based on Chapter 9 of the bankruptcy code but is significantly more restrictive
from the perspective of the debtor. PROMESA establishes a seven-member oversight board
that has the sole authority to propose restructuring plans and has authority over Puerto
Rico’s budget. The board members were selected by the president, however PROMESA
gave the right to the following individuals to create approved lists from which to select the
following number of board members: speaker of the House, two members; Senate major-
ity Leader, two members; House minority leader, one member; Senate minority leader, one
member; president of the United States, one member. This gave effective control over a
voting majority of the board members to the Republican party. Further, the court was only
authorized to approve a restructuring plan if it was in the best interest of creditors. That is,
if the presiding judge deemed that the bond holders could not achieve more favorable terms
through other legal means. In summary, PROMESA allows an outside body with more than
the debtor’s interest in consideration to propose restructuring plans, control the debtor’s
fiscal process, and mandate the court to take a harder line against the debtor than under
Chapter 9 and the similar "Recovery Act."
    It is important to note that this law also placed a stay on any litigation against Puerto
Rico relating to default and created a legal framework for restructuring where none existed
before. On the surface, this may seem credit negative as without this law Puerto Rico had
no legal right to restructure nor to avoid payment. However, note that the Puerto Rican
governor stated his intent to prioritize public services over debt service regardless of this legal
limbo. As in other sovereign crises, the threat of forcing repayment without restructuring is
not credible nor espoused. Also note the statements of the speaker of the House promising
some kind of restructuring plan. These stated intentions, among others, indicate a clear
realization by all parties, especially following the Supreme Court’s decision against Puerto
Rico’s Recovery Act, that some form of legislated restructuring framework was inevitable.
Given this, we find the eventual form to be beneficial to creditors and thus credit positive.


A.6     Mixed Event Classification
We identify three scenarios that give us a priori reason to reclassify mixed events. First,
as neutral ratings events signify no change, we classify combinations of signed (positive or


                                                53
negative) ratings actions and neutral ratings actions with the sign of the signed ratings
action. Second, in cases where we have positive and negative ratings actions on the same
day, we use the sign of a GO ratings action if present, as these are the most direct news
about the commonwealth’s creditworthiness. Third, in cases where signed legal events and
signed ratings actions occur on the same day, we look at the relative importance of the events
from a legal standpoint. We find four mixed events that fall into one of these groups and
merit reclassification. The event window of the first begins 6/26/2015. The event includes
the governor’s statement that the debt was not payable and the nine associated ratings
downgrades. The one included positive event is the affirmation by the 1st Circuit Court of
Appeals of the earlier decision against Puerto Rico’s Recovery Act. Although the event is
certainly credit positive, questions asked by the three judges of the 1st Circuit during earlier
oral arguments had already revealed apparently unanimous opposition to Puerto Rico’s case.
This, combined with the significance of Governor Padilla’s statement that the debt was not
payable and its reception by the ratings agencies merits a credit negative classification for
this series of events. We classify this as a ratings action. The second event window begins
on 4/1/2016. This includes one credit positive event, a filing of a suit over GDB revenue
diversion. It also includes two credit negative events, the passage of the Debt Moratorium
Act by Puerto Rico’s House and Senate. We classify the combined event as credit negative
because the Debt Moratorium Act would have allowed Puerto Rico to delay payments on
its debt. This is more significant for Puerto Rico’s credit than the lawsuit over revenue
diversion. The third window is a mixed rating action beginning 3/8/2013. It includes an
improvement in the UPR credit rating and downgrades of GO and PREPA. We classify it
by the GO rating action. Finally, the event window beginning June 25, 2014, includes the
credit negative passage of the Recovery Act and a series of related ratings downgrades. All
of these events are negative so the overall sign is negative. We classify the overall type as a
legal event as the ratings actions directly resulted from the legal event. Section 6 shows the
robustness of our benchmark results to these reclassifications.




                                              54
