NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DO PUBLIC FIRMS RESPOND TO INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES MORE THAN
PRIVATE FIRMS? THE IMPACT OF INITIAL FIRM QUALITY
Vojislav Maksimovic
Gordon M. Phillips
Liu Yang
Working Paper 24104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w24104

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
December 2017

Vojislav Maksimovic is from University of Maryland and can be reached at
vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu. Gordon Phillips is from Tuck School of Business at Dartmouth and
NBER and can be reached at gordon.m.phillips@tuck.dartmouth.edu. Liu Yang is from
University of Maryland and can be reached at lyang@rhsmith.umd.edu. We thank Ian Appel and
seminar participants at the University of Alberta Frontier of Finance Conference, University of
British Columbia, Dartmouth College, Hong Kong University, Nanyang Technological
University, Purdue University, Singapore Management University, Huazhong University of
Technology, SUNY Buffalo, University of Maryland and the University of Oregon for helpful
comments. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not
necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to
ensure that no confidential information is disclosed. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.
© 2017 by Vojislav Maksimovic, Gordon M. Phillips, and Liu Yang. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Do Public Firms Respond to Investment Opportunities More than Private Firms? The Impact
of Initial Firm Quality
Vojislav Maksimovic, Gordon M. Phillips, and Liu Yang
NBER Working Paper No. 24104
December 2017
JEL No. G3,G32,L2,L20,L22,L25,L26
ABSTRACT
Using U.S. Census data, we track firms at birth and compare the growth pattern of IPO firms and
their matched always-private counterparts over their life cycle. Firms that are larger at birth with
faster initial growth are more likely to attain a larger size and to subsequently go public. We
estimate a model to predict the propensity to become public (“public quality”) using initial
conditions. Firms in the top percentile of public quality grow 29 times larger than the remaining
firms fifteen years later if they actually become public and 14 times larger if they stay private,
showing a large selection effect for IPO status. Public firms respond more to demand shocks after
their IPO and are more productive than their matched private counterparts. This effect is stronger
in industries that are capital intensive and dependent on external financing. Overall, initial
conditions predict firm growth trajectories, selection into public status and responsiveness to
demand shocks. We find no evidence of public market myopia when matching by initial
conditions.
Vojislav Maksimovic
R.H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
Room 4417, Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
vmax@rhsmith.umd.edu
Gordon M. Phillips
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
gordon.m.phillips@gmail.com

Liu Yang
Department of Finance
Robert H. Smith School of Business
4420 Van Munching Hall
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-1815
lyang@rhsmith.umd.edu

I. Introduction
In the United States, most large firms are publicly traded, whereas smaller firms tend to be held
privately. Public status comes with several distinct advantages, such as access to public capital
markets, and the ability to diversify ownership.1 There are also potential costs of public status,
including costs of dispersed ownership, misaligned investment and growth incentives, and costs
from public market oversight. 2 Several authors, such as Stein (1989), Froot, Perold, and Stein
(1992) as well as the New York Times,3 have suggested that misaligned investment and growth
incentives have the potential to cause investment distortions in public firms. Recently, Asker,
Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2015) argue that misalignment incentives are powerful enough as to
induce public firms to respond less than private firms to industry growth opportunities. However,
comparing private firms with seemingly similar public firms that have gone public years
previously, and are at a different stage of their life-cycle, risks confounding differences in public
status with inherent differences in quality between firms. In this paper, we show that firms’ initial
conditions at birth predict their future growth trajectories and public status, and that controlling for
this measure of firm quality, public firms are more, or at least as, responsive to growth opportunities
as private firms in subsequent years.
We analyze the growth trajectories and responses to growth opportunities by public and private
firms over the first fifteen years after birth. We control for inherent firm quality at the beginning
of a firm’s life, then match firms that subsequently became public with comparable private firms
that stay private throughout. Using confidential data from the Longitudinal Business Database
(LBD) maintained by the U.S. Census Bureau, we obtain size, growth, labor productivity and other
relevant characteristics for a large sample of firms (892,000 firms and 5,952,500 firm-years
between 1978 and 2008) starting from their first year, regardless of public and private status.
We then use this data to examine the growth trajectories of the firms, and we address the
following questions. How persistent are initial conditions? Do firms that are initially larger and

See Ritter and Welch (2002) for an overview of both rational and behavioral rationales for why firms go public
and the IPO timing. These theories include life-cycle theories (Zingales (1995) and Chemmanur and Fulghieri
(1999) and market-timing theories (Lucas and MacDonald (1990), and Baker and Wurgler (2000).
2
See, for example, the theoretical models by Holmström (1982), Narayanan (1985), Miller and Rock (1985),
Stein (1989), and von Thadden (1995). Suboptimal incentives often involve attempts by managers to misinform
their dispersed shareholders, or faulty signals due to mispricing in the public markets. The opposite theoretical
view about public markets is given by Edmans (2009). He shows theoretically how increased stock-market
liquidity and transient blockholders can increase market efficiency and reduce managerial myopia.
3
See New York Times, July 6, 2010, Smith and Parentau –“Are Profits Hurting Capitalism?”
1

more productive remain larger and more competitive later in life? Do the same initial
characteristics predict future public status? Controlling for these initial characteristics, does public
status predict differential growth, efficiency, and responses to growth opportunities? If so, is the
differential effect permanent, or concentrated around a firm’s decision to go public? Finally, are
any differences between our results and the previous literature attributable to sample selection
issues when researchers do not control for initial conditions? We show that previous conclusions
that publicly listed firms under-react to investment opportunities are driven by cross-sectional
matching and selection issues.
We establish several new findings that highlight the importance of controlling for firm initial
conditions and firm selection. First, we show that initial conditions strongly predict future firm
size. Firms in the top one percent of initial size in the first year are, on average, 20 times larger
fifteen years later compared to the average firm born at the same time. Similarly, firms in the top
one percent of first-year growth rate or initial average wage are on average 7.2 and 5.6 times larger
after fifteen years, respectively. Thus, firm’s initial conditions are highly predicative of future
outcomes. This is consistent with the conjecture that entrepreneurial talent is persistent. Strategic
and talented entrepreneurs who select growth opportunities that yield profits faster create more
viable firms, find it easier to raise capital faster, or some combination thereof.
Second, we show that the same initial firm characteristics that predict growth also predict a
firm’s propensity to acquire public status through an Initial Public Offering (IPO). One standard
deviation increase in initial size, initial wage and first-year growth rate increases the probability of
IPO by 300%, 250% and 170%, respectively. Moreover, higher propensity also predicts higher
growth. A firm with top one percent propensity to subsequently go public employs, on average, 16
times more employees at age of ten than a an average firm whose propensity to go public is outside
the top one percent. Among firms with top one percent propensity, those that actually go public
are 29 times larger, whereas those that stay private are only 14 times larger than the remaining
firms fifteen years later. This difference can be interpreted as an upper bound on the benefits of
public status.4 These estimates indicate the large role initial conditions play in predicting firm size
over time, and the significant effect of selecting public listing.
Third, when we match firms on initial conditions and compare outcomes of public firms and
private firms around the times of the IPOs, we find a distinctive pattern. The IPO firms grow faster
The difference of 12 times is explained by the benefits of public status, differences in initial quality not observed
by us, and events, such as an unexpectedly good outcome of an R&D program, that may have occurred prior to
deciding to go public.

4

2

prior to the IPO, and in the first five years after the IPO. However, their growth rate subsequently
converges to that of always-private firms five years the IPO. This result is consistent with the
notion that the IPO firms are of higher quality. They initially have a growth spurt until reaching
their optimal size, and their growth afterwards converges back to the economy average. The
transition from private status occurs on average around midway through the firm’s high growth
trajectory.
Fourth, in the five-year period after the IPO, publicly listed firms react more positively to
product market growth opportunities than matched private firms. As with growth, this advantage
dissipates over time but does not reverse.
Fifth, we show that during the period of high responsiveness to growth opportunities (first five
years after the IPO), the labor productivity of listed firms is higher than or equal to that of matched
always-private firms. This is consistent with efficient growth of public firms observed in this
interval, after which public firms attain the efficient scale based on their characteristics. Further
growth and efficiency from that point are not statistically different from that of always-private
firms. Additionally, we show that the closure rates of public firms are lower than that of private
firms. Thus, public firms do not attain their higher growth by following riskier growth strategies.5
In addition, we observe similar differences in closure rates for firms that became public on or off
the IPO waves.
Sixth, we show that public firms’ greater sensitivity to growth opportunities holds both when
we consider firms’ total growth including acquisitions, and when we measure only the growth of
firms’ original establishments. Thus, the greater responsiveness of public firms does not rely
exclusively on their greater participation in the market for assets. We also show that the differential
responses to growth opportunities of public firms are greater in industries that rely more on external
financing. Public firms in more financially dependent industries grow faster in periods when
financing costs are high, which suggests that public status gives firms better access to financial
markets when money is tight.
We show that the previous finding that publicly listed firms underinvest in response to product
market opportunities (Asker, Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist (2015)) likely arises because of crosssectional matching of mature firms. We show using Census data that cross-sectional matching leads
The firms in Jovanovic (1982) exhibit similar dynamics. In that model firms initially do not know their
productivity. As their productivity is revealed in the market place, the more efficient firms grow faster. Our data
shows, however, that early characteristics are informative of quality and predict future growth. However, since
there is residual uncertainty about quality and growth opportunities, similar dynamics arise.
5

3

to adverse selection whereby very successful private firms are matched with under-performing
public firms.6 Firms with very high productivity in their early life grow aggressively beyond their
initial size and have a high probability of going public. As a result, very successful public firms
are much bigger in size, making it difficult to find size-matched private firms. We show that, in a
given year, a sizable sample of very large and efficient mature public firms cannot be crosssectionally matched to private firms. At the same time, unsuccessful public firms on a downward
path are likely to be matched to more successful private firms with an upward trajectory.
Examining a cross-sectionally matched sample, we find that the lower responsiveness
underinvestment of public firms relative to private firms is mostly driven by old, mature public
firms. Thus, the finding in Asker et al. that public firms respond less robustly to growth
opportunities than matched private firms can be explained by the timing of the match, and the
inability to find private matches in cross section for large, very successful public firms.
We perform several tests to address potential concerns with our comparison between public
and private firms. First, unobservable firm characteristics may generate unmeasurable differences
between IPO and always-private firms in our matched sample. To further clarify the selection
effect, we examine firms with Venture Capital (VC) investments earlier in their life. VC investors
may have additional information about the firm, and VC sponsorship can serve as a signal for firm
quality. We show that IPO firms that are supported by VC earlier in life exhibit even greater
responsiveness to demand shocks following their IPO. This finding is consistent with firms with
higher quality and stronger initial conditions selecting to move into public status. Second, since
IPO and acquisition are the two most common exit strategies for successful private firms, one
potential concern is that the differences we observe can be driven by acquisition of successful
private firms by public firms. These successful private firms thus exit the sample, which creates
downward bias for the matching sample. We show that while initially matched private firms that
are subsequently acquired by public firms also grow faster before acquisition than matched firms
that remain private, they do not exhibit the same higher sensitivity to growth opportunities over
time as firms that go public. Thus, the effects we identify are specific to firms that go public, and
are not driven by sample attrition due to acquisitions.
All the results above hold in both specifications when we split into different time periods or
control for firm-cohort-period fixed effects. First, we estimate the model in three time periods
The summary statistics in Asker, Farre-Mensa and Ljungqvist also show matched public firms decrease in
performance (average ROA = -2.8%) versus the full sample of public firms (ROA = 6.4%) while the reverse is
true for the ROA of matched private firms (ROA= 11.1%) versus the full sample of private firms (ROA =-11.8%).

6

4

(before the IPO, first five years after the IPO, and five years after the IPO) in order to examine the
effect of public status on growth over time. Second, we define a firm-cohort-period fixed effect for
each cohort of public firm and its matching private firms, and for each of the three stages of cohort’s
life-cycle (before IPO, first five years after the IPO, and fiver years after the IPO). This
specification allows us to follow cohorts based on initial match over time and control for shocks
that affect firms of the same age in each industry. In addition, the post-IPO patterns are also robust
to alternative matching at IPO-time as well our matches at birth.
Overall, our results indicate that firm quality is observable very early in firm’s life and that its
effect is persistent. Higher quality firms go public and they attain larger size. A significant part of
size differential between samples of public and private firms is predictable from initial conditions.
When matched by initial quality, the growth path of firms that become public diverges from that
of always-private firms both before and after the IPO. For a period after the IPO, public firms grow
faster and are more responsive to growth opportunities. Predictions of firm size based on initial
conditions suggest a lower bound of 49% of differences in firm size at year 15 due to initial
conditions and the remaining 51% of differences in firm size due to the benefits of public status or
unobserved initial differences in quality or luck.
We find little evidence of inefficient growth for public firms. Public firms maintain higher
efficiency during high growth periods. The most important differences between outcomes of birthmatched public and private firms occur around the time of the IPO. While some of the difference
is due to the increased access to financial markets, we cannot rule out the possibility unobserved
selection effects also play a role. Our results also suggest that measurements of initial firm quality
may provide an exogenous quality index in other empirical work in corporate finance where
researchers need to match firms for quality.
We argue that there is also a strong “foundation effect” in which the entrepreneur’s ability is
embodied in the firm’s structure and influences the exploitation of future growth opportunities in
the long run.7 Thus, our paper also relates to the literature that traces the effects of managerial
characteristics on firm performance. Bertrand and Schoar (2003), Cronqvist, Makhika and Yonker
(2012), and Benmelech and Frydman (2015), among others, trace the connection between the
personal characteristics of managers and firm decisions.

Ayyagari et. al. (2017) investigate how the interaction between firm characteristics at formation and institutions
in a developing country predicts outcomes.

7

5

Our paper also draws on the literature on decisions to go public. Researchers have both
analyzed the trade-offs between public and private status (e.g., Bhattacharya and Ritter (1993),
Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1999), Maksimovic and Pichler (2001)) and the benefits to the
entrepreneurial firm of sale to public investors or to strategic acquirers (e.g., Bayar and
Chemmanur (2010), Chemmanur and He (2011), Gao, Ritter and Zhou (2013), and Chemmanur,
He, and Nandy (2010)). These papers focus on product market, and study how information flow
and strategic interactions determine the firm's value to outside investors and potential competitors.
By contrast, we focus on how a firm’s initial characteristics, as perceived the founding team and
initial investors, contain information that is predictive of the firm's future value and growth, and
how the subsequent transition from private to public status affects the firm's responses to growth
opportunities.
We contribute to the research that examines real side differences of public and private firms.
Brav (2009) finds that private firms have lower investment rates than public firms in a sample of
British firms. Gilje and Taillard (2016) show that relative to private firms, public firms in the gas
industry are more responsive to investment opportunities. Lyandres, Marchica, Michaely, and
Mura (2013) examine how private and public firms’ owners’ diversification differentially impacts
firm investment. Maksimovic, Phillips and Yang (2013) examine differences between public and
private firms in mergers and acquisitions, and Bernstein (2015) examines how public and private
firms differ in innovation after their IPOs. Gao and Li (2013) examine differences in CEO pay by
public status and find that public firms have higher pay sensitivity than private firms to accounting
performance. Phillips and Sertsios (2017) examine public and private firms in the medical device
industry and find that public firms have higher financing responses and develop more new products
than private firms.
Our paper is also related to Lemmon, Roberts and Zender (2008) who argue that there are
persistent firm-specific effects that influence firm capital structures among public firms over time,
and that this persistence exists for IPO firms prior to going public. We show that characteristics
that predict firm growth trajectories and responsiveness to growth opportunities are set early after
firm formation. These characteristics are consistent with the models of entrepreneurship by Lucas
(1978) and others.
We organize the rest of this paper as follows. Section II describes our data. Section III
motivates our study by highlighting the role of initial conditions. Section IV predicts public status
using initial conditions. Section V presents our main results comparing birth-matched public and
6

private firms on growth, efficiency and survival. Section VI further explores the effect of public
status on growth related to investment type and financial dependence. Section VII uses a crosssectionally matched sample of public and private firms to show issues with ex post matching.
Section VIII concludes.

II. Data
We use data from the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), 8 maintained by the Center for
Economic Studies (CES) at the Bureau of the Census to track growth for both public and private
ﬁrms. The LBD covers non-farm establishments with paid employees in all industries and all states
in the U.S. beginning in 1976. It has about 8.5 million records in 2012 and contains information
on ownership, location, status (active or inactive), industry, employment and total payroll on the
establishment level. In their review of PSED data, Hurst and Pugsley (2011) conclude that “most
individuals who start a small business have little desire or expectation to grow their business
beyond a few employees.” To avoid confounding our results with these firms, we follow the
common practice of dropping very small firms with less than four employees. For firms born after
1976, the first year of the LBD, we identify the birth year of the firm as the first year that firm
identifier appears in the data. Since the LBD keeps separate identifiers for the firm and the
establishments, for new establishments added to a firm, we can separate organic growth from
acquisitions.9
We use the IPO data provided by Jay Ritter’s website.10 We collect information on IPO firms
from 1981 to 2005 including company name, CRSP Permanent ID, offer date, ticker at the offering,
founding date and VC funding status. We then use the existing bridge ﬁle created by the CES staff
to identify the IPO firms in the LBD. To construct the bridge ﬁle, ﬁrms are matched by employer
identiﬁcation number (EIN) and name in each year from 1980 to 2005.11 To ensure the accuracy
of the match, we impose several additional restrictions. We exclude firms from the sample if the
founding date provided by Jay Ritter differs from the LBD initial year by more than five years (in
both directions) or the difference in employment in the IPO year is more than 25% between the

The LBD reports a snap shot of firm conditions on March 12 every year and contains all firms that have at least
one paid employee.
9
For more information about LBD, see https://www.census.gov/ces/pdf/CES-WP-02-17.pdf.
10
See Jay Ritter’s website at https://site.warrington.ufl.edu/ritter/ipo-data/
11
Not all IPO firms during this period are matched through the bridge file. We lost about one third of the sample
due to missing Census’ firm id in the bridge file.
8

7

COMPUSTAT and the LBD. These additional criterial eliminate 20% of the matched IPO firms.
In order to guard against including leveraged buyouts, we also eliminate IPOs of firms that were
previously public. Our initial matched sample consists of 2,900 IPO firms with initial conditions
identified in the LBD, giving us a match rate of 48%.
Compared to the overall sample, our matched IPO firms are smaller and younger at the IPO
compared to Ritter’s IPO sample.12 However, they have very similar distribution across industries
and over IPO years compared to unmatched IPO firms. In unreported tables, we also find that the
matched and unmatched IPO firms experience similar growth rate in sales post IPO using
COMPUSTAT data.
Since the LBD does not differentiate new firm creation from spinoffs and those from organic
birth, also we eliminate firms that are formed in their first year with establishments that existed
before and firms with more than 200 employees reported at birth in the LBD. These last criteria
eliminate 29% of the matched IPO firms.
To predict the decision of going public based on initial conditions, we create a birth sample
that contains all firms in the LBD born after 1978 with fewer than 200 employees in the first year
reported in the LBD, using a similar screen as we use for the IPO firms. We also eliminate industryyears (based on 3-digit SIC codes) that yield no IPO firms. We then specify a dummy variable that
equals to one if a firm is in our matched IPO sample and zero otherwise. We excluded the
unmatched IPO firms. The growth rates between two samples fifteen years after IPO are not
significantly different.
Our final sample has about 892,000 firm births (given we only include industry-years in which
there was an IPO) and the probability of going public is about 0.2%, with variation over time and
industries using industries with at least one IPO. We identify the age at the IPO as the difference
between the offering date and the birth year reported by the LBD. We use the birth sample to run
our regressions to predict the probability of going public using initial birth conditions. We then
construct a panel data by tracking firms in the birth sample over time for up to 15 years. Our panel
data has approximately 5.9 million firm-year observations.
For cross-sectional matching, we use the same bridge file constructed by Census staff to
identify all public firms in the LBD during the entire sample.

12

The match rate is higher for single-establishment firms and lower for firms with multiple establishments.
8

III. Initial Conditions and the Lifecycle of the Firm
In this section, we provide some initial motivating evidence using a comprehensive sample of
892,000 post-1978 firm births from the Census Bureau. Figure 1 shows that initial size at the end
of the first year already differs between private and subsequently public firms. This difference
grows over time - 15 years after their birth, public firms are substantially larger. The increase in
observed differences in size between public and private ﬁrms in Figure 1 can reﬂect the difference
in initial ﬁrm quality and also treatment effects from differential access to financing.
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
Figure 2 provides some motivating evidence that initial conditions are persistent and related to
long-run firm growth. We sort firms by their initial conditions including size and wage in the first
year we observe them, and the first full-year employment growth, which occurs between the first
and second year when firm appears in the LBD.13
For each variable, we separate firms that are in the top one percent of their distribution from
the rest of the firms from the same industry-year cohort. Then we compare the average employment
size from these two groups going forward - not taking into account whether these firms are public
or not. Figure 2 shows that firms that are born at larger size, paying higher wages, and having high
initial growth continue to grow faster for fifteen years post-birth. The observed persistence in initial
conditions is consistent with the idea that the entrepreneurs have different skills and those skills
influence long-run firm growth.
[Insert Figure 2 Here]
In subsequent sections we break up our analysis into four parts. First, we examine whether
firms that are larger and more productive immediately after birth are on a higher long-run growth
trajectory than initially smaller and less productive firms, and whether the same initial conditions
also predict future public status. We also derive a propensity score for measure the “public quality”
of all young firms using initial size, growth and productivity. Second, we create a matching sample
of IPO firms and private firms based on the predicted “public quality”. Third, we show that firms

The LBD is created using information collected on March 12 every year. For firms born after March 12, the
first time it appears would be subsequent year. Thus, the newly-born firms we identify can be up to 11 months
old.
13

9

that in fact do become public show a distinctive growth trajectory pre-and post- IPO that differs
from those of firms with the same initial propensity but remain always-private. We perform a
variety of robustness checks on our main results. Last, we reconcile our findings with previous
findings that public firm underinvest in response to product market opportunities.
In Table 1 we examine whether firms’ initial characteristics predict future firm size. We
measure firm size using employment five, ten, or fifteen years after birth, respectively. Initial
employment measures the number of full-time employees in the first year reported by firm. Initial
wage is calculated as the average wage paid by firm in the first year. Initial growth measures the
growth of employment from the first to the second year. We include year and industry fixed effects
in all specifications and cluster error by industry-year. Industries are defined using 3-digit SIC
level. Table 1 shows that firms’ initial conditions predict future growth over all three horizons.
This suggests that a component of the firm’s quality is observable early in the life of the firm and
persists for up to 10-15 years. This observable characteristic is perceived by entrepreneurs and
early financial backers of the firm, while the firm is still private. We next investigate whether these
initial indicators of firm quality also predict the firm’s decision to go public.14
[Insert Table 1 Here]

IV. Predicting Public Status
Since firms select to become public, it is reasonable to infer that going public provides value
to the firm, or at least to the founders and initial investors. Public firms have the ability to raise
equity in public markets. The enhanced access to capital markets helps investors to achieve
optimal diversification and allows the firm to raise capital at lower cost. Access to publicly traded
equity also helps the firm finance acquisitions with stock and reward employees with traded stock.
On the other hand, dispersed ownership in public firms may lead to unresolved agency conflicts
and investment myopia (e.g., Stein (1988)). Edmans (2009) shows theoretically how large
blockholders in public firms can attenuate managerial myopia through their trading and how
liquidity and transient shareholdings can increase public firm’s investment by increasing market

It is also possible that all firms are initially of the same quality, and that some firms were luckier than others in
getting more resources at the very beginning. If so, the interpretation of our results would change slightly, to
show that initial luck in obtaining financing affects firms’ trajectories in predictable ways over the long term. We
do not emphasize this interpretation, however, given the results in Howell (2016) that show that windfalls of
capital do not alter firms’ trajectories in this way.

14

10

efficiency. The net advantage of public status thus depends on firm size, as the fixed costs of
attaining and maintaining public status, and the comparative advantage of access to public
markets, is likely to make public status more attractive to larger firms. Our focus in this paper is
on the selection of which firms decide to become public and whether public status has, on balance,
a positive or a negative effect on the firm’s ability to respond to demand shocks. To establish this,
we also investigate productivity and survival of birth-matched public and always-private firms.
Our central hypothesis is that given inherent talent, the benefits of public status are greater for
firms on a fast growth trajectory that expect to engage in greater financing and investment. Thus,
firms which select to become public are likely to be of higher quality, and they will respond more
strongly to growth opportunities. In order to evaluate the effects of public status we must control
for the differences between the firms that select to become public and the firms that do not.
We first begin by predicting which firms will become publicly traded later in life. Defining Yit
to be an indicator variable for public status with Yit = 1 for publicly traded firms and 0 for private
firms, we model the firm’s decision to go public as follows:
Yit = 0

if V(P | Talent, Costs) < 0,

=1

if V(P | Talent, Costs) > 0.

Here V(P | Talent, Costs) is the value of becoming public given the firm’s industry, its
underlying talent and its costs of becoming public and maintaining public status. We thus regress
the public market indicator on a firm’s inherent initial talent and industry conditions. To capture
the inherent talent we use birth conditions which include initial employment (in log), initial average
wage (in log), and the first annual growth rate for which we have data. As Figure 2 shows, these
initial conditions are very persistent over time. We also include squared terms of these variables to
account for non-linearity. We estimate this equation using a linear probability model.15
In a second specification, we also include industry control variables that capture industry
growth, percentage of firms engaged in mergers and acquisitions, and percentage of small firms in
the industry. The M&A rate proxies for the time-varying incentive to go public in order to facilitate
expansion through acquisitions.16 Small firms are defined as firms with less than 50 employees

LPM does as good a job approximating marginal effects as a non-linear model as a marginal effect is just a
slope and is less subject distributional problems than a logit or probit model as emphasized by Angrist and Pischke
(2009) in Chapter 3.4.2.
16
Merger-motivated IPOs are studied in Celikyurt, Sevilir, and Shivdasani (2010) and Hovakimian and Hutton
(2010).
15

11

following the Department of Commerce categories. Firms may have less incentive to go public in
an industry that is dominated by small firms in which they can reach optimal scale without raising
much funds externally.
This specification enables us to test whether initial conditions predict the tendency to go public
later in life. Specifically, it enables us to test whether larger and faster growing young firms become
public. The former hypothesis is motivated by Lucas (1978) who predicts that initially larger firms
are led by more talented entrepreneurs, and the latter by Jovanovic (1982) where, controlling for
size, young firms perceived to be of higher quality grow faster. In addition, this specification also
yields a “public quality” index based on the propensity of becoming public. We can use this index
to control for initial observable firm characteristics when comparing subsequent outcomes between
firms that become public and those that stay private.17 Since this index is calculated using firms’
initial conditions, it does not rest on the timing of the IPO and therefore is not influenced by
changes in growth opportunities at the time of the IPO and by IPO waves (Pastor and Veronesi
(2003)), which we verify empirically below. Table 2 presents the results.
[Insert Table 2 Here]
Firms that are initially larger and pay higher wages at birth are more likely to be public later.
One standard deviation increase in initial size and initial wage leads to 300% and 250% increase
in the predicted public quality index from the mean, respectively. Firms with higher first-year
growth also have higher public quality index. One standard deviation increase in growth rate leads
to 170% increase in the probability of becoming public from the mean. The industry variables,
industry growth, percentage M&A are both strongly significantly positive. Firms in industries with
high growth and where there are a high frequency of M&A are likely to be public, consistent with
public firms find it advantageous to use external capital to help grow and to use equity to buy other
firms.

V. Public Status and Firm Growth
A. Lower and Upper Bounds for Selection and Treatment
Using the predicted public quality index from Column 1 in Table 2, we now examine
graphically how initial conditions relate to firm growth over time.
This parallels for firm quality the indices used to measure financial constraints, for example Kaplan and
Zingales (1998) and Hoberg and Maksimovic (2015).
17

12

[Insert Figure 3 Here]
In Figure 3 we examine the firms – both eventually public and always private – that are in the
top 1% of the predicted public quality index and graph their growth in their number of employees
over time. Several results can be seen in the Figure 3. First, both always private and eventually
public firms that are in the top 1% of the predicted public quality index become sharply larger than
other firms. Fifteen years later, firms that started out in the top one percent of the public quality
index have 955 employees on average, more than 16 times bigger than the average for the rest of
the distribution. Moreover, private firms in the top 1% have 831 employees by year fifteen
compared to 59 employees on average for all other firms - 14 times larger. This measures the lower
bound for the selection effect.
Second, firms in the top 1% of the predicted public index that do go public have an average of
1,696 employees and are 29 times bigger than the average firm outside of the top 1%. The
difference between this size difference of 29 times and the previous private size difference of 14
times can be interpreted as the upper bound of the treatment effect, as part of this difference may
still be due to selection based on unmeasured attributes.
We investigate the predictive power of our public quality index for high quality firms in a
regression setting in Table 3. The dependent variable is the annual employment growth. We define
high public quality index, HPI, equal to one if the estimated public quality index based on initial
conditions (estimated in Table 2 Column 2) is above the 99th percentile of all firms at birth and
zero otherwise. We interact HPI with a measure of industry demand and a measure of the tightness
of access to financing. Our measure of industry level (at 3-digit SIC) demand, DS, is the demand
shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. We focus on positive
demand shocks as we wish to measure how firms respond to increases in growth opportunities.
Our measure of liquidity, CS, measures the credit spread for the year between A3 and Baa corporate
bonds. Both measures have been widely used and are described in detail in Maksimovic, Phillips,
and Yang (2013). We control for industry-year fixed effects in all regressions and cluster the error
at the industry-year level.
[Insert Table 3 Here]
Column (1) shows that firms with high public quality firms grow faster than other firms, most
specifically in years when demand increases in their industry. The coefficient of the interaction

13

between HPI and liquidity in the economy is insignificant, suggesting that firms with high public
quality index do not grow faster at times of higher credit spreads. This is not surprising since the
majority of the firms in the HPI category stay private throughout the sample period. In column (2)
we restrict the sample to firms that never go public, and again find that firms that a have a high
public quality index grow differentially faster when their industry receives a positive demand
shock. It further confirms that the index we construct captures firm quality. In columns (3) to (6)
we again examine all firms, and split the sample by firm age. We find that the predictive power of
the public quality index is highest in the firm’s first five years.
In summary, the figures and tables above present a consistent relation between a firm’s initial
characteristics and its subsequent growth. In particular, regardless of whether a firm goes public or
stays private, firms that are initially larger, grow faster, and are more productive respond more
strongly to industry growth opportunities. This effect is strongest early in the firm’s life-cycle. We
next investigate whether the firms that go public respond differently to growth and financing
opportunities than private firms with similar initial characteristics.
B. Matching IPO Firms and Private Firms
Having established the finding that better initial quality firms with are more likely to
subsequently grow faster and become public, we first match IPO firms with always-private firms
at birth based on initial quality For each IPO firm in our sample, we select up to 5 closest-matches
from private firms from the same industry and birth year based on the predicted public quality
index (using Column 1 in Table 2). We also require the matched private firms to survive at least
up to the IPO year and the relative size of the matched private firm to the IPO firm is within the
range of (0.5, 2). We exclude IPO firms with fewer than three matches to obtain common support.
Our results are robust if we restrict to exactly five matches. Our final sample has about 1,600 IPO
firms and about 8,000 matched private firms. Table 4 provides summary statistics comparing IPO
firms with matched and unmatched private firms.
[Insert Table 4 Here]
Table 4 shows that IPO firms and matched private firms have very similar predicted public
quality index. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for an equal distribution has a p-value of 0.51,
suggesting that the distribution of the predicted public quality index between public and matched
private firms are not significantly different. Both eventually public and matched private firms are
14

much more likely to go public later in life - the estimated probability of being public is about 40
times higher for these two groups compared to the unmatched private firms. We also present
statistics for the number of employees, the initial wage in thousands of dollars, and the initial yearly
growth rate – both for public firms and matched and unmatched private firms. IPO firms and
matched private firms are also similar in size and the initial growth rate in their initial years
although private matched firms tend to have higher average wage. In contrast, there is a stark
difference between matched and unmatched private firms. Unmatched private firms are much
smaller at birth, have lower wages, and experience a much slower initial growth rate compared to
matched private firms. Table 4 highlights the selection effect in public status and emphasizes the
need for controlling for firm quality when comparing the difference between public and private
firms.
Figure 4 presents the distribution density in size for IPO firms and their matched private
counterparts. The two groups have similar size at birth, a result of matching, but deviate over time.
At the IPO, the public firms are already bigger than the matched private firms. The difference keeps
growing 5 and 10-year following the IPO.
[Insert Figure 4 Here]
As a robustness check, we also create an alternative matched sample based on initial conditions
that does not rely on our index of public quality. There, for each IPO firm, we select five private
firms based on initial size, initial wage, and first-year growth rate using the nearest neighbor
matching, not using the index based match. All of our subsequent results are qualitatively the same.
C. Responses to Growth Opportunities
We now examine whether and how IPO firms differ from their matched counterparts in their
responsiveness to demand shocks compared to their matched private counterparts. We estimate the
following basic specification using annual data in the sample of IPO firms and their matched
always-private firms:

1
where Pub is an indicator variable for actual public status. Growth is measured in employment
winsorized at one percent on both ends. As before, we use changes in shipments in downstream
15

industries to capture exogenous shocks to industry demand. Since our hypothesis is that being
public facilitates response to changes in industry demand that require expansion of the firm scale,
we focus on the positive part of the industry demand shocks, DS. All of our results are robust when
we use industry demand shocks in both directions.
Public and private ﬁrms may also be affected differently by ﬁnancial market shocks. Public
ﬁrms can access public ﬁnancial markets, especially for long-term capital, at more favorable or
easier terms while private ﬁrms rely more on short-term ﬁnancing from ﬁnancial intermediaries
(Brav (2009)). We thus examine whether credit conditions in the debt markets impact public firm
growth and thus include a credit spread variable (CS). Lown, Morgan, and Rohatgi (2000) find that
credit spreads are strongly correlated with the tightening of liquidity measured from the Federal
Reserve Senior Loan Officer (SLO) survey. We calculate credit spread as the difference in interest
rate between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds.
We control for a variety of firm characteristics. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment.
Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures the firm's age following birth.
All variables are lagged. Our results are robust when we exclude firm characteristics.
Figure 5 presents growth rates of IPO firms around IPO. Regardless of firm age at IPO, there
is one common pattern. IPO firms grow faster prior to the IPO, and in the first five years after the
IPO. The growth rate subsequently converges to the economy average. In comparison, the average
growth rate of all private firms is close to zero. Given the observed difference in growth over time,
in all of our later analysis, we estimate our regressions separately in three time periods – prior to
the IPO, first five years after the IPO, and five years after the IPO.
[Insert Figure 5 Here]
Thus, for each IPO firm, we break up the time interval to three separate periods, (-5,-1), (1, 5)
and (6, 10) where 0 denotes the IPO year, to examine the event windows around the IPO. The first
period tracks firms in their private, pre-IPO period, and the other two windows track the early and
late public years respectively. We follow the same time frame and use the IPO year of their public
match to define event windows for matched private firms.
In Table 5, columns (1) - (4), we estimate equation (1) using all firm-years and then separately
yields the differential growth rates for firms

for each of the three sub-periods. The coefficient
that become public. The coefficient

and

enable us to estimate the difference in growth

sensitivity to demand shocks and financial market shocks, respectively, between public and private
16

firms. Similar specifications are used in Gilje and Taillard (2016) and Asker, Farre-Mensa and
Ljungqvist (2015). The interpretation of these coefficients differs across event windows. Since the
IPO decision occurs at time 0 and is likely to be based on performance in the immediately prior
period, coefficients estimated over the period (-5,-1) compare the performance of firms ultimately
selected to become public with firms with similar conditions at birth but did not become public
prior to IPO. The window (1, 5) describes early IPO years for public firms. Since decisions (to
become public) have already been made, any excess performance over this period does not cause
an IPO. Instead, it will describe the possible effects of recently acquired public status, but will be
an upper bound for any treatment effect as part of the difference in performance may be due to
quality differences we do not measure.

Over the window (6, 10), excess performance, if any, is

more likely to reflect steady state effects.
We define industry by 3-digit SIC and include industry-year fixed effects. Since DS varies by
industry-year and CS is an annual measure, the main effects of both variables drop out after
including industry-year fixed effects.
In columns (5) and (6), we adopt a fixed effect specification. We treat each firm in our IPO
sample and its matching always-private firms as a separate cohort. For each cohort, we further
separate firm-years into three periods, namely up to five years prior to the IPO (-5, 0), first five
years following the IPO (1, 5), and six to ten year after the IPO (6, 10). Thus, we have 1600 x 3
firm-cohort-period fixed effects. This procedure controls for shocks that affect the growth of each
IPO firm and the matching always-private firms at different points of their life cycle. Since the
matching firms are of the same age and industry as the IPO firms, this fixed effect, in addition to
year fixed effects, removes the possibility that the differences are cohort-specific and persist over
particular periods of time.18 Thus, this fixed effect structure provides for a stringent control of
factors that might confound cross-sectional differences in performance between public and private
firms. Robust standard errors allow for clustering at the industry-year level are reported in
parentheses throughout.
[Insert Table 5 Here]

Our results also hold with conventional firm fixed effects but we use separate cohort effects because these
capture possible technological changes in the industry that are specific to IPO firms and their particular cohort.

18

17

Column 1 of Table 5 shows that public firms grow faster and are more responsive to growth
opportunities, as measures by demand shocks DS. There is also evidence that public firms grow
relatively faster in periods when credit spreads are high.
Examining the results broken out by the years surrounding a firm’s IPO in columns (2) - (4)
we can see some interesting patterns. The public indicator variable is positive and significant for
the five years prior to the firm’s IPO and the five years after, but becomes insignificant for years
greater than five. Examining the interaction of eventual public status with the demand shock, we
find that it is in the earlier years (before year five) following the IPO that public firms react more
positively to changes in demand than private firms. IPO firms grow 1.7% more than their private
counterparts for every one standard deviation increase in positive demand shock. This result is
consistent with public firms growing faster pre-IPO to reach a certain size with internal and private
funds and using the funds from their IPO and their access to public markets to better take advantage
of industry growth opportunities. However, growth and sensitivity to demand shocks fall back to
their private market matched firms after first five years. In an unreported table, when we re-run
the specification in Table 5 year by year following year five, we do not find that public firms
significantly differ from their private counterparts, either in growth rate or response to demand
shocks. The other control variables in the regression show that basic economics holds for these
firms. The positive coefficient on wages indicates that firms, perhaps indicating higher human
capital grow more. There are negative coefficients on age and employment, consistent with growth
slowing down over the firm’s life and there being some decreasing returns to scale. We show, in
an unreported table, that our results are robust without controls such as size and age.
In columns (5) and (6) we report specifications including firm-cohort-period fixed effects. In
column (5) we show that public firms which become public at some point grow faster and are more
responsive to growth opportunities, without considering their pre- and post-IPO periods separately.
In column (6) we focus on the post-IPO period and split it into years 1 to 5 (1, 5) and years 6 to 10
(6, 10) by including two indicator variables, PostIPO_1to5 and PostIPO_5+. It shows that public
firms grow faster and respond to growth opportunities more strongly than private firms in the first
five years after the IPO. The estimated coefficients have similar magnitude as those reported in
column (3). However, the differential effect disappears thereafter, consistent with the specification
in column (4).
These results indicate a natural life-cycle process for firms. Firms that become public grow fast
for up to five years following the IPO but their growth is similar to their matched private firms
18

afterwards. It is worth noting that public firms are of a much larger size at this point. These results
are consistent with firms obtaining a larger, optimal firm size after five years post-IPO.
Interactions of Pub x CS provide very limited evidence that public firms benefit differentially
from access to financing during periods of low liquidity. Some of these firms may not have credit
ratings which may potentially explain the insignificance. In addition, benefits from access to
financial markets is likely to be a result of their underlying quality and size, and therefore captured
by the fixed effects.
D. Efficiency of Public Firms
We have shown that public firms respond more to positive demand shocks in the first five years
after their IPO. While these results are suggestive of efficient investment strategy, it is also
possible that public firms may over expand beyond their optimal scale given their access to lessexpensive public capital. We now examine efficiency for IPO firms in the post-IPO period,
especially during periods when they grow more following a positive demand shock. Ideally we
would like to use profits or total factor productivity measures, but those items are only available
for manufacturing firms while the vast majority of the IPO firms during this period are outside of
manufacturing industries. Thus we resort to a labor productivity measure based on sales per
employee ratio. It is also consistent with our growth measure based on employment. Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan (1998) show that sales-employee ratio is highly correlated with total
factor productivity in U.S. manufacturing firms.
[Insert Table 6 Here]
Inspection of Table 6 reveals very little evidence that the higher growth rates and higher
responsiveness to growth opportunities of public firms come at the cost of lower labor efficiency.
To the contrary, public firms are more efficient when their industry receives a positive demand
shock, especially in the first five years after the IPO. The interaction between the public status
indicator and demand shock is positive and significant at one percent lever in columns (3) and (6).
It indicates that public status helps firms to adapt to changing industry conditions and become more
efficient in expansion.
Interestingly, we find that the labor efficiency of public firms increases relative to private firms
in years when the financing is more readily available (i.e. credit spread is low) prior to and
immediately after IPO. This contrasts with the result in Table 5 that the growth rate of firms is
19

unaffected by the credit spread over these life-stages. It suggest that while the growth of early stage
public and pre-public firms is not affected by credit spreads, public firms facing low financing
costs may be able to invest correspondingly in capital assets to maintain their labor productivity.
E. Survival and Firm Risk
A natural question to ask is whether the higher growth we have documented for public firms
comes at the expense of higher risk. We investigate this question by examining the failure rate of
public firms and their matched private counterparts. In Panel A of Table 7, we estimate a Cox
Proportional Hazard model – where the hazard is defined as “death”. In this model, a negative
coefficient indicates a lower chance of death and thus a higher probability of survival.
We identify “death” of a firm as the case in which the firm is out of business and none of its
establishments is active. “Death” is thus the closure of all establishments of a particular firm. Since
the LBD has different identifiers for firms and for establishments, we can separate acquisitions
from plant closures. We do not count cases when a firm ceases to exist and its plants are
subsequently acquired and continue to be operated by other firms as “death”. Therefore, our
definition captures the economic survival rather than the business survival. Since we restrict the
matched private firms survive at least to the IPO year, we begin our estimation from the IPO year
(year 0).
[Insert Table 7 Here]
Column (1) of Panel A of Table 7 shows that public firms are more likely to survive. The
survival rates are tabulated in Panel B. The difference between public and private firms is more
pronounced in early years. Five years after the IPO, 21% of public firms close, as compared to
32% for matched private firms. In an unreported table, we also find that public firms are more
likely to be acquired than private firms.
One potential concern for breaking out time periods surrounding the IPO is that firms may have
timed their public offering in response to financial expected market factors, thereby introducing
sub-optimal growth patterns relative to firms which always remain private. For example, firms may
choose to grow too fast too early in order to be able to take advantage of anticipated financial
market mispricing, as might occur during hot markets. In Columns 2 we show that the effect of
public status on survival is not affected whether or not the firm goes public during IPO waves. We

20

define IPO waves as years in which the number of IPOs is two standard deviations above the
average in our sample period using Ritter’s data.19
Taken together, Table 5-7 show that public firms are more responsive to industry growth
opportunities and that their growth is efficient and does not lead to risker strategies.
F. IPO Firm Growth and VC Investments
We match our sample of IPO firms with private firms at birth based on observable firm
characteristics such as industry, size, wage and initial growth. However, unmeasurable difference
may still exist between IPO firms and always-private firms. To provide more evidence on the
selection effect, we examine the effect of VC investments on firms’ exploitation of growth
opportunities. VC investors may have additional information about the firm quality and VC
sponsorship can serve as another signal for firm quality. Puri and Zarutskie (2012) show that in
their sample VC-financed firms grow faster and outperform matched firms that are not financed
by VC. Such an effect may occur both because VCs select higher quality small firms and because
they provide mentoring and monitoring services (Bernstein, Giroud, and Townsend (2016)) or
because they set up more investor friendly governance structures (Hochberg (2012)).
We use VC-investment information from Ritter’s data base to separate public firms into two
groups – VC-sponsored (VC) or non-VC-sponsored (Non_VC) to examine the effect of VCsponsorship on the differential growth between public and private firms. Specifically, we estimate
the following specification:
_
_

_

2
and

capture the difference in growth rates between IPO firms in VC- or non-VC

sponsored IPO firms and matched private firms, respectively.
responsiveness to demand shocks, and

and

and

capture the difference in

capture the difference in responsiveness to

financial shocks. As in our main regressions, we control for industry-year fixed effects. Table 8
reports our findings.
[Insert Table 8 Here]

19

We use Ritter’s data to define IPO waves so that we can capture all IPOs in a given year.
21

Both VC and non-VC firms grow faster than matched always-private firms in their pre-IPO
period. However, in the period after the IPO, the differential opens up, and VC sponsored pre-IPO
firms outperform their matched always-private firms both in growth rates and responsiveness to
growth opportunities. The evidence is consistent with VC firms selecting better firms who go
public or helping firms before their IPO. The VC backing helps the firms before their IPO and
they respond more than private firms to demand shocks.

VI. How and When is Public Status Important?
A. Internal vs. External Growth
Table 5 above shows that firms grow faster in the years prior to their IPO and in the first five
years post-IPO. This growth may be internal or through acquisitions. We would expect public firms
to have an advantage in growth through acquisition through the issuance of shares, as documented
by Celikyurt, Sevilir and Shivdasani (2010). We thus examine whether the higher growth of IPO
firms arises from acquisitions which are directly facilitated by public status or through expansion
of existing operations.
We identify internal (or organic) growth by tracking the growth of establishments that firms
had from the very beginning. It includes growth of the firm’s existing establishments and from
newly built establishments, and excludes additions to the firm that occur through acquisitions. We
are able to separate establishments that are newly built from those acquired as Census keeps
separate identifiers for firms and establishments. Since acquirers often only keep a portion of the
establishments from acquisitions and sell off the rest (Maksimovic, Phillips and Prabhala (2008)),
we exclude growth from acquired establishments in all years after the acquisition. Our approach is
likely to create a downward bias for estimating internal growth. Since public firms are more likely
to engage in acquisitions (Maksimovic, Phillips and Yang (2013)), it would under-estimate internal
growth from public firms compared to private counterparts. Table 9 examines internal growth in
the matched sample over different time horizon surrounding IPO.
[Insert Table 9 Here]
Table 9 follows the same structure as that in Table 5. The only difference is that it uses the
ratio of internal growth as dependent variable instead of overall growth. Column 1 shows that as
for the overall growth, IPO firms also differ significantly in how they exploit growth opportunities
using their assets in place, in that they are more responsive to growth opportunities. Interestingly,
22

the magnitude for the coefficients on Pub*DS in column 1 is very similar to that reported in Table
5 when we include both internal and external growth – 0.295 vs. 0.317. On the other hand, the
estimated coefficient on public status is noticeably smaller than in Table 5 – 0.053 vs. 0.089. These
findings suggest that although acquisitions account for an important part of the difference between
public and private firms, the greater responsiveness of public firms does not only rely on their
greater participation in the market for assets.
As in Table 5, public firms’ greater responsiveness to growth occurs mostly in the first five
years after the IPO. Another interesting contrast between Tables 5 and 8 is in the growth rates of
IPO and private firms. In both tables the growth rates of firms that become public in the pre-IPO
period (-5, -1) is higher than that of matched private firms. However, after the IPO there is
divergence in overall growth rates and the growth rates of the assets that IPO firms possessed at
birth. Specifically, five years after the IPO the growth rate of the public firms’ initial assets declines
below that of private firms. This result is consistent with the finding that public firms are much
more active in acquisition markets than private firms (Maksimovic, Phillips, and Yang (2013),
Arikan and Stulz (2016)) and that larger firms grow by acquisition rather than by organic growth
(Maksimovic and Phillips (2008)). This finding also suggests that a focus on capital expenditures
in comparison of public and private firms’ investment patterns may miss important distinctions
between these categories of firms.
Column 5 and 6 estimate the model with firm-cohort-period fixed effects, similar to that used
in Table 5 and find consistent results.
B. IPO Firm Growth and Acquisition of Private Firms
Since an IPO and acquisition are the two most common exit strategies for successful private
firms (Bayar and Chemmanur (2011)), one potential concern is that the difference we observe can
be driven by successful private firms being acquired by other public firms and thus exiting the
sample, creating a downward bias for the matching sample. This might occur because private firms
in our sample are matched to the public firms at birth. For each public firm, we select up to five
matched private firms based on initial conditions and survival up to the IPO year of the reference
public firm.
To gain further understanding of this process, we separate matched private firms into three
groups based on their acquisition status – never acquired (baseline), acquired by private firms
(Prv_Acq_Prv=1), and acquired by public firms (Prv_Acq_Pub=1). We then track growth and

23

responsiveness to shocks of each group compared to the baseline. For firms that are subsequently
acquired, we exclude firm-years after the acquisition as the establishments then belong to another
firm. Table 10 reports our findings.
[Insert Table 10 Here]
In Table 10 we analyze the growth trajectories of public, acquired, and always-private firms.
Inspection of columns (1) - (3) shows that both the IPO-firms and those that are cash-out through
acquisition grow faster on average during their private phase than the always-private neveracquired firms. However, only the IPO firms exhibit a heightened responsiveness to growth
opportunities.
Interestingly, there is also some evidence that private firms that eventually acquired by other
private firms grow more slowly in periods of high credit spreads, particularly in their early years.
Thus, firms that entrepreneurial firms that are taken over by private firms are encountering
financial distress. This is consistent with the finding in Maksimovic, Phillips and Yang (2013) that
the productivity gains from private acquisitions are lower than when the acquirer is public.
C. IPO Firm Growth and Financially Dependent Industries
One potential explanation for our finding that public firms are more responsive to demand
shocks early in their public life is that the public status allows firm to raise capital more easily to
respond to changing opportunities. To test this hypothesis, we separate industries into two groups
based on their financial dependence. If the advantage of being public comes from better access to
financing to fund high capital expenditures, then we would expect a bigger difference between
public and private firms in industries with higher financial dependence.
We use Quarterly Financial Reports (QFR) data at Census in every 5th year, which are the years
available to us, to compute industry level financial dependence measures.20 The QFR has both
income and balance sheet data for a stratified random sample of public and private firms. While
only a sample of 200,000 firms exist in each year, thus preventing most firms in the LBD from
being matched, there are sampling weights which allow us to create population estimates. We use
this data to construct our indicator of industry financial dependence. We measure financial
dependence using the rate of external financing calculated as the difference between capital

For example, we use financial dependence identified in year 1982 for year 1982 to 1986, and financial
dependence identified in 1987 for 1987-1991.
20

24

expenditure and internal operating cash flow over total assets. We then separate all industry-years
into two groups – those that are financially dependent (FD) and those that are not financially
dependent (Non_FD) based on whether the median rate of the industry is higher than the median
of all industries in that year. Specifically, we estimate the following specification:
_
_

_

3
and

capture the difference in growth rates between IPO firms in financially dependent or

non-dependent industries and matched private firms, respectively.
in responsiveness to demand shocks, and

and

and

capture the difference

capture the difference in responsiveness to

financial shocks. As in our main regressions, we control for industry-year fixed effects. Table 11
presents our findings.
[Insert Table 11 Here]
Examination of the results presented in Table 11 reveals some interesting patterns. First, the
differential growth between public and private firms post IPO is not higher in more financiallydependent industries. However, public firms in financially dependent industries are more
responsive to industry growth opportunities than private firms. Again, the effect is most
pronounced in years (1, 5), early in their public life. The estimated coefficient on demand shocks
for financially dependent industries is higher in magnitude than that from our main regression in
Table 5 – 0.694 vs. 0.485, and the estimated coefficient on demand shocks for financially nondependent industries is positive but not significantly from zero. This suggests that public firms’
greater responsiveness to demand shock is mostly driven by firms in financially dependent
industries. Interestingly, we do see that pre-IPO and in early years post-IPO, public firms in
financially dependent industries grow faster in periods when financing is tight (i.e. higher credit
differential). There is no corresponding differential in non-dependent industries. This result is
consistent with the hypothesis that there is an advantage of being public when alternative sources
of finance are more expensive. However, the effect disappears with firm age.

25

VII. Firm Growth with Cross-Sectionally Matched Public and Private Firms
Using a panel of public and private firms matched in 2001, AFL find that public firms respond
significantly less to demand shocks than do private firm. Given that we find different results using
birth-matched sample, we now explore whether their result may at least be partially attributable to
matching in cross-section rather than at firm birth.
Similar to AFL, we match in the year 2001. For each public firm in 2001, we select up to five
private firms closest in size and age in the same 3-digit SIC industry using the same criteria
proposed by AFL requiring the ratio of their total assets is less than to 2 (i.e. max (TApublic, TAprivate)
/ min(TApublic, TAprivate)<2 ). We discard the sample public firms if we cannot find any match. Once
a match is formed, as in AFL, we follow the firms over time and keep the panel structure intact.
We then use this matched sample to run our main specification to predict firm growth.
Table 12 Panel A presents summary statistics for our four subsamples - public and private
firms, matched and unmatched. We are able to match about 5,800 public firms with 26,600 private
counterparts. This sample and their matched private counterparts is much larger than the AFL
sample as our data includes nearly all public firms in 2001. In our matched sample, public firms
and private firms are similar in size, wage and productivity while public firms have lower growth
rate in the previous three years and the trend continues after 2001. There is also an interesting
pattern across different samples. Among all four groups, unmatched public firms are the biggest in
size, most efficient, and have the highest growth rate. There are 550 (8.7%) very large, very
efficient public firms for which we cannot find matching private firms. In contrast, unmatched
private firms are the smallest among all groups, least efficient, and have lower growth than matched
private firms. The comparison suggests that when we match mature public firms in cross-section
in the same year to private firms, we tend to match the less successful public firms with the more
successful private firms.
[Insert Table 12 Here]
In Panel B, we examine firm growth in response to demand shocks using the sample matched
in 2001. Column 1 includes all firm years while Column 2 - 5 split the sample by firm age with
cutoffs set at 5, 10 and 20 years. We find some limited evidence that the matched public firms
respond less to demand shocks relative to their cross-sectionally matched private counterparts.
26

While negative, the effect is only marginally significant in our data. Comparing firms by age splits,
we find that the negative coefficient is most prominent for firms in the age group of (11, 20). We
attribute these findings to the fact that finding a size match to already public firms is difficult in
many cases, resulting in adverse selection in the matched set of public firms. As shown in Panel
A, it is more likely to find a match for public firms that have not done very in the well in the past
and those firms grow at significantly lower rate than their matched private counterparts going
forward. In addition, in our sample, in 2001, public firms have an average age of 17 years, and
many have long passed their IPO year. Table 5 shows that there is little difference in growth
between public and private firms five years after the IPO.

VIII. Conclusions
We examine the growth of IPO firms and private firms using a sample of 892,000 firms. We
follow the growth of these firms throughout their life-cycle – from early years when all firms are
private, to later years when some of the firms choose to go public and beyond. We compare the
early growth patterns of public and private firms and their responses to industry demand shocks.
We find that the firm’s characteristics at birth predict growth. Larger, initially faster growing
and more productive firms remain on a faster growth trajectory in the subsequent ten to fifteen
years. The same characteristics are predictors of future public status. Thus, public firms differ from
most private firms not only in access to public markets, a treatment effect, but also in inherent
quality, a selection effect. Our estimates show that over the first ten years, the selection effect is
larger than the treatment effect.
We find that subsequently public firms differ from private firms matched on early birth
characteristics in growth trajectories and sensitivity to growth opportunities. They grow faster prior
to and approximately five years post the IPO and are more responsive to positive growth shocks
for the first five years post-IPO. After that point, they grow at the same rate and have similar
responsiveness to positive demand shocks as their initially matched private counterparts, albeit
with the public firms being of a much larger size.
Taken together, our results show that public firms in their first 5 years post-IPO are more
responsive to growth opportunities, especially in those industries that are dependent on external
financing, and that their growth is efficient and does not lead to a riskier strategy
We use data on VC-sponsorship to further examine the selection effect. IPO firms that are
sponsored by VC earlier in life respond even more to industry growth opportunities post IPO. We
27

also show that our findings are not caused by high-quality matched private firms subsequently
exiting through acquisition. The greater responsiveness of public firms to growth opportunities in
early years after the IPO also holds when we match public and private firms one year prior to the
IPO.
We reconcile our results with earlier research that finds that private firms are less responsive
to growth opportunities. Using a cross-sectional match, we show that the differences in results are
likely due to the fact that the earlier literature is not able to match very successful, large public
firms in cross section. The cross-sectional matches used previously rely on matches of equallysized mature already public to private firms, whereby larger, more successful private firms are
matched to relatively less successful public firms that are much smaller than the more successful
public firms.
Overall, our results show that that there are economically important differences in the quality
of firms that are evident early in the firms’ lives. The quality differences predict future growth and
public status. In addition, firms that become public grow faster are more responsive to demand
shocks around the IPO date. Once the initial quality of the firms is controlled for, there is no
evidence that public firms are less responsive to demand shocks than private firms. We show that
public firms grow faster and respond more positively to positive demand shocks in the first five
years post-IPO than birth-matched private firms. Thus, the evidence suggests that managerial
myopia, which some believe characterizes public firms’ responses to investment opportunities, is
not likely to be a significant counterweight to the benefits of being public.

28

References
Arikan, A. M., & Stulz, R. M. (2011). Corporate acquisitions, diversification, and the firm's
lifecycle (No. w17463). Working Paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Asker, J., J. Farre-Mensa, and A. Ljungqvist (2015). “Corporate Investment and Stock Market
Listing: A Puzzle?” Review of Financial Studies 28, no. 2: 342–390
Ayyagari, M., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and V. Maksimovic (2017). “Does local financial development
matter for firm lifecycle? Evidence from India,” Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.
Baker, M. and J. Wurgler (2000), “The Equity Share in New Issues and Aggregate Stock Returns,”
Journal of Finance 55, 2219-2257.
Bayar, O., and T. Chemmanur (2011). “IPOs versus acquisitions and the valuation premium puzzle: a
theory of exit choice by entrepreneurs and venture capitalists.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 46: 1755-1793.
Benmelech, E., & Frydman, C. (2014). “Military CEOs.” Journal of Financial Economics 117(1): 4359.
Bernstein, S. (2015). “Does going public affect innovation?” Journal of Finance 70, Issue 4, Pages
1365-1403
Bernstein, S., X. Giroud, and R. Townsend (2016), “The impact of venture capital monitoring”,
Journal of Finance 71 (4), 1591 - 1622
Bertrand, M., and Schoar, A. (2003). “Managing with style: The effect of managers on firm policies.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 118, No. 4 (2003): 1169-1208.
Bhattacharya, S. and J. Ritter (1983). “Innovation and Communication: Signaling with Partial
Disclosure”, Review of Economic Studies 50, 331 - 346
Brav, O. (2009). “Access to capital, capital structure, and the funding of the firm.” Journal of Finance
64(1), 263-308.
Celikyurt, U., Sevilir, M., & Shivdasani, A. (2010). “Going public to acquire? The acquisition motive
in IPOs.” Journal of Financial Economics 96(3), 345-363.
Chemmanur, T. J., and P. Fulghieri (1999). “A Theory of the Going-Public Decision.” Review of
Financial Studies 12, 249-279.
Chemmanur, T., and J. He (2011). “IPO waves, product market competition, and the going public
decision: Theory and evidence.” Journal of Financial Economics 101: 382-412

29

Chemmanur, T., S. He, and D. K. Nandy (2010). “The going-public decision and the product market.”
Review of Financial Studies 23: 1855 - 1908
Cronqvist, H., Makhija, A. K., & Yonker, S. E. (2012). “Behavioral consistency in corporate finance:
CEO personal and corporate leverage.” Journal of Financial Economics 103(1), 20-40.
Easton, P. D., & Zmijewski, M. E. (1989). “Cross-sectional variation in the stock market response to
accounting earnings announcements.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 11(2), 117-141.
Edmans, A. (2009). “Blockholder trading, market efficiency, and managerial myopia.” Journal of
Finance 64(6), 2481-2513.
Foster, L., Haltiwanger, J., & Krizan, C. J. (2006). “Market selection, reallocation, and restructuring
in the US retail trade sector in the 1990s.” Review of Economics and Statistics 88(4), 748-758.
Gao, H., & Li, K. (2015). “Large shareholders and CEO performance-based pay: New evidence from
privately-held firms.” Journal of Corporate Finance 35: 370-388.
Gao, X., J. Ritter, and Z. Zhu (2013), “Where Have All the IPOs Gone?,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, Vol. 48, No. 6, 1663-1692.
Gilje, E., and Taillard, J. (2016). “Do private firms invest differently than public firms? Taking cues
from the natural gas industry.” Journal of Finance 71 (4), 1733 - 1778
Hochberg, Y. (2012). “Venture capital and corporate governance in the newly public firm”, Review of
Finance 16 (2), 429 – 480.
Holmström, B. 1982. Managerial incentive problems: A dynamic perspective, in: Essays in
Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck. Helsinki: Swedish School of Economics.
Reprinted in Review of Economic Studies 66 (1999):169–82.
Hovakimian, A., & Hutton, I. (2010). “Merger‐Motivated IPOs.” Financial Management, 39(4),
1547-1573.
Hurst, E., and B. W. Pugsley (1982). "What Do Small Businesses Do?" Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity Vol. 2, 73-118.
Jovanovic, B. (1982). “Selection and the Evolution of Industry.” Econometrica: Journal of the
Econometric Society 649-670.
Lemmon, M. L., M. R. Roberts, and J. Zender (2008). “Back to the Beginning: Persistence and the
Cross-Section of Corporate Capital Structure.” Journal of Finance 63(4), 1575-1608.
Lyandres, E., M.T. Marchica, R. Michaely, and R. Mura (2013). The effects of owners’ portfolio
diversification on firm strategies: Theory and evidence from private and public firms, working paper
Johnson School of Business, Cornell University.
30

Lucas, R. E. (1978). “On the size distribution of business firms.” Bell Journal of Economics 9, 508523.
Lucas, D., and R. McDonald (1990), Equity issues and stock price dynamics, Journal of Finance 45,
1019–1043.
Maksimovic, V., and P. Pichler (2001). “Technological Innovation and Initial Public Offerings”,
Review of Financial Studies, 14, 459 - 494
Maksimovic, V., G. Phillips, and L. Yang (2013). “Private and Public Merger Waves.” Journal of
Finance 2177-2217.
Miller, M., and K. Rock. 1985. Dividend policy under asymmetric information. Journal of Finance
40:1031–51.
Narayanan, M. 1985. Managerial incentives for short-term results. Journal of Finance 40:1469–84.
Pastor, L., and Veronesi, P. (2003). “Stock prices and IPO waves.” (No. w9858). Working Paper,
National Bureau of Economic Research.
Phillips, G. and G. Sertsios, (2017), “Financing and New Product Decisions of Private and Publicly
Traded Firms,” Review of Financial Studies 30 (5): 1744-1789.
Puri, M., and R. Zarutskie (2012), “On the life cycle dynamics of venture-capital and non-venturecapital-financed firms, Journal of Finance 67 (6), 2247 – 2293.
Rajan, R. G., and L. Zingales (1998). “Financial dependence and growth.” American Economic
Review 88, 559–587.
Rauch, J. E. (1991). “Modelling the informal sector informally.” Journal of Development Economics
35, 33-47.
Ritter, J. (1987), “The Costs of Going Public”, Journal of Financial Economic Vol. 19, 269 – 281
Ritter, J. and I. Welch (2002), “A Review of IPO Activity, Pricing and Allocations,” Journal of
Finance Vol. 93, 1795-1828,
Stein, J. C. (1988). “Takeover threats and managerial myopia.” Journal of Political Economy 61-80
Stein, J. C. (1989), "Efficient capital markets, inefficient firms: A model of myopic corporate
behavior." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 104.4 655-669.
Von Thadden, E.-L. 1995. Long-term contracts, short-term investment, and monitoring. Review of
Economic Studies 62:557–75.

31

Figure 1: Size Distribution of Public and Private Firms (Unmatched Sample)

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

Employment at Birth

0

2

4
xlntotemp

6

8

Private
Public

0

Density
.1 .2 .3

Employment −10 Years after Birth

0

2

4
xlntotemp

6

8

Private
Public

This figure presents the size distribution of public and private firms in our sample
(unmatched) at birth (Panel A) and 10 years after birth (Panel B).

Figure 2: Initial Conditions and Firm Growth

0

Employment
500
1000

1500

By Initial Size

0

5

10

Age

P1 to P99

15

P99 to P100

0

Employment
100
200

300

By Initial Wage

0

5

10

Age

P1 to P99

15

P99 to P100

0

100

Employment
200
300

400

By Initial Growth

0

5
P1 to P99

Age

10

15

P99 to P100

The figures compare firm size (number of employees) over time for firms in the 1st-99th
percentile and firms above 99th percentile based on initial conditions - size, wage, and
initial growth rate, respectively.

Employment
1000
1500

2000

Figure 3: Top 1% Firms: Public vs. Private

500

29 times
bigger

Treatment
(Upper
Bound)

Selection
(Lower
Bound)

0

14 times
bigger

0

5

Age
P1-99
P99_Prv

10

15

P99-100
P99_Pub

This figure shows the average number of employees for firms at the top 1% of the predicted public quality (P99-100)
and those in the rest of the population (P1-99) by their actual public status later in life. P99_Prv and P99_Pub refer to
the top 1% firms that stay private and become public later, respectively. Thus, the difference between P99_Prv and
P1-99 captures the lower bound of selection effect while the difference between P99_Pub and P99_Prv captures the
upper bound of treatment effect.

Figure 4: Matched Sample

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

At IPO

Density
0 .1 .2 .3 .4

At Birth

0

2

4
xlntotemp

6

8

0

4
xlntotemp

Private

Private

Public

Public

6

8

10 Yrs after IPO

0

Density
.1 .2

.3

Density
0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25

5 Yrs after IPO

0

This
figure

2

2

4
xlntotemp

6

8

0

2

4
xlntotemp

Private

Private

Public

Public

6

8

This figure represents the distribution density of the log of number of employees for public
firms and their matched private counter parts over time - at birth, at IPO, 5 years after IPO, and
10 years after IPO. For each public firm, we choose up to 10 matched private firms from the
same industry and same birth year based on the predicted probability of being public (based on
Table 2 Column 2).

Figure 5: Growth around IPO

0

Annual Growth
.2
.4

.6

Annual Growth − Around IPO

−10

−5

0
5
Years after IPO
1−3
>6

10

15

4−6

This figure plots the annual growth rate for public firms around the IPO. We
separate the IPO firms in groups based the age of IPO (less than 3 years, year 4 to
6, or after 6 years)

Table 1: Persistence in Initial Conditions
This table presents estimateed coefficients to predit a firm's size later in life based on macro, industry, and firm conditions at birth.
The dependent variables are employment size 5, 10, or 15 years after birth, respectively. We include year and industry fixed
effects in all specifications. Industries are defined using 3-digit SIC level. Initial employment measures number of employees in the
first year reported by firm. Initial wage is calculated as the average wage paid by firm in the first year. Initial growth measures the
growth of employment in the first year. Robust standard errors allow for clustering at the industry-year level and are reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dependent Var:
Employment
Initial Employment

Panel A: Year 5
(1)
1.631 ***
(0.010)

Initial Wage

0.637 ***
(0.024)

Initial Growth (x 100)

0.350 ***

Panel B: Year 10
(2)
2.639 ***
(0.038)
1.401 ***
(0.094)
0.514 ***

Panel C: Year 15
(3)
3.282 ***
(0.121)
2.042 ***
(0.356)
0.771 ***

(0.006)

(0.025)

(0.084)

463,000

268,000

162,000

R-square

8.16%

3.90%

1.07%

Year FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Industry FE

Yes

Yes

Yes

Number of Observation

Table 2: Predicting Public Status
This table presents the estimated coeffcients to predict a firm's public status. The dependent variable equals to 1 if
a firm becomes publicly traded later in life and 0 otherwise. Log(Initial_Emp) is the logarithm of the number of
employees at birth. Log(Initial Wage) is the logarithm of average wage paid by the firm at birth. Initial_Growth is
the firm's growth rate (in employment) in the first year. Pct_Small_Firms is the percentage of firms that have
fewer than 50 employees in the industry. Ind_Growth is the average growth (in employment) in the industry, and
Pct_M&A is the percentage of employment involved in mergers and acquisitions (from target firms) in the
industry. Industries are defined using 3-digit SIC level. We control for industry (3-digit SIC) fixed effects and
year fixed effects in all regressions. Robust standard errors allow for clustering at the industry-year level and are
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: 1 (Public)
Log(Initial_Emp)
Log(Initial_Emp)^2
Log(Initial Wage)
Log(Initial Wage)^2
Initial_Growth
Initial_Growth ^ 2
Ind_Growth

(1)
-0.003
(0.058)
0.037
(0.010)
-0.570
(0.066)
0.177
(0.018)
0.354
(0.032)
0.211
(0.023)

Pct_M&A
Pct_Small_Firms
R-Square
Number of Observations
Industry FE
Year FE

0.016
892,000
Yes
Yes

***
***
***
***
***

(2)
0.005
(0.058)
0.036
(0.010)
-0.578
(0.066)
0.178
(0.018)
0.351
(0.032)
0.209
(0.023)
0.772
(0.263)
8.659
(2.123)
-0.673
(0.133)
0.016
892,000
Yes
Yes

***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Table 3: Public Index and Firm Growth
This table reports the estimated coefficients of regressing firm growth on an indicator of high public index. We define high public quality index (HPI)
equal to 1 if the estimated public index based on initial conditions (estimated in Table 2 Column 2) is above the 99th percentile of all firms at birth and
zero otherwise. The dependent variable is the annual employment growth. DS is an industry level (at 3-digit SIC) measure for demand shock constructed
based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the credit spread for the year. We control for industry and year fixed effects in all
regressions. Robust standard errors allow for clustering at the industry-year level and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Varible: Emp Growth

(1)
All Firms

HPI

0.019 *
(0.010)

HPI * DS
HPI * CS
R-Square
# of Obs
Ind-Year FE

0.262 **

(2)
Private
Firms Only
0.007
(0.011)
0.249 **

(3)
All firms
Yr (1, 5)
0.056 **
(0.025)
0.424 ***

(4)
All Firms
Yr (6, 10)

(5)
All Firms
Yr (11, 15)

(6)
All Firms
Yr (15+)

0.014

-0.009

-0.009

(0.018)

(0.018)

(0.018)

0.017

0.302 *

0.099

(0.106)

(0.114)

(0.154)

(0.159)

(0.162)

(0.233)

0.002

0.002

-0.016

-0.002

0.011

0.009

(0.008)

(0.008)

(0.022)

(0.015)

(0.014)

(0.010)

0.009

0.009

0.011

0.006

0.007

0.009

4,449,000

4,435,000

1,757,000

1,286,000

760,000

645,000

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Table 4: Summary Statistics for Matched Sample
This table presents the summary statistics for our matched sample. For each public firm, we choose up to 5 matched private firms from the
same industry and the same birth year based on the predicted probability of being public (using Table 2 column 2). Colunm (3) and (5)
present the t-statistics comparing the group mean between (1) and (2), and between (1) and (4), respectively. Standard errors are shown in
parentheses.

Phat
Initial Employment
Initial Wage
Growth Rate

Number of Obs.

(1)
Public Firms

(2)
Private Firms
(Matched)

(3)
t-stat
(1) vs (2)

(4)
Private Firms
(Unmatched)

(5)
t-stat
(1) vs (4)

0.83%

0.81%

1.56

0.28%

49.39

(0.011%)

(0.005%)

27.01

26.37

(1.07)

(0.49)

61.79

65.45

(1.33)

(0.65)

0.767

0.794

(0.018)

(0.009)

(0.0006)

1,600

8,000

886,000

(0.005%)
0.54

18.42

8.02

(0.03)
-2.46

16.41

33.88

(0.02)
-1.32

-0.058

44.80

Table 5: Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm growth on public status and demand shocks for the matched sample of public and
private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and survivial up to the IPO year. The
dependent variable is the growth of employment for a firm in a specific year. Column 1 includes all firm years (from up to five years before the
IPO to up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior to IPO; column 3 includes firm years that are up to
five years following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between 6 and 10 years following the IPO. We control for firm-cohortperiod fixed effects in column (5) and (6). Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and zero
otherwise. PostIPO_1to5 is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are within the first five years following the IPO and zero
otherwise. PostIPO_5+ is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are five years after the IPO date and zero otherwise. DS
measures the industry-level (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the
annual credit spread using the difference in rates between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment.
Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth. All dependent variables are lagged. Industryies are
defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. Robust standard errors are clustered at the industry-year level and reported in parentheses. *, **, and ***
represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Firm Growth
Pub
PostIPO_1to5

(1)
All Years
0.089 ***
(0.021)

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.202 ***
(0.033)

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
0.070 **
(0.033)

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
-0.027
(0.038)

(5)
FE
0.072 ***
(0.027)

PostIPO_5+

0.317 ***
(0.119)

0.091
(0.220)

0.485 ***
(0.183)

0.187
(0.238)

0.124
(0.124)
0.472 ***
(0.136)

0.036 *
(0.020)

0.023
(0.028)

0.019
(0.032)

0.009
(0.031)

-0.002
(0.025)

DS
Pub x DS
(PostIPO_1to5) x DS
(PostIPO_5+) x DS
Pub x CS
(PostIPO_1to5) x CS

Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Firm-Cohort-Period FE

-0.033 ***
(0.002)
0.158 ***
(0.007)
-0.013 ***
(0.002)
0.15
89,000
Yes

-0.056 ***
(0.005)
0.179 ***
(0.011)
-0.035 ***
(0.003)
0.23
30,000
Yes

-0.017 ***
(0.003)
0.141 ***
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.11
42,000
Yes

-0.005 *
(0.003)
0.115 ***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.001)
0.09
18,000
Yes

0.101 ***
(0.032)
-0.015
(0.039)
0.175 *
(0.099)
0.468 ***
(0.163)
0.128
(0.241)
-0.005

-0.026 ***
(0.003)
0.171 ***
(0.006)
-0.0534 ***
(0.003)
0.08
89,000

(0.031)
0.018
(0.033)
-0.026 ***
(0.003)
0.171 ***
(0.006)
-0.065 ***
(0.003)
0.08
89,000

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

(PostIPO_5+) x CS
Log(Emp)

(6)
FE

Table 6: Efficiency by Public Status
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing efficiency (measured as sales over employment) on public status and demand shock for
the matched sample of public and private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and
survivial up to the IPO year. The dependent variable is the growth of employment for a firm in a specific year. Column 1 includes all firm years
(from up to five years before the IPO to up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior to IPO; column 3
includes firm years that are up to five years following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between 6 and 10 years following the
IPO. We control for firm-cohort-period fixed effects in column (5) and (6). Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded
at some point in its life and zero otherwise. PostIPO_1to5 is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are within the first five
years following the IPO and zero otherwise. PostIPO_5+ is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are five years after the IPO
date and zero otherwise. DS measures the industry-level (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical
industries. CS measures the annual credit spread using the difference in rates between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of
firm employment. Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth. All dependent variables are
lagged. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. Robust standard errors are clustered at the industry-year level and reported in
parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Sales/Emp
Pub
PostIPO_1to5

(1)
All Years
0.048
(0.126)

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.239 *
(0.137)

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
0.160
(0.158)

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
-0.305
(0.261)

(5)
FE
0.050
(0.153)

PostIPO_5+

1.550 ***
(0.476)

1.166 **
(0.543)

1.972 ***
(0.551)

1.896
(1.505)

0.215
(0.187)
1.039 *
(0.593)

-0.107
(0.110)

-0.266 **
(0.105)

-0.292 *
(0.154)

0.495
(0.210)

0.025
(0.142)

DS
Pub x DS
(PostIPO_1to5) x DS
(PostIPO_5+) x DS
Pub x CS
(PostIPO_1to5) x CS
(PostIPO_5+) x CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Firm-Cohort-Period FE

-0.040 **
(0.018)
0.653 ***
(0.029)
0.044 ***
(0.003)
0.28
45,000
Yes

-0.081 ***
(0.016)
0.512 ***
(0.032)
0.049 ***
(0.006)
0.32
13,000
Yes

-0.064 ***
(0.021)
0.658 ***
(0.035)
0.043 ***
(0.005)
0.28
23,000
Yes

-0.016 **
(0.026)
0.853 ***
(0.064)
0.017 ***
(0.006)
0.36
10,000
Yes

-0.086 ***
(0.019)
0.618 ***
(0.031)
0.0459 ***
(0.005)
0.12
45,000
Yes
Yes

(6)
FE
0.188
(0.159)
-0.092
(0.316)
0.042
(0.160)
1.106 **
(0.547)
1.583
(1.674)
-0.219
(0.150)
0.486
(0.262)
-0.087
(0.019)
0.617
(0.031)
0.039
(0.005)
0.12
45,000
Yes
Yes

*
***
***
***

Table 7: Survival by Public Status - Cox Proportional Hazard Model
This table reports the analysis of survivial rate based on public status. Panel A describes the
coefficents from a Cox Proportional Hazard Model estimated from the matched sample of public and
private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial
conditionsand survivial up to the IPO year. We include all firm years up to fifteen years following the
IPO. Failure is defined as the event that a firm does not survive in the next year. Pub is an indicator
that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point of its life. IPO_wave is an indicator
variable that equals one if the firm went public during IPO waves and zero otherwise. IPO waves are
defined as years in which the number of IPOs is two standard deviations above the average in the
sample period using Ritter's data. We control for industry-year fixed effects in all regressions.
Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%,
5%, and 1% level, respectively. Panel B predicts ithe survivial rate by public status and IPO age
using estimates from column (2).

Panel A: Cox Proportional Hazard Model
(1)
-0.194 ***
(0.044)

Pub
IPO_Wave
Pub * IPO_Wave
Number of Obs
Log Likelihood

76000
-38854

Panel B: Survivial Rate following IPO by Public Status and IPO Age
# of Yrs After IPO
Private Firms
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

100%
100%
93%
86%
80%
74%
69%
65%
61%
57%
53%
49%
47%
45%
43%
40%

(2)
***
-0.230
(0.051)
0.061
(0.045)
0.117
(0.089)
76000
-38851
IPO Firms
100%
100%
98%
94%
89%
83%
78%
73%
67%
62%
58%
53%
50%
48%
44%
41%

Table 8: Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status and VC Sponsorship
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm growth on public status, demand shocks, and financial dependence for the
matched sample of public and private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and
survivial up to the IPO year. The dependent variable is the annual growth rate of employment in a specific year. Pub is an indicator that equals to
1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and zero otherwise. Column 1 includes all firm years (from up to five years before the
IPO to up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior to IPO; column 3 includes firm years that are up to
five years following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between 6 and 10 years following the IPO. PostIPO is an indicator
variable that equals to 1 for public years and zero for private firms or public firms prior to the IPO. We include firm-cohort period fixed effects
in column 5. Non-VC (VC) is an indicator variable that equals to 1 if the public firm does not (does) have VC sponsorship. DS measures the
industry-leve (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the credit spread
using the difference between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds for the year. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment. Log(Wage) is the
logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth. All dependent variables are lagged. We control for industry-year fixe
effects in all regressions. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. Robust standard errors are clustered at the industry-year level and
reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Firm Growth
Pub x Non-VC
Pub x VC
PostIPO x Non-VC

(1)
All Years
0.054 **
(0.027)
0.124 ***
(0.028)

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.193 ***
(0.041)
0.192 ***
(0.045)

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
0.044
(0.042)
0.102 **
(0.045)

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
-0.030
(0.055)
-0.004
(0.050)

0.270 *
(0.146)
0.299 *
(0.164)

0.231
(0.229)
-0.049
(0.280)

0.224
(0.207)
0.664 ***
(0.252)

0.605 *
(0.349)
-0.169
(0.322)

0.055 **
(0.025)
0.020
(0.027)

0.001
(0.036)
0.060
(0.039)

0.053
(0.039)
-0.020
(0.047)

-0.010
(0.050)
0.008
(0.038)

-0.033 ***
(0.002)
0.157 ***
(0.007)
-0.013 ***
(0.002)
0.15
89,000
Yes

-0.056 ***
(0.005)
0.178 ***
(0.011)
-0.035 ***
(0.003)
0.23
30,000
Yes

-0.017 ***
(0.003)
0.141 ***
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.12
42,000
Yes

-0.005 *
(0.003)
0.115 ***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.001)
0.09
18,000
Yes

PostIPO x VC
Pub x Non-VC x DS
Pub x VC x DS
PostIPO x Non-VC x DS
PostIPO x VC x DS
Pub x Non-VC x CS
Pub x VC x CS
PostIPO x Non-VC x CS
PostIPO x VC x CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Firm-Cohort Period FE

(5)
FE

0.060 *
(0.036)
0.083 **
(0.033)

0.133
(0.205)
0.477 ***
(0.173)

0.009
(0.033)
-0.022
(0.031)
-0.026 ***
(0.003)
0.166 ***
(0.006)
-0.017 ***
(0.001)
0.10
89,000
Yes
Yes

Table 9: Firm Internal Growth Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm's internal growth on public status and demand shocks for the matched sample of public
and private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and survivial up to the IPO year. The
dependent variable is the growth of employment for a firm in a specific year. Column 1 includes all firm years (from up to five years before the IPO to
up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior to IPO; column 3 includes firm years that are up to five years
following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between 6 and 10 years following the IPO. We control for firm-cohort-period fixed
effects in column (5) and (6). Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and zero otherwise.
PostIPO_1to5 is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are within the first five years following the IPO and zero otherwise.
PostIPO_5+ is an indicator variable that equals to one for firm-years that are five years after the IPO date and zero otherwise. DS measures the
industry-level (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the annual credit spread
using the difference in rates between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment. Log(Wage) is the logarithm of
firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth. All dependent variables are lagged. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes.
Robust standard errors are clustered at the industry-year level and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Internal Growth
Pub

(1)
All Years
0.053 **
(0.025)

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.221 ***
(0.031)

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
-0.001
(0.039)

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
-0.134 *
(0.074)

(5)
FE
0.010
(0.033)

PostIPO_1to5
PostIPO_5+

0.295 **
(0.139)

-0.083
(0.225)

0.482 ***
(0.165)

0.470
(0.301)

0.057 **
(0.025)

-0.003
(0.025)

0.062
(0.042)

0.088
(0.074)

0.043
(0.032)

-0.028 ***
(0.003)
0.183 ***
(0.007)
-0.016 ***
(0.002)
0.16
80,000
Yes

-0.057 ***
(0.005)
0.216 ***
(0.012)
-0.038 ***
(0.002)
0.26
27,000
Yes

-0.004
(0.003)
0.159 ***
(0.008)
-0.005 ***
(0.002)
0.12
37,000
Yes

0.000
(0.004)
0.123 ***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.001)
0.11
16,000
Yes

-0.023 ***
(0.003)
0.199 ***
(0.007)
-0.0589 ***
(0.003)
0.08
80,000

0.041
(0.041)
0.076
(0.055)
-0.022 ***
(0.003)
0.199 ***
(0.007)
-0.065 ***
(0.004)
0.08
80,000

Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes

(PostIPO_1to5) x DS
(PostIPO_5+) x DS
Pub x CS
(PostIPO_1to5) x CS
(PostIPO_5+) x CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Firm-Cohort-Period FE

0.044
(0.040)
-0.117 **
(0.059)
0.146
(0.116)

0.123
(0.015)
0.502 ***
(0.148)

DS
Pub x DS

(6)
FE

0.394 **
(0.169)
0.562 *
(0.321)

Table 10: Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status and Acquisition Status
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm growth on public status and demand shocks for the matched sample
of public and private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and survivial
up to the IPO year. The dependent variable is the growth of employment for a firm in a specific year. Column 1 includes all firm
years (from up to five years before the IPO to up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior
to IPO; column 3 includes firm years that are up to five years following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between
6 and 10 years following the IPO. Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and
zero otherwise. Prv Acq_Prv is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm never went public and was acquired by another private firm
later in life and zero otherwise. Prv Acq_Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm never went public and was acquired by a
public firm later in life and zero otherwise. DS measures the industry-level (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on
changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the credit spread using the difference between the A3 and Baa ratedbonds for the year. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment. Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age
measures firm's age following birth. All dependent variables are lagged. We control for industry-year fixed effects in all
regressions. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. Robust standard errors allow for clustering at the industry-year
level and are reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Firm Growth
Prv Acq_Prv
Prv_Acq_Pub
Pub
Priv_Acq_Prv x DS
Priv_Acq_Pub x DS
Pub x DS
Priv_Acq_Prv x CS
Priv_Acq_Pub x CS
Pub x CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE

(1)
All Years
0.149 ***
(0.028)
0.131 ***
(0.043)
0.124 ***
(0.021)
-0.138
(0.152)
-0.243
(0.236)
0.289 **
(0.119)
-0.070 **
(0.028)
0.004
(0.043)
0.025
(0.019)
-0.039 ***
(0.002)
0.154 ***
(0.007)
-0.013 ***
(0.002)
0.16
89,000
Yes

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.187 ***
(0.042)
0.112 **
(0.054)
0.237 ***
(0.035)
-0.455 *
(0.253)
-0.399
(0.254)
0.018
(0.225)
-0.084 **
(0.042)
0.033
(0.048)
0.012
(0.028)
-0.062 ***
(0.005)
0.175 ***
(0.011)
-0.035 ***
(0.003)
0.24
30,000
Yes

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
0.091 **
(0.039)
0.129 *
(0.070)
0.099 ***
(0.034)
-0.022
(0.197)
0.061
(0.311)
0.483 **
(0.197)
-0.012
(0.040)
-0.005
(0.079)
0.017
(0.033)
-0.024 ***
(0.003)
0.137 ***
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.12
42,000
Yes

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
0.060
(0.046)
0.122
(0.132)
-0.011
(0.039)
0.312
(0.336)
-1.566 *
(0.847)
0.135
(0.237)
-0.060
(0.045)
-0.006
(0.120)
0.000
(0.033)
-0.006 *
(0.003)
0.114 ***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.001)
0.09
18,000
Yes

Table 11: Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status and Financial Dependence
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm growth on public status, demand shocks, and financial dependence for the
matched sample of public and private firms. For each public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on initial conditions and
survivial up to the IPO year. The dependent variable is the annual growth rate of employment in a specific year. Pub is an indicator that equals
to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and zero otherwise. Column 1 includes all firm years (from up to five years before
the IPO to up to 10 years after the IPO); column 2 includes firm years from up to five years prior to IPO; column 3 includes firm years that are
up to five years following the IPO; and column 4 includes firm years that are between 6 and 10 years following the IPO. PostIPO is an indicator
variable that equals to 1 for public years and zero for private firms or public firms prior to the IPO. We include firm-cohort period fixed effects
in column 5. FD (Non-FD) is an indicator that equals to 1 if the industry is (not) financially dependent. We measure financial dependence using
the difference between capital expenditure and internal operating cash flow over total assets and define FD to be 1 if the median rate of the
industry is higher than the median of all industries. DS measures the industry-leve (3-digit SIC) demand shock constructed based on changes of
shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the credit spread using the difference between the A3 and Baa rated-bonds for the year.
Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment. Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth.
All dependent variables are lagged. We control for industry-year fixed effects in all regressions. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC
codes. Robust standard errors are clustered at the industry-year level and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Dep Var: Firm Growth
Pub x Non-FD
Pub x FD
PostIPO x Non-FD

(1)
All Years
0.150 ***
(0.026)
0.034
(0.029)

(2)
Yr (-5, -1)
0.278 ***
(0.038)
0.112 **
(0.048)

(3)
Yr (1, 5)
0.167 ***
(0.044)
0.000
(0.044)

(4)
Yr (6, 10)
-0.049
(0.068)
-0.008
(0.045)

0.120
(0.178)
0.498 ***
(0.151)

0.094
(0.320)
0.183
(0.295)

0.103
(0.243)
0.694 ***
(0.223)

0.283
(0.439)
0.098
(0.288)

0.002
(0.024)
0.067 **
(0.028)

-0.037
(0.034)
0.091 **
(0.038)

-0.062
(0.043)
0.076 *
(0.044)

0.018
(0.060)
-0.001
(0.037)

-0.033 ***
(0.002)
0.158 ***
(0.007)
-0.013 ***
(0.002)
0.15
89,000
Yes

-0.056 ***
(0.005)
0.179 ***
(0.011)
-0.035 ***
(0.003)
0.23
30,000
Yes

-0.017 ***
(0.003)
0.141 ***
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.11
42,000
Yes

-0.005 *
(0.003)
0.115 ***
(0.008)
0.002
(0.001)
0.09
18,000
Yes

PostIPO x FD
Pub x Non-FD x DS
Pub x FD x DS
PostIPO x Non-FD x DS
PostIPO x FD x DS
Pub x Non-FD x CS
Pub x FD x CS
PostIPO x Non-FD x CS
PostIPO x FD x CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
Number of Obs.
Industry-Year FE
Year FE
Firm-Cohort Period FE

(5)
FE

0.127 ***
(0.035)
0.028
(0.033)

0.146
(0.217)
0.485 ***
(0.157)

-0.044
(0.032)
0.020
(0.030)
-0.026 ***
(0.003)
0.167 ***
(0.006)
-0.017 ***
(0.001)
0.10
89,000
Yes
Yes

Table 12: Response to Demand Shocks by Public Status - Matched in 2001
This table presents the estimated coeffcients of regressing firm growth on public status and demand shocks for the matched sample of public and private firms in 2001. For each
public firm, we select up to 5 matched private firms based on size and age in 2001. The dependent variable is the growth of employment for a firm in a specific year. Panel A
presents summary statistics for our subsamples. In Panel B, column 1 include all firm years up to 2010; column 2 - 5 split the sample by firm age - cutoffs are set at 5, 10 and 20
years. We define firm age using the difference between current year and birth year. Pub is an indicator that equals to 1 if a firm becomes publicly traded at some point in its life and
zero otherwise. DS measures the demand shock constructed based on changes of shipment from vertical industries. CS measures the credit spread using the difference between the
A3 and Baa rated-bonds. Log(Emp) is the logarithm of firm employment. Log(Wage) is the logarithm of firm's average wage. Age measures firm's age following birth. All dependent
variables are lagged. We control for industry-year fixed effects in all regressions. Industryies are defined using the 3-digit SIC codes. Robust standard error are clustered at the
industry-year level and reported in parentheses. *, **, and *** represent significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively.

Panel A: Group Mean for Subsamples used in Matching

Public Unmatched
Public Matched
Private Matched
Private Unmatched
Panel B: Firm Growth
Pub
Pub * DS
Pub * CS
Log(Emp)
Log(Wage)
Age
R-Square
# of Obs.
Industry-Year FE

Wage
(in $000)
45
62
43
29

Total Emp
25703
2479
1343
22
(1)
All Years
-0.031
(0.013)
-0.226
(0.131)
-0.008
(0.009)
0.000
(0.001)
0.059
(0.005)
0.001
(0.000)
0.06
171,000
Yes

**
*

***
**

Firm Age
21
17
17
12

Growth
(last 3 years)
0.084
-0.104
0.037
0.000

Sales/Emp
10768
2666
1553
135

(2)
(3)
(4)
Age = (1, 5)
Age = (6, 10)
Age = (11, 20)
-0.190
-0.094
-0.020
(0.146)
(0.060)
(0.030)
0.365
-0.055
-0.606
(1.003)
(0.490)
(0.310)
0.034
-0.030
-0.044
(0.138)
(0.049)
(0.023)
-0.021
0.004
0.003
(0.014)
(0.004)
(0.002)
0.089 ***
0.088 ***
0.074
(0.019)
(0.010)
(0.006)
0.007
-0.003
0.002
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.001)
0.14
0.11
0.09
7,000
13,000
35,000
Yes
Yes
Yes

*
*
*
***
*

(5)
Age >20 yrs
-0.006
(0.011)
-0.173
(0.111)
-0.012
(0.008)
0.000
(0.001)
0.041 ***
(0.006)
-0.001
(0.001)
0.07
115,000
Yes

Growth
(next 3 Years)
0.011
-0.099
-0.008
0.000

# of Firms
550
5,800
26,600
1,559,500

