                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




THE INFLUENCE OF PEER GENOTYPES AND BEHAVIOR ON SMOKING OUTCOMES:
                     EVIDENCE FROM ADD HEALTH

                                       Ramina Sotoudeh
                                         Dalton Conley
                                     Kathleen Mullan Harris

                                       Working Paper 24113
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w24113


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   December 2017




This paper benefited from comments and discussions with Mark Hoffman, Parijat Chakrabarti,
and the instructors of RSF Summer Institute in Social-Science Genomics. Funding for this study
was provided by the Russell Sage Foundation (grant #83-15-29) and by the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation Connected Learning Research Network. This paper uses data
from The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health), a program project
directed by Kathleen Mullan Harris and designed by J. Richard Udry, Peter S. Bearman, and
Kathleen Mullan Harris at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, and funded by grant
P01-HD31921 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, with cooperative funding from 23 other federal agencies and foundations. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w24113.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2017 by Ramina Sotoudeh, Dalton Conley, and Kathleen Mullan Harris. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Influence of Peer Genotypes and Behavior on Smoking Outcomes: Evidence from Add
Health
Ramina Sotoudeh, Dalton Conley, and Kathleen Mullan Harris
NBER Working Paper No. 24113
December 2017
JEL No. D79,I12,I20

                                         ABSTRACT

We introduce a novel use of genetic data for studying social influences on behavior: Using data
from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health), we deploy the
distribution of genotypes in a given grade within a school to instrument the influence of peer
smoking on an individual’s own smoking behavior. We argue that this design alleviates many
problems inherent to estimating peer effects. Using this approach, we find the relationship
between peer smoking and individual smoking to be larger than that estimated by prior studies.
Further, we explore the reduced form relationship between peer genotypes and ego smoking and
find that the impact of peers’ genetic risk for smoking on ego’s smoking behavior is at least half
as large as the effect of individual’s own genotype and sex, and 30% the effect of age. Moreover,
peer influence on smoking appears heterogeneous by race: although whites and non-whites are
equally susceptible to peer influence with respect to smoking, white egos are more likely to be
influenced by white alters. This analysis suggests a promising way that genetic information can
be leveraged to identify peer effects that avoids the reflection problem, contextual effects and
selection into peer groups.

Ramina Sotoudeh                                 Kathleen Mullan Harris
125 Wallace Hall                                155 Hamilton Hall
Princeton University                            Chapell Hill
Princeton, NJ 08544                             North Carolina, 27599-3210
sotoudeh@princeton.edu                          kathie_harris@unc.edu

Dalton Conley
Department of Sociology
Princeton University
153 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
dconley@princeton.edu
Introduction

         Scholars of peer effects have long recognized two difficulties in their attempts to

ascertain the impact of friends, colleagues and other social connections on our own behavior and

attitudes. First, in the absence of random assignment of peers, it is impossible to determine

whether any observed associations between peers’ and ego’s outcomes are the result of “true”

peer effects—i.e. the causal impact of alters on ego—or, alternatively, whether they merely

reflect homophily (the fact that individuals who are similar on relevant observed or unobserved

dimensions tend to form ties). That is, individuals’ associations on a given trait may result from

the fact that they actively select friends who are similar to themselves on either observed or

unobserved factors which may then result in similarities among friends. In fact, using naive

models and improper extrapolation may lead the researcher to conclude that traits such as height,

which cannot possibly spread through networks, exhibit peer effects and as a result, many of the

findings from this literature have been called into question (Cohen-Cole & Fletcher, 2008).

Another problem in peer effects research comes from the common exposure of individuals in a

given social group (e.g., a friendship network or a classroom) to common environmental

characteristics of that social group – i.e. similar teachers or community characteristics – which

may, in turn, confound interpretations of peer effects. To address these challenges, a growing

number of studies have leveraged quasi-natural experiments that generate randomly assigned

peers such as freshman college roommates (Guo et al. 2015), class assignment (Figlio 2002;

Legewie 2012) and even golf foursomes among executives (Guryan, Kroft, and Notowidigo,

2009).

         Even in cases where random assignment of peers is leveraged, there remains the

“reflection problem” to use Manski’s term (1993). That is, it is hard for the observer to know




                                                                                                     3
who is causing whose behavior in a dyad or network of relationships. Take for example the case

of Figlio’s (2002) study of disruptive classmates on academic achievement. He uses the

assignment of a boy with a feminine name to a classroom as an instrument for a disruptive peer,

since these “boys named Sue” appear to be randomly assigned to classes and tend to get into

more disciplinary problems. He finds that being assigned a disruptive peer engenders deleterious

consequences for the other students in terms of behavioral and academic outcomes. However,

one cannot be certain that Sue’s mere presence as a gender-norm-disrupting influence is not itself

the treatment. Namely, Sue may get into more trouble because he is picked on, not as the

instigator. This implies that while the reduced form effect of Sue’s presence on the academic

achievement of his peers is still accurately estimated, the precise nature of the treatment remains

ambiguous due to the reflection problem. Many scholars seek to use pre-treatment variables

such as high school GPA in college roommate studies in order to get around this dilemma (Guo

et al. 2015).

        With these concerns in mind, the present paper deploys a novel approach to identify peer

effects on adolescent smoking: We use the genetic propensity to smoke of as-if-randomly-

assigned same-grade schoolmates as an exogenous source of influence on ego’s smoking

behavior that avoids the reflection problem. Namely, since genotype is assigned at conception,

we can identify the biological source of behavioral contagion and hence overcome the reflection

problem. Meanwhile, by deploying school and year fixed effects, we identify variation in peer

genetic propensity to smoke (i.e. classmates in a given grade in a given school) that, we argue, is

essentially randomly assigned (solving the homophily problem). Lastly, since genotype is not a

plastic, labile trait, we avoid contextual effects that might influence actual measures of peer

behavior.




                                                                                                  4
       Aside from using genetic data as a tool to better understand school-based social

dynamics, we are also substantively interested in the way peer genes affects a person’s outcome

(beyond the person’s own genetic contributions) and the forces that may mediate this association.

In this regard, we are proposing a novel way to integrate social and genetic data. That is, we

explore the possibility of considering genes not only as attributes of individuals but also as

attributes of an individual’s larger social environment. Since genes increase an individual’s

propensity towards a behavior or a state of being, the genetic makeup of an individual’s

surroundings may well be affecting the behavior or outcome of the proband individual as well,

through social channels. This approach calls into question the sharp line between nature and

nurture, between genes and social environment.

       With this in mind, the contribution of the present paper is fourfold. First, we make a

contribution to methodology and research design by showing how peer genes can be used as an

instrument for peer behavior. Second, we use this method to re-evaluate the relationship between

peer smoking and individual smoking, which we find to be positively and significantly related.

Third, we make substantive contributions to the social genetics literature by exploring the extent

to which others’ genes, net of one’s own genes, affect one’s outcome. These social genetic

effects are large and merit consideration by both social and biological scientists. Namely, we

find that even by the most conservative estimate, the magnitude of the effect of peers’ genes on

an individual’s smoking outcome is at least half as large as that of individual’s own genes, sex

and 30% that of age on his or her smoking behavior. Finally, we consider the ways in which an

individual’s own genes, or social characteristics such as race, may moderate the effect of peer

smoking on the ego. We find modest evidence of gene by environment (GxE) interaction,

individuals with higher genetic propensity to smoke are more susceptible to peer influence of




                                                                                                   5
smoking. There also seems to be heterogeneous peer influence in smoking by race: although both

whites and non-whites are as susceptible to peer influence of smoking, we show that white egos

are more likely to be influenced by white alters.



Using genes in social science

       The genetic makeup of organisms is determined at conception and remains unchanged

throughout life 1. Genes, though temporally unvarying, have been shown to influence a variety of

human, behavioral outcomes. These two properties of genes – the fact that they are determined at

conception, and are associated with individual outcomes – makes them great candidates for

sources of exogenous variation which can be leveraged to elucidate causal relationships in social

research. This kind of research is made possible with the integration of genetic data into large-

scale, multidisciplinary surveys. In this line of research, studies have identified genetic variants

linked to many social and complex outcomes including: educational outcomes (Okbay et al.

2016), smoking behaviors (TAG 2010), fertility (Barban 2016) and psychopathological outcomes

(PGC 2013; PGC 2009)—among many other social and health-related outcomes.

       That said, significant methodological hurdles remain for research that uses genetic data to

predict observational outcomes in population-based samples. The first hurdles relate to

measuring genetic contributions to social outcomes. Initial studies of genetic effects on social

outcomes used candidate genes; that is, genes of pre-specified theoretical interest that are

measured with particular outcomes in mind. These studies failed to account for the non-random

distribution of candidate genes across environments, because the genes may act as proxies for




1
 An exception to this rule is somatic mutation, genetic changes passed down to progeny via cell
division, as in the case of cancer (Murphy et al. 1995).


                                                                                                       6
unmeasured environmental influences (Fletcher & Conley, 2013) and were also underpowered to

detect main and interaction effects. However, more recently, the advent of dense microarrays that

measure common genetic variants known as Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (or SNPs) has

made it possible and relatively inexpensive to measure millions of genetic loci in a single study.

       As a result, researchers have moved away from single gene studies and towards using

genome-wide association studies (GWASs) to measure genetic risk. Using results from a GWAS,

researchers can construct a polygenic score (PGS) for a phenotype by aggregating the effects of

thousands of SNPs across the genome and weighting them by the strength of their association

with that phenotype. In essence, a polygenic score is a weighted average or composite score that

takes into account information across an individual’s entire genome to measure his/her genetic

predisposition or risk for a particular outcome. A polygenic score for individual i is a weighted

average across n SNPs of the number of reference alleles x (0,1 or 2) at loci j multiplied by the

score for that SNP β:



                            (𝛽𝛽𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 𝑥𝑥𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 )
(1)    𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑃𝑖𝑖 = ∑𝑛𝑛𝑗𝑗=1         𝑛𝑛




Polygenic scores have several attractive features. First, complex behavioral outcomes that are

the focus of socio-genetic research are usually highly polygenic; that is, they reflect the

aggregate influence of many different genes (Visscher, Hill, & Wray, 2008). Individuals fall

somewhere on a continuum of genetic risk that reflects small contributions from many genetic

loci—even clinically dichotomous outcomes may reflect a shift along a phenotypic continuum

known as decanalization (Gibson, 2009). Second, individual genetic loci influencing the etiology

of complex phenotypes have low penetrance: often no single gene produces a symptom or trait at



                                                                                                     7
a detectable level, making it difficult to distinguish between environmental and genetic factors

(Gibson, 2012). Finally, they are “hypothesis-free” measures—i.e. ex ante knowledge about the

biological processes involved is not needed to estimate a score for a particular phenotype. 2 A

polygenic scores casts a wide net across an individual’s entire genome to yield a single

quantitative measure of genetic risk, allowing researchers to explore how genes operate within

environments where the biological mechanisms behind the outcome are not yet fully understood

(Belsky & Israel, 2014).

       Using these more comprehensive measures of genetic influence, researchers have turned

their attention to understanding more complex paradigms of how genes and social forces interact

to explain individual outcomes (Baud et al. 2017; Cawley et al. 2017; Domingue et al. 2017).

Rather than focusing specifically on the relationship between a gene or a set of genes and an

outcome, these studies explore the complex ways by which genes come to bear on social

outcomes—for example, at the interaction between a person’s and a group’s genetic makeup, on

the one hand, and an individual’s behavior, on the other. Considering these issues represent new

approaches within the paradigms of “social genetic effects” (SGA) and “gene-by-environment”

interactions (GxE). In this paper, we explore these two paradigms as they relate to smoking

behavior.

       The social genetic effects paradigm rests on the observation that the genotypes of our

compatriots serve as part of our own “social” environment (Domingue & Belsky 2017). Since

other individuals’ behaviors and states of being are (however partially) influenced by their genes,

and since the extensive literature on social psychology and social networks have shown us that



2
 The approach of hypothesis-free gene discovery is akin to many other realms of social science
made possible by computational power and digitized data, such as text analysis (Chakrabarti and
Frye 2017; Hoffman et al. 2017)


                                                                                                   8
others’ behaviors likely matter for our behaviors and outcomes, then these so-called “social

genetic effects” are to be expected. As with the peer effects literature, however, causality is hard

to establish in a non-experimental setting because of issues of selection and context.

       Recent experimental studies on animals have established that these social genetic effects

explain a significant part of animal’s health and psycho-social outcomes. Baud et al. (2017) find

that murine cage-mates have significant effects on the outcomes of individual mice for more than

a third of phenotypes they considered. Together, what they termed “social genetic effects”

accounted for 29% of the phenotypic variance in the mice. The authors also show that not

accounting for these social genetic effects, may, in many cases, lead to inflated estimates of

heritability (Baud et al. 2017).

       However, while intriguing, scholars have only just begun exploring social genetic effects

and gene-by-environment interactions in humans. This is mainly due to the fact that unlike mice,

we cannot randomly assign individuals’ social or metagenomic environments. Indeed, even in

ethnically homogenous samples, it turns out that friends (Christakis & Fowler, 2014) and

spouses (Conley et al., 2016; Domingue et al., 2014; Guo, Wang, Liu, & Randall, 2014;

Domingue et al., 2017) tend to be more genotypically similar than randomly matched individuals

and that even environmental measures such as urbanity are correlated with genetic population

structure (Conley et al., 2014). Thus, while other individuals’ genotypes or phenotypes might

influence the expression of one’s genes, it is also possible that the individual’s genes or traits

influences the kind of social or genetic environment they select into (Domingue & Belsky,

2017). It is therefore difficult to separate out genetic homophily from true peer effects. If not for

careful study design, genes and environments can act as mutual proxies, confounding the

researcher’s attempts to parse their effects.




                                                                                                     9
       Because of these difficulties, the few empirical studies that do consider the question of

social genetics are, at best, suggestive. Using data from the National Longitudinal Study of

Adolescent to Adult Health, Domingue et al. (2017) find an association between an individual’s

downstream educational attainment and the education attainment polygenic score of his or her

schoolmates and self-reported friends, controlling for the focal individual’s own polygenic score.

They interpret this as evidence in favor of social genetic effects, but they also note that this

association cannot be solely attributed to social genetic effects since families self-select into

neighborhoods with their desired schools, and individuals actively select their friends. In the

same study, Domingue et al. (2017) show a positive genotypic association between individuals

and their friends as well as their schoolmates, which points to the possibility that selection based

on genes may be driving their phenotypic results.

       Another strategy employed to capture social genetic effects leverages the slight genetic

variation between full siblings as treatments for explaining sibling outcomes. 3 Using a candidate

gene approach, Rauscher, Conley and Siegel (2015) show that the expression of genetic variants

linked to general health in an individual are moderated by the individual’s sibling’s variants.

While a promising result initially, candidate genes were later shown to suffer from multiple

testing bias and can lead to many false positive findings. Alternatively, using a similar full-

sibling design, Cawley et al. (2017) use genome-wide data to look at “peer effects” between full

siblings. They find a significant and positive association between a sibling’s BMI polygenic




3
  A child inherits 50% of their genome from their mother and 50% from their father. The actual
genes which make up those proportions, however, are randomly drawn from each parent’s
genome. It follows that, in expectation, full siblings will share 50% of their genes; but in a given
case, full siblings can range from being almost genetically unrelated to nearly identical,
depending entirely on how the random assignment of parental genes plays out. In practice most
siblings share about 35 to 65 percent of their genome (Visscher et al. 2009).


                                                                                                    10
score and ego’s weight, controlling for ego’s own polygenic score. Using siblings helps

overcome selection problems, since an individual cannot choose their sibling nor their sibling’s

genotype, but it introduces a number of additional assumptions about within-family dynamics

that limit the external validity of their findings. One threat to the validity of their findings is that

they do not account for parents’ genotype and so a sibling’s higher polygenic score may act as a

proxy for higher parental polygenic score. Since parents’ eating habits play an important role in

shaping household consumption patterns (and other aspects of a child’s behavior such as body

image), their genes, even when not transmitted to one of their offspring, may have a strong

influence on their offspring’s outcomes. Recent studies have already established the importance

of these “non-transmitted alleles” on offspring outcomes (Kong et al. 2017). This contextual

effect poses a threat to Cawley et al.’s research design in identifying true peer effects, because

parent genotype may be causing both siblings to end up with higher weights than expected – i.e.

evidence of common environmental exposure rather than peer effects between siblings. Even if

the authors had accounted for parental genotype, the effects they report may be going through

pathways other than direct sibling-to-sibling influence. For example, parental reaction to one

child with a higher genetic risk for BMI may induce them to make specific kinds of foods

available, which may then affect the eating habits and BMI of other children in the family. If this

were the mechanism driving phenotypic association between siblings, the finding would be

meaningful in a household setting, but it would not inform research on peer effects more broadly.

        As the examples above illustrate, even with good measures of the genetic contributions to

a trait, such as a PGS, existing efforts to find associations between genetic variation and social

behavior in large, multidisciplinary surveys are often unable to support causal inferences because

they use endogenous measures of genotype and social environment. To overcome these




                                                                                                      11
estimation issues, new methods that provide adequate identification of exogenous genetic (G),

environmental (E) and gene by environment interaction (GxE) effects are needed to provide a

comprehensive way forward in understanding how the social factors influencing developmental

and health outcomes interact with the biological factors that may also influence outcomes of

interest. That is the task of the present study.



Data

       The data for this study comes from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to

Adult Health (Add Health), a nationally representative cohort study on the health and behavior of

adolescent school children first interviewed in 1994-95 across a sample of more than 130 middle

and high schools across the United States (Harris 2010). An in-school survey was administered

to every student present at each of the 130 schools asking them to self-report their social and

health behaviors, friends, and family and school context. A second in-home survey was

administered to a random sample of the students in each school, which entailed a far more

detailed questionnaire about their behaviors, attitudes, health, parents, siblings, and home life.

During the fourth wave of data collection in 2007-2008, 96% of the respondents who

participated in the original in-home surveys (15,159 out of 15,701 individuals) agreed to provide

biospecimen (in the form of saliva and capillary whole blood samples) to be immediately

genotyped for specific SNPs and candidate genes; and, of those individuals, 80% (12,254)

agreed to have their biospecimen archived for future use. With the more recent development of

genotyping technology and the resulting decrease in cost, the archived samples were genotyped

on about one million genetic markers, which provide genome-wide data for polygenic score

construction (Harris et al. 2013). A number of standard genetic quality control screening




                                                                                                     12
procedures were performed on the data, after which genotyping data was available for 9,975

individuals. 4 Further, following Fletcher (2010), we limit the sample to students in schools with

a 12th grade and exclude students not assigned sample weights or who attended a grade with

fewer than 20 total students in our sample. This leaves us with 4,950 respondents in total, and

with genotyping data in classrooms for a reasonable number of peers.

       The outcome variable, which measures individual smoking habits, is the response to the

following question: “During the past 30 days, on the days you smoked, how many cigarettes did

you smoke each day?” It is coded as 0 for individuals who did not smoke in the past thirty days,

1 for individuals who smoked 1 cigarette on the days that they smoked, and so on. This question

was asked in the first wave of the data, between 1994 and 1995, when respondents were in

middle or high school. We construct polygenic scores using the TAG consortium’s “cigarettes

per day” to build a PGS (we also test the PGS based on age at first smoking as a robustness

check). The “cigarettes per day” measure for smoking both accords with our dependent variable

as well as captures an aspect of smoking likely linked to nicotine dependence. For every

individual in the data, we construct a smoking PGS, characterize their smoking behavior,

construct measures of their exposure to peers’ smoking behavior and peers’ smoking PGSs.



Methods




4
  Two Illumina platforms were used for genotyping Add Health genetic data. Illumina Human
Omni1-Quad BeadChip was used for roughly 80% of the sample and includes over 1.1 million
genetic markers. Illumina Human Omni-2.5 Quad BeadChip was used for the remainder of the
sample and includes 2.5 million markers. A series of quality control procedures were performed
on the SNP and individual level. Genetic markers with call rates < 90% and minor allele
frequency < 0.5% were excluded. SNPs with Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium P-value < 5x10-5
were also excluded.



                                                                                                  13
          To overcome problems commonly associated with identifying peer effects (which also

plague social genetic effects), we use the linear-in-means model of social interactions proposed

by Manski (1993). The approach of this statistical model is to model an individual’s outcome as

a function of the average outcomes of their peers iteratively excluding each individual. We

combine this strategy with an instrumental variable/fixed effects model in order to get at causal

social genetic effects that go through peer behavior. Our key identifying assumption is that

conditional on school-level variation (i.e. school fixed effects), the distribution of genetic

propensity to smoke is as-if-random in a given grade. Since genes are assigned at birth, and

being in a given grade within a school is roughly defined by the year and month of birth, it is

reasonable to assume the absence of selection into the grade environment by the individual based

on his or her genes. 5 We include a number of control variables (such as sex and socioeconomic

indicators at the grade level) to ensure that educational mechanisms, such as holding boys and

individuals with lower socioeconomic status back a grade, are not leading to systematic

compositional differences in the gene pool. Using this method we can circumvent the reflection

problem (where it is unclear whether peers are influencing the individual or vice versa) and

contextual bias (where a common factor may be leading to the observed similarity between two

peers).

          Our units of analysis for the outcome are individual smoking behaviors in adolescence

whereas the independent variable captures the exposure of the focal individual to their grade-

level peers. Following previous work on peer effects (Fletcher, 2010; Fletcher, 2012a), we look




5
 This would not be true for example if there was a sudden demographic change in a given school
district, which led to compositional differences between grades, or radical year to year shifts in
behavior. This is largely not the case: 9th graders and 10th graders in most schools are the same,
other than being a year apart.


                                                                                                  14
at the composition of individuals in a given grade because grades are relevant ecological contexts

for adolescent behaviors and social interactions both empirically as well as theoretically.

Theoretically, considering the distribution of a behavior in a context larger than self-selected

friends, reveals something about the social meaning of the behavior which may lead to variation

in engagement rates (Bearman and Brückner, 2015; Frank et al., 2008; McFarland et al., 2014).

Empirically, most friendships in the Add Health dataset are within, rather than between, grades.

For instance, the network segregation of friendship within grades is far higher than the network

segregation of friendship according to race or sex (see Figures B1-B3 in Appendix B). High

segregation of friendship by grade shows that grade is the relevant ecological setting for social

interaction (Moody, 2001). Grade-mates’ statuses and behaviors have also been found to be

salient predictors of students’ outcomes. For example, researchers have shown effects of gender,

race and socioeconomic status of grade-mates on individuals’ outcomes (Hanushek et al., 2003;

Hoxby, 2000). Grade-mates’ behaviors have also been linked to individual behaviors such as

drinking, smoking, dropping out of high school, church attendance, and illegal drug use in

previous studies (Gaviria and Raphael, 2001; Fletcher, 2010; Fletcher, 2012a).

       Because we know that individuals actively select their friends, rather than examine

friendships directly, we study the effects of the larger group within which individuals form

friendships (i.e. grade) on their outcomes. This “intent-to-treat” strategy allows us to circumvent

common problems of peer effect identification that arise because of peer selection. To our

knowledge only one scholarly paper to date have used this model to address causal peer

influence on smoking. Fletcher (2010) used classmates’ parents’ smoking status and the number

of older siblings an individual has as instruments to estimate the peer effects of smoking.

However, these instruments pose a number of methodological problems. First, it is possible that




                                                                                                    15
using household smoker as an instrument violates the monotonicity assumption underlying an

instrumental variable design. This assumption holds that the treatment influences everyone

whom it affects in the same way. It implies that there will be no “defiers” – i.e. individuals who

act in opposition to the treatment. In the case of having a parent who smokes, however, the effect

on the child, in terms of making them more likely to smoke, may actually not hold. A child of a

smoker may well learn about the negative health and social consequences of smoking firsthand,

and actively avoid smoking. Similar acts of defiance have been shown for some children of

alcoholics and drug addicts (Mannella et al., 2000; Zimmerman et al., 2013) and it is reasonable

that they hold for smoking as well. Second, Fletcher’s exclusion restriction – that parent’s

smoking behavior and having older siblings could only influence peer smoking through the

individual’s own smoking behavior – may be violated if an individual is directly exposed to the

smoking behaviors of their peers’ parents or older siblings. An adolescent visiting a classmate’s

house after school may observe her classmate’s parent or sibling smoking, and may be directly

influenced by their behavior, even if the classmate does not smoke. Finally, it is feasible that

parental smoking and having older siblings are associated with an individual’s smoking behavior

through channels other than the direct transmission of smoking behavior itself. An individual in a

household with older siblings and smokers may be more likely to engage in a number of deviant

behaviors, and this engagement in deviant behaviors, rather than the learned behavior of

smoking, may be the pathway linking household characteristics to adolescent behavior.

       By controlling for peers’ family characteristics (i.e. peer parental smoking and older

siblings), rather than using them as instruments, and, alternatively, using peer smoking PGS as

the instrument, this paper addresses the previously mentioned shortcomings of the peer effects

literature and provides a non-biased estimate of the peer effects of smoking. Beyond the more




                                                                                                   16
consistent identification strategy of peer effects of smoking, the instrument used in this paper is

itself of substantive interest. Following the social genetic effects literature, our model reveals the

quantity of social genetic effects directly: we estimate the effect of peer genes through peer

behavior on an individual’s outcome. The contribution of other’s genes to an individual’s

outcome, controlling for individual’s own genes, highlights the importance of the social

environment in the role that genes play in predicting our outcomes. Genes are often

conceptualized as being a non-social force in shaping an individual’s outcome. The literature on

gene-by-environment effects has long established that the influence of genes on an outcome is

dependent on and mediated by the social-environmental landscape. Here, we will show that the

aggregate influence of others’ genes on an individual’s outcome is considerably larger than that

of her own genes.

       In the models that follow, we control for the sex, race, maternal education, familial

smoking behavior, number of siblings and family income of the ego as well as the mean of those

variables at the grade-level. As discussed before, the possibility of the direct influence of parent

or sibling smoking on peers is a potential violation of the exclusion restriction assumption. By

controlling for the presence of household smoker (and the average household smokers of peers in

a grade), we block the direct pathway between parental/sibling smoking on peers. In addition, we

control for the ego’s own smoking PGS, so our point estimates show the effect of peers above

and beyond one’s own genetic risk for smoking. We initially include individuals of all races in

the analyses, but control for the individual’s own race and the racial composition of the grade. 6



6
  The main worry with this formulation is that smoking polygenic smoke was trained on white
individuals and therefore might not be a strong instrument for non-white respondents. In
Appendix A, we show that the polygenic score is positively correlated with and predicts smoking
behavior in non-whites. This is confirmed by other studies that show overlapping SNPs in
smoking GWAS conducted on African and European ancestry populations (Otto et al., 2016).


                                                                                                    17
We later conduct subgroup analyses by race to detect whether peer effects are racially

heterogeneous.

        The first stage of the two stage least square is the following:

(1)                     𝑌𝑌�−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝛾𝛾1 𝑍𝑍−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
                                                ̅       + 𝛾𝛾2 𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝛾𝛾3 𝑊𝑊 + 𝜉𝜉𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

where igs indexes an individual i in grade g in school s and -igs signifies that the estimate

excludes the individual. Y is smoking behavior of the individual, 𝑌𝑌�−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the average smoking

level of peers excluding the individual, G is the smoking polygenic score for a given individual,

𝑍𝑍̅−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 is the average level of the smoking polygenic score within a school and grade excluding

the individual and W is the vector of controls (including individual level and grade level

variables). The intercept is 𝛼𝛼, and 𝜉𝜉 is the additive error term.

        Equation 2 portrays the second stage regression of our model:

(2)                                          𝑌𝑌𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 = 𝛼𝛼 + 𝜌𝜌1 𝑌𝑌�−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝜌𝜌2 𝐺𝐺𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 + 𝜌𝜌3 𝑊𝑊 + 𝑣𝑣𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

where 𝑌𝑌�−𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖 indexes the fitted values from the first stage regression, and 𝑣𝑣 is the error term.

        Using this model we can identify the peer effect of smoking as instrumented by the genes

of peers. Not only is the model causally identified, it also reveals a substantively interesting

quantity. It gives us a point estimate of the impact of one’s peers’ genetic risk of smoking on an

individual’s smoking as it goes through peer behavior. In addition to these linear models, we try

alternative model specifications and functional forms including instrumental variable Poisson

regression and substituting a logistic-in-means model for the linear-in-means model testing a

sigmoid function of peer influence rather than a linear one; both alternative functional forms

yield substantively similar results to our results presented below (see Appendix D).

        We extend the model further to explore whether the effect of peer genes is moderated by

an individual’s own genes. We conceive of this extended model as a gene-by-environment


                                                                                                                 18
interactional framework in which the environment is defined as the genetic makeup of an

individual’s peers, or what Domingue et al. (2017) refer to as “social epistasis” 7. We might

expect individuals who have higher polygenic scores for smoking to be more influenced by their

friends’ smoking behaviors. However, it is also possible that these individuals’ smoking habits

are more inelastic to their friends’ behaviors than those of their lower-PGS counterparts. To test

whether an individual’s own genes mediate the influence of peers on their own behavior, we

subset the sample by polygenic score levels and run three separate models for each polygenic

level.



Results

          We begin by examining whether there is any evidence of social genetic effects (i.e. effect

of others’ genes on one’s own outcome) in these data. Specifically, we examine the effect of peer

polygenic score on individual smoking behavior, net of one’s own polygenic score and a vector

of controls, in addition to school and grade fixed effects. This model is the reduced form of the

two stage least square model. Although this specific model does not specify the mechanisms

through which social genetic effects work, it is still robust to selection, reflection and contextual

biases and therefore identifies the causal effect of peer genes on individual behavior. Since being

in a specific grade, within a given school, is determined by birth year, it is unlikely that active

selection into grades, on the part of individuals and/or parents, or gene-environment correlations,

are driving the results (see school by grade descriptive plots in Appendix A). Meanwhile, genes

are determined at birth and therefore ward against reverse causation and the reflection problem;



7
 Epistasis is the technical term for a non-additive, joint effect of more than one genetic locus—a
GxG interaction effect.



                                                                                                      19
in addition, we remove each individual when calculating their peer exposure score. Contextual

biases – in which a common factor makes both the individual as well as the peer group engage in

a behavior –are also unlikely, because we examine how the gene pool within a grade, compared

to other grades in that school, affects an individual’s smoking behavior.

       The results show a positive effect of average classmates’ smoking polygenic score on

individual smoking outcome, net of the individual’s own polygenic score. In other words, we

find that the genes of one’s peers contribute to one’s outcomes, even when controlling for one’s

own genes. A standard deviation increase in peer smoking polygenic score results in a 0.27

standard deviation increase in the number of cigarettes an individual smokes in a day. To

contextualize this effect, we compare it to the magnitude of the effect of an individual’s own

genes on his or her smoking behavior. However, as Figure 1 shows, the standard errors of the

estimate for mean classmate polygenic scores increase considerably. This is because there is only

minimal variation in individual exposures to grade-mates within the same grade (the only source

of variation is that the individual is excluded from their own measures of exposure), and thus our

unit of analysis is essentially the grade, in contrast to models that treat sex, age or polygenic

score at the individual level. With about 300 included grades across all schools, we have about

53% statistical power. Given the difficulty of identifying causal effects of peer behavior, we opt

for sacrificing statistical efficiency for statistical consistency. Even with the loss of some

statistical efficiency when moving the mean grade polygenic score as the independent variable,

we can be confident that the magnitude of the effect of other’s genes on an individual’s smoking

outcome is at least half as large as the individual’s own smoking polygenic score. The lowest

bound of the estimate, at a 95% confidence interval, corresponds to 0.03 - an estimate which

60% as large as the individual’s own smoking polygenic score (0.05) and sex (0.05), and 30% of




                                                                                                    20
the effect of age (0.1). 8 While being older and being male have been shown to be two of the

strongest predictors of smoking (Conard et al. 1992; U.S. Department of Health and Human

Services 2012, 2014), our results suggests that the magnitude of the effect of peers’ PGS may

have an even larger effect, with the lowest bound showing an effect size that is 60% as large as

the effect of being male, and 30% as large as an additional standard deviation of age. The

literature on adolescent smoking consistently points to the importance of peers in determining

when an adolescent starts and ceases smoking and the number of cigarettes they will consume,

but no research to date has identified peers’ genes as an important, alternative source of

influence.

                                          [Figure 1 about here]


The reduced form model shows that the magnitude of the effect of peer genes on smoking is

larger than the effect of one’s sex, age and smoking polygenic score. The implication is that a

large part of the effect of genes on outcomes, is in fact, social, due to the genetic composition of

the peer group. In the next set of analyses, we incorporate peer genes into an instrumental

variable framework thereby restricting the pathway of the effect of genes to the smoking

behavior of peers. We use a two stage least squares using mean peer smoking PGS as an

instrument for peer smoking behavior. Mean smoking polygenic score is a strong instrument,

meaning (in the instrumental variables literature) that it is strongly correlated with the outcome,

individual smoking behavior. The F statistic from the first stage regression is 53, well beyond the

conventional desirable threshold of 10 (Bound, Jaegar and Baker, 1995). This gives us

confidence that average peer smoking PGS is an ideal instrumental variable.



8
 For the last two models (age and sex) we did not include grade fixed effects, since much of the
effect of age would be picked up by the grade.


                                                                                                  21
            The results, shown in Figure 2, show that a one standard deviation increase in peer

smoking behavior (as instrumented by peer smoking polygenic score), results in a 0.29 standard

deviation increase in the number of cigarettes an individual smokes a day. The magnitude of our

coefficient is about twice as large as that of Fletcher’s (2010). 9 In addition, the magnitude of the

effect of peer smoking is very similar to that of peer polygenic score from the reduced form

model in Figure 1, which suggests that the effect of peer genes goes almost entirely through peer

behavior. This is both in line with what we would expect, given that the phenotype used in the

gene discovery phase was smoking behavior, and it also makes us more confident that the

exclusion restriction is not violated. Considering the unstandardized coefficients reveals that an

increase of one cigarette on average by one’s grade-mates, leads an individual to smoke 0.89

more cigarettes a day: the effect of average peer behavior on an individual’s behavior is very

large. 10

            As a robustness check for our modeling choices, we conduct the same analyses on

height. 11 Height is a biological/developmental trait and we do not expect it to be influenced by

peer height polygenic scores or actual peer height. In the figure below, we plot the coefficients




9
  Fletcher (2010) used a binary indicator for smoking. We replicated Fletcher’s models, and
standardized the variables in his models in order to enable comparison. Fletcher’s standardized
coefficients show that a one standard deviation increase in peer smoking behavior results in a
0.14 standard deviation increase in being a current smoker. This is in comparison to 0.29 using
our model.
10 As a sensitivity check, we conducted the same set of analyses (the reduced form in addition to

the two-staged least squares) for a set of 14 schools where all students were followed was
included in the in-home follow up sample (and therefore eligible for genotyping). The results are
broadly consistent with what we find here, but lack statistical significance on account of lower
power due to smaller sample size.
11
   The results are robust to clustered standard errors. We also provide additional robustness
checks on functional form specifications in Appendix D.


                                                                                                    22
for height alongside smoking. The results show that the social genetic effect as well as peer

effects on height are not significantly different from zero.


                                      [Figure 2 about here]



       We next turn to the moderating role an individual’s own PGS may play in the effect of

his peer environment in explaining his smoking behavior. If we consider other’s genes as an

individual’s environment, we can refer to this effect as a gene-by-environment (GxE) interaction.

Studies that consider GxE effects in smoking have looked at the mediating role of psychosocial

factors (Koval et al., 2000), birth cohort (Domingue et al., 2015), variation in state tobacco taxes

(Fletcher, 2012b) and natural experiments of exposure to tobacco, such as the Vietnam War era

draft lottery (Schmitz & Conley, 2015) on smoking outcomes. However, no study to date has

identified the way an individual’s genes interact with the behaviors of her peers in determining

her smoking outcome. Does the influence of peer’s smoking behavior differ for individuals with

different polygenic scores? There are three plausible hypotheses. First, having a high polygenic

score may make individuals more prone to influence by their smoking peers. Studies of other

traits point to this possibility. A study of the polygenic score for alcohol dependence finds that

the contribution of genes to developing an alcohol dependence is moderated by peer deviant

behavior (Salvator et al., 2014). Peer substance use has also been shown to moderate the effect of

individual genes on individual mental health (Salvator et al., 2015). Although these studies are

not causally identified, and therefore cannot tell us whether the actual effects are working

through peer behavior (as opposed to say, selection), they do provide suggestive evidence for the

association between higher genetic propensity and higher peer influence.




                                                                                                     23
       Secondly, it could be the case that those with high polygenic scores are in fact less

susceptible to their environmental contexts. The argument here is that those with high genetic

risk of engaging in a behavior, especially if that behavior has a biological basis such as nicotine

dependence, are going to engage in that behavior regardless of their environment. For instance,

high risk adolescents may smoke regardless of their peer environment thanks to the intrinsic

rewards they get from nicotine. Fletcher (2012b) shows that individuals with a protective

polymorphism on the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (those with lower genetic propensity to

become dependent on nicotine) reduced their smoking habits in response to state tobacco tax

policies, while others did not. Other studies have found that the polygenic score for smoking is

more predictive of smoking behavior in more recent birth cohorts, after the dangers of smoking

had become widely known (Domingue et al., 2016). The authors hypothesize that as the

availability of information about the health risks of smoking, and subsequently the stigmatization

of smoking behavior, increased over the course of the twentieth century, the biology of tobacco

use became a more salient predictor of tobacco consumption. Guo et al. (2015) generalize this

framework and look for differential effects of peers on binge drinking by low, medium and high

levels of polygenic score. They show that individuals in the middle of the distribution are

susceptible to peer influence but not those in the low or high ranges. They propose a “swing

theory” of gene by environment interactions, whereby individuals with too high a genetic

predisposition are likely to engage in a behavior regardless of their peers, and those with too low

a genetic predisposition are not likely to engage in a behavior anyway. The group that is likely to

be swayed by their peers is the individuals who fall in the middle of the polygenic score

distribution. These dynamics are plausible given that 90% of U.S. adolescents try cigarettes

before age 18 (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 2012, 2014) and whether or not




                                                                                                   24
they become smokers may be highly dependent on both their hard-wired response to that

experimentation as well as the behavioral context surrounding them.

       Third, it is possible that peers influence an individual regardless of her genetic disposition

towards the behavior. We have shown that genes influence the smoking outcome of an individual

(see Appendix A), and we have shown that the environment influences individual behavior

above and beyond one’s polygenic risk of smoking (see the reduced form of the model in Figure

1). The two however, may be independent from one another such that an individual’s genetic

predisposition to smoke is not affecting how likely they are to adopt their peers’ behaviors. The

susceptibility to adapting others’ behaviors may in fact have a different genetic architecture yet

to be discovered.

       We test these three hypotheses in two different ways. First, we include an interaction

term for individual and peer PGS in the reduced form model as in equation 3. Next following

Guo et al.’s (2015), we test the swing theory of gene-by-environment interaction, splitting the

sample into equal groups with low, medium and high polygenic scores for smoking. Although

none of the results reach statistical significance, individuals with medium and high smoking PGS

have a positive coefficient for the influence of peer genes on their smoking behavior, while those

with low smoking PGS tend to have a negative one. This is modest evidence that individuals

with a low genetic propensity to smoking are negatively influenced by their peer’s smoking

habits. Although the confidence intervals are slightly overlapping between the estimates for the

low group on the one hand and medium and high on the other, the diverging point estimates

provide suggestive evidence of the first hypothesis put forth in this section: that those with

higher genetic propensity towards the behavior are more likely to be influenced by their peers.


                                      [Figure 3 about here]



                                                                                                  25
Heterogeneous effect by Race

         We now examine racial dynamics of the peer influence of smoking. Who is influencing

whom? The literature has established a robust positive association between being white and

smoking cigarettes (Harris et al. 2006; Harrell et al., 1998; Johnson & Hoffman, 2000). This

trend holds in our sample. The average cigarettes smoked per day is 2.3 for whites, 1.1 for

Hispanics and 0.4 for blacks. Even when controlling for socioeconomic factors such as family

income and maternal education, the individual’s smoking polygenic score, sex and grade and

school fixed effects, whites are significantly more likely than both blacks and Hispanics to

smoke (analyses available upon request).

         However, the literature has not thoroughly explored the differential influence of and

susceptibility to peers of different races. In the analyses that follow, we split the sample

according to ego’s race and re-run the previous analyses to analyze the differential susceptibility

of white and non-white respondents to peer influence. 12 This analysis looks at the susceptibility

of the egos by race to peer influence in general and therefore includes peers of all races.


                                       [Figure 4 about here]


As Figure 4 shows, both whites and non-whites are positively affected by peer smoking.

Although whites tend to have a higher point estimate for the effect of peer smoking, it is not

significantly different from the susceptibility of non-whites to the smoking behavior of their

peers.


12
  Because the sample consists primarily of white respondents, splitting it into blacks and
Hispanics separately would strain the statistical power of the analyses. In addition, Hispanics and
blacks are similarly less likely to smoke than whites. We therefore, combine the two racial
categories into a “non-white” category.


                                                                                                 26
       We next look at race-specific and interracial peer effects. Are whites more susceptible to

the effect of their white, as opposed to nonwhite, peers and vice versa? Here, our data only

allows us to examine the effect of white peers on white and nonwhite individuals because there

are not enough school-grades with sufficient populations of nonwhites.



                                       [Figure 5 about here]


We find that white peers have a positive effect on white egos, but we do not find an effect

significantly different from zero for non-white egos and egos of all races. Given the large

confidence intervals (not fully shown in the figure due to scaling) however, and the fact that the

sample size reduces to 310 respondents, this may be due to the loss of statistical power. What we

do find, however is a robust within-race influence and susceptibility for white respondents.




Discussion

       In this paper, we introduce a novel strategy that uses genes to estimate peer effects. We

show that genes can be used as instrumental variables in a linear-in-means estimation model with

school and grade fixed effects. Genes are determined at birth, are associated with the trait of

interest, and their distribution in a grade, controlling for grade and school level characteristics

and fixed effects is as-if random. These properties make genes good candidates for instrumental

variables in social science research. This strategy helps overcome three common problems in

estimating peer effects: 1) the selection or homophily problem whereby individuals select their

peers based on observed or unobserved common characteristics, 2) contextual endogeneity,

where an attribute of the context (i.e. teacher, or a health class offered to individuals in the same



                                                                                                      27
grade of a school) affects both the ego and the peers, and 3) the reflection problem, whereby it is

unclear whether ego is affecting peers or vice versa.

       We find evidence of peer effects on adolescent smoking behavior. One additional

cigarette smoked by one’s grade-mates leads, on average, to an individual to smoke 0.89 more

cigarettes a day. This is larger than estimates of the peer effect of smoking identified in previous

studies. In fact, the magnitude of the effect is twice as large as those of Fletcher (2010) who

estimates the peer effect of smoking using a similar estimation strategy but with different

instrumental variables potentially susceptible to violation of a number of assumptions.

       The endeavor undertaken here, however, is more than a simple estimation task. Using

genes as instruments allows us to estimate the effect peer genes have on an individual’s outcome,

through their behavior. In the reduced form analysis, we show that the magnitude of the effects

of peer genes on an individual’s smoking habit, is at least half the magnitude of the effect of sex

and the individual’s own genes, and 30% the magnitude of the effect of age on smoking

behavior.

       Conceptually, our approach treats others’ genes as part of the social environment of ego.

This is a break from the view that genes are forces which act solely on the individual. It is true

that genes encode proteins in an individual’s body, but individuals’ actions and bodies are

shaped by society and have social implications (Freese et al. 2003; also see Zerubavel et al.

2015). Our results reiterate the social nature of our biology. The boundaries of genetic influences

are not necessarily contained in our own bodies.

       The social implications of social genetic effects are important for policy, especially as

they relate to adolescent smoking. That an individual’s smoking behavior, and ultimately health

outcomes, are affected by his or her peers’ genes is important to consider for understanding




                                                                                                     28
social multiplier effects. Our findings also show that grade is indeed a relevant setting for peer

influence. Our focus on the grade, as opposed to the friend group, as an ecological environment

makes our results applicable and more readily actionable to smoking prevention efforts in

schools. We therefore contribute to broadening the understanding of “peer effects”. Humans are

social creatures and take cues from members of their social environment beyond dyadic relations

and interactions, which are the dominant way of operationalizing interpersonal dynamics in the

social network literature. Though a behavior like smoking could hypothetically imply a one-on-

one relationship between a smoker and his cigarettes, devoid of social meaning or identity for

that individual, lay knowledge and scholarship tell us that being a smoker, even occasionally

smoking a cigarette, entails a meaningful social identity (Falomir & Invernizzi 1999; Lennon et

al. 2005; Haslam et al. 2009). That social identity, however, is context dependent. Being one of

five smokers in a grade full of adolescents who look down on smoking is qualitatively different

than being a smoker in a grade where smoking is common place, even if, in both cases, four of

your best friends are smokers. In this regard, using the grade as the relevant peer group allows us

to analyze the more complex cultural dynamics of smoking behavior, which are lost if we

narrowly focus on dyadic or friend group relations.

       We establish that genes influence individual-level smoking outcomes, and peers

influence individual smoking behavior above and beyond one’s polygenic risk to smoke; next we

looked at the mediating role of the former (individual PGS) on the latter (individual’s

susceptibility to peer influence in terms of smoking behaviors). Even though our results did not

reach statistical significance, the magnitudes of the estimates provide suggestive evidence that

individual polygenic scores in the middle or higher terciles are more susceptible to the influence

of peer smoking genes, and by extension peer smoking behavior. Further research is required to




                                                                                                     29
ensure the robustness of this finding, and it may challenge theories of genetic inelasticity –

whereby individuals with high polygenic scores are thought to engage in a given behavior

regardless of their social environment. It also shows that individual genetic predisposition toward

a behavior may not be independent from the individual’s susceptibility towards that behavior.

       We also examined differential peer effects of smoking by race. We establish that, as in

other studies, whites tend to smoke more than non-whites. However, in terms of being influenced

by peer smoking behavior, non-white egos are as likely as white egos to smoke more cigarettes

in response to peer smoking behavior. We show that white peers have a positive impact on white

and non-white egos, and that this is not the case for non-white peers, though we may be

underpowered to adequately measure the effect of non-white peer effects on non-white

individuals’ smoking behavior.

       Although the only outcome we consider in this paper is smoking, there is nothing about

the model that would constrain this to be so. Future scholars may seek to apply this method to

other socially driven outcomes, including health outcomes, that display an element of contagion

and are in part influenced by genetic disposition — be that actual communicable disease as

driven by the immunological profiles of peers around us, to depression and suicide.




                                                                                                 30
Work Cited:


Alexander, C., Piazza, M., Mekos, D., & Valente, T. (2001). Peers, schools, and adolescent
       cigarette smoking. Journal of adolescent health, 29(1), 22-30.
Barban, N., Jansen, R., De Vlaming, R., Vaez, A., Mandemakers, J. J., Tropf, F. C., ... &
       Tragante, V. (2016). Genome-wide analysis identifies 12 loci influencing human
       reproductive behavior.
Baud, A., Mulligan, M. K., Casale, F. P., Ingels, J. F., Bohl, C. J., Callebert, J., ... & Stegle, O.
       (2017). Genetic variation in the social environment contributes to health and disease.
       PLoS genetics, 13(1), e1006498.
Beach, S. R., Brody, G. H., & Kogan, S. M. (2016). 4 Molecular Genetics and Epigenetics in the
       Context of Family and Couple Problems. The Oxford Handbook of Relationship Science
       and Couple Interventions, 39.
Bearman, P. S., & Brückner, H. (2015). Promising the Future: Virginity Pledges and First
       Intercourse1. American journal of Sociology.
Bearman, P. S., Moody, J., & Stovel, K. (2004). Chains of affection: The structure of adolescent
       romantic and sexual networks. American journal of sociology, 110(1), 44-91.
Belsky, D. W., & Israel, S. (2014). Integrating genetics and social science: Genetic risk
       scores. Biodemography and social biology, 60(2), 137-155.
Bound, J., Jaeger, D. A., & Baker, R. M. (1995). Problems with instrumental variables
       estimation when the correlation between the instruments and the endogenous explanatory
       variable is weak. Journal of the American statistical association, 90(430), 443-450.
Cawley, J., Han, E., Kim, J. J., & Norton, E. C. (2017). Testing for Peer Effects Using Genetic
       Data (No. w23719). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2008). Smoking-attributable mortality, years of
       potential life lost, and productivity losses--United States, 2000-2004. MMWR. Morbidity
       and mortality weekly report, 57(45), 1226.
Chakrabarti, P., & Frye, M. (2017). A mixed-methods framework for analyzing text data:
        Integrating computational techniques with qualitative methods in
        demography. Demographic Research, 37, 1351-1382.
Conley, D., & Fletcher, J. (2017). The Genome Factor: What the social genomics revolution
       reveals about ourselves, our history, and the future. Princeton University Press.
Conley D, Laidley T, Belsky D, Fletcher J, Boardman J, Domingue B. (2016). Assortative
       mating and differential fertility by phenotype and genotype across the 20th century. Proc
       Natl Acad Sci.
Conrad, K. M., Flay, B. R., & Hill, D. (1992). Why children start smoking cigarettes: predictors
       of onset. Addiction, 87(12), 1711-1724.
Cook, C. J., & Fletcher, J. M. (2017). High School Genetic Diversity and Later-life Student
       Outcomes: Micro-level Evidence from the Wisconsin Longitudinal Study (No. w23520).
       National Bureau of Economic Research.
Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium. (2013). Identification of risk
       loci with shared effects on five major psychiatric disorders: a genome-wide analysis. The
       Lancet, 381(9875), 1371-1379.
Delph, L. F., & Kelly, J. K. (2014). On the importance of balancing selection in plants. New
       Phytologist, 201(1), 45-56.



                                                                                                  31
Domingue, B. W., & Belsky, D. W. (2017). The social genome: Current findings and
        implications for the study of human genetics. PLoS genetics, 13(3), e1006615.
Domingue, B. W., Belsky, D., Fletcher, J., Conley, D., Boardman, J. D., & Harris, K. M. (2017).
        Analysis of genetic similarity among friends and schoolmates in the National
        Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health (Add Health). bioRxiv, 107045.
Domingue, B. W., Conley, D., Fletcher, J., & Boardman, J. D. (2016). Cohort effects in the
        genetic influence on smoking. Behavior genetics, 46(1), 31-42.
Domingue, B. W., Fletcher, J., Conley, D., & Boardman, J. D. (2014). Genetic and educational
        assortative mating among US adults. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
        111(22), 7996-8000.
Falomir, J. M., & Invernizzi, F. (1999). The role of social influence and smoker identity in
        resistance to smoking cessation. Swiss Journal of Psychology/Schweizerische Zeitschrift
        für Psychologie/Revue Suisse de Psychologie, 58(2), 73.
Fletcher, J. M. (2010). Social interactions and smoking: Evidence using multiple student cohorts,
        instrumental variables, and school fixed effects. Health Economics, 19(4), 466-484.
Fletcher, J. M. (2012a). Peer influences on adolescent alcohol consumption: evidence using an
        instrumental variables/fixed effect approach. Journal of Population Economics, 25(4),
        1265-1286.
Fletcher, J. M. (2012b). Why have tobacco control policies stalled? Using genetic moderation to
        examine policy impacts. PloS one, 7(12), e50576.
Fletcher, J. M., & Conley, D. (2013). The challenge of causal inference in gene–environment
        interaction research: Leveraging research designs from the social sciences. American
        journal of public health, 103(S1), S42-S45.
Fowler, J. H., Settle, J. E., & Christakis, N. A. (2011). Correlated genotypes in friendship
        networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(5), 1993-1997.
Frank, K. A., Muller, C., Schiller, K. S., Riegle-Crumb, C., Mueller, A. S., Crosnoe, R., &
        Pearson, J. (2008). The social dynamics of mathematics coursetaking in high
        school. American Journal of Sociology, 113(6), 1645-1696.
Freese, J., Li, J. C. A., & Wade, L. D. (2003). The potential relevances of biology to social
        inquiry. Annual Review of Sociology, 29(1), 233-256.
Gaviria, A., & Raphael, S. (2001). School-based peer effects and juvenile behavior. The review
        of economics and statistics, 83(2), 257-268.
Gibson, G. (2009). Decanalization and the origin of complex disease. Nature Reviews
        Genetics, 10(2), 134-140.
Gibson, G. (2012). Rare and common variants: twenty arguments. Nature Reviews
        Genetics, 13(2), 135-145.
Guo, G., Li, Y., Wang, H., Cai, T., & Duncan, G. J. (2015). Peer influence, genetic propensity,
        and binge drinking: a natural experiment and a replication. American journal of
        sociology, 121(3), 914-954.
Guo, G., Wang, L., Liu, H., & Randall, T. (2014). Genomic assortative mating in marriages in
        the United States. PloS one, 9(11), e112322.
Guryan, Jonathan, Kory Kroft, and Matthew J. Notowidigdo. 2009. "Peer Effects in the
        Workplace: Evidence from Random Groupings in Professional Golf
        Tournaments." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(4): 34-68.
Hanushek, E. A., Kain, J. F., Markman, J. M., & Rivkin, S. G. (2003). Does peer ability affect
        student achievement?. Journal of applied econometrics, 18(5), 527-544.



                                                                                              32
Harrell, J. S., Bangdiwala, S. I., Deng, S., Webb, J. P., & Bradley, C. (1998). Smoking initiation
        in youth: the roles of gender, race, socioeconomics, and developmental status. Journal of
        Adolescent Health, 23(5), 271-279.
Harris, K.M., Halpern, C.T., Whitsel, E.E., Hussey, J., Killeya-Jones, L.A., Tabor, J., Elder,
        G.H., Hewitt, J., Shanahan, M., Williams, R.B., Siegler, I.C., & Smolen, A. (2013).
        Social, behavioral, and genetic linkages from adolescence into adulthood. American
        Journal of Public Health, 103 (S1), S25-S32.
Harris, K.M. (2010). An integrative approach to health. Demography, 47(1),1-22.
Harris, K.M., Gordon-Larsen, P., Chantala, K., & Udry, J.R. (2006). Longitudinal trends in race
        and ethnic disparities in leading health indicators from adolescence to young adulthood.
        Archives of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 160,74-81.
Haslam, S. A., Jetten, J., Postmes, T., & Haslam, C. (2009). Social identity, health and well‐
        being: an emerging agenda for applied psychology. Applied Psychology, 58(1), 1-23.
Hoffman, M. A., Cointet, J., Brandt, P., Key, N. & Bearman, P. (2017). The (Protestant) Bible,
       the (Printed) Sermon, and the Word(s): The Semantic Structure of the Conformist and
       Dissenting Bible, 1660-1780. Forthcoming in Poetics.
Hoxby, C. M. (2000). The effects of class size on student achievement: New evidence from
        population variation. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(4), 1239-1285.
Hugh-Jones D, Verweij KJ, Pourcain BS, Abdellaoui A. Assortative mating on educational
        attainment leads to genetic spousal resemblance for causal alleles. Intelligence. 2016
International Schizophrenia C, Purcell SM, Wray NR, et al. Common polygenic variation
        contributes to risk of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. Nature. 2009;460(7256):748-
        752.
Jamal, A., Homa, D. M., O'Connor, E., Babb, S. D., Caraballo, R. S., Singh, T., ... & King, B. A.
        (2015). Current cigarette smoking among adults—United States, 2005–2014. MMWR
        Morb Mortal Wkly Rep, 64(44), 1233-1240.
Johnson, R. A., & Hoffmann, J. P. (2000). Adolescent cigarette smoking in US racial/ethnic
        subgroups: findings from the National Education Longitudinal Study. Journal of Health
        and Social Behavior, 392-407.
Kong, A., Thorleifsson, G., Frigge, M. L., Vilhj.lmsson, B. J., ... & Stefansson K., (2017) Non-
        Transmitted Alleles and Genetic Nurturing. Working paper.
Koval, J. J., Pederson, L. L., Mills, C. A., McGrady, G. A., & Carvajal, S. C. (2000). Models of
        the relationship of stress, depression, and other psychosocial factors to smoking behavior:
        a comparison of a cohort of students in grades 6 and 8. Preventive Medicine, 30(6), 463-
        477.
Legewie, J., & DiPrete, T. A. (2012). School context and the gender gap in educational
        achievement. American Sociological Review, 77(3), 463-485.
Lennon, A., Gallois, C., Owen, N., & McDermott, L. (2005). Young women as smokers and
        nonsmokers: a qualitative social identity approach. Qualitative Health Research, 15(10),
        1345-1359.
McFarland, D. A., Moody, J., Diehl, D., Smith, J. A., & Thomas, R. J. (2014). Network ecology
        and adolescent social structure. American sociological review, 79(6), 1088-1121.
McGue, M., Vaupel, J. W., Holm, N., & Harvald, B. (1993). Longevity is moderately heritable in
        a sample of Danish twins born 1870–1880. Journal of gerontology, 48(6), B237-B244.
Melamede, R. (2005). Cannabis and tobacco smoke are not equally carcinogenic. Harm
        Reduction Journal, 2(1), 21.



                                                                                                33
Mennella, J. A., & Garcia, P. L. (2000). Children's hedonic response to the smell of alcohol:
        effects of parental drinking habits. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental
        Research, 24(8), 1167-1171.
Moody, J. (2001). Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in America. American
        journal of Sociology, 107(3), 679-716.
Mounts, N. S., & Steinberg, L. (1995). An ecological analysis of peer influence on adolescent
        grade point average and drug use. Developmental Psychology, 31(6), 915.
Murphy, G. P., Lawrence, W., & Lenhard, R. E. (1995). American Cancer Society textbook of
        clinical oncology. The Society.
Okbay, A., Baselmans, B. M., De Neve, J. E., Turley, P., Nivard, M. G., Fontana, M. A., ... &
        Gratten, J. (2016). Genetic variants associated with subjective well-being, depressive
        symptoms, and neuroticism identified through genome-wide analyses. Nature genetics,
        48(6), 624-633.
Otto, J. M., Gizer, I. R., Bizon, C., Wilhelmsen, K. C., & Ehlers, C. L. (2016). Polygenic risk
        scores for cigarettes smoked per day do not generalize to a Native American
        population. Drug and alcohol dependence, 167, 95-102.
Pallonen, U. E., Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., Prokhorov, A. V., & Smith, N. F. (1998).
        Stages of acquisition and cessation for adolescent smoking: an empirical
        integration. Addictive behaviors, 23(3), 303-324.
Polderman, T. J., Benyamin, B., De Leeuw, C. A., Sullivan, P. F., Van Bochoven, A., Visscher,
        P. M., & Posthuma, D. (2015). Meta-analysis of the heritability of human traits based on
        fifty years of twin studies. Nature genetics, 47(7), 702-709.
Rauscher, E., Conley, D., & Siegal, M. L. (2015). Sibling genes as environment: Sibling
        dopamine genotypes and adolescent health support frequency dependent selection. Social
        science research, 54, 209-220.
Reuter, M., & Montag, C. (2016). Genes and Human Decision-Making. In Neuroeconomics (pp.
        67-83). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Robinson MR, Kleinman A, Graff M, Vinkhuyzen AAE, Couper D, Miller MB, et al. Genetic
        evidence of assortative mating in humans. Nat Hum Behav. 2017 Jan 9;1:0016.
Ryan, A. M. (2000). Peer groups as a context for the socialization of adolescents' motivation,
        engagement, and achievement in school. Educational Psychologist, 35(2), 101-111.
Salvatore, J. E., Aliev, F., Bucholz, K., Agrawal, A., Hesselbrock, V., Hesselbrock, M., ... &
        Edenberg, H. J. (2015). Polygenic risk for externalizing disorders: Gene-by-development
        and gene-by-environment effects in adolescents and young adults. Clinical Psychological
        Science, 3(2), 189-201.
Salvatore, J. E., Aliev, F., Edwards, A. C., Evans, D. M., Macleod, J., Hickman, M., ... &
        Latvala, A. (2014). Polygenic scores predict alcohol problems in an independent sample
        and show moderation by the environment. Genes, 5(2), 330-346.
Schmitz, L., & Conley, D. (2016). The long-term consequences of Vietnam-era conscription and
        genotype on smoking behavior and health. Behavior genetics, 46(1), 43-58.
Smeland, O. B., Wang, Y., Lo, M. T., Li, W., Frei, O., Witoelar, A., ... & Chen, C. H. (2017).
        Identification of genetic loci shared between schizophrenia and the Big Five personality
        traits. Scientific Reports, 7.
Spielman, D., Brook, B. W., Briscoe, D. A., & Frankham, R. (2004). Does inbreeding and loss of
        genetic diversity decrease disease resistance?. Conservation Genetics, 5(4), 439-448.




                                                                                             34
Subramanian, A., Tamayo, P., Mootha, V. K., Mukherjee, S., Ebert, B. L., Gillette, M. A., ... &
       Mesirov, J. P. (2005). Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for
       interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences, 102(43), 15545-15550.
Tenconi, E., Degortes, D., Clementi, M., Collantoni, E., Pinato, C., Forzan, M., ... & Favaro, A.
       (2016). Clinical and genetic correlates of decision making in anorexia nervosa. Journal of
       clinical and experimental neuropsychology, 38(3), 327-337.
Tobacco and Genetics Consortium. (2010). Genome-wide meta-analyses identify multiple loci
       associated with smoking behavior. Nature genetics, 42(5), 441-447.
True, W. R., Heath, A. C., Scherrer, J. F., Waterman, B., Goldberg, J., Lin, N., ... & Tsuang, M.
       T. (1997). Genetic and environmental contributions to smoking. Addiction, 92(10), 1277-
       1287.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and
       Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and
       Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
       Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2012.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The Health Consequences of Smoking—50
       Years of Progress: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health
       and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
       Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, 2014.
Visscher, P. M., Hill, W. G., & Wray, N. R. (2008). Heritability in the genomics era—concepts
       and misconceptions. Nature Reviews Genetics, 9(4), 255-266.
Visscher, P. M., Medland, S. E., Ferreira, M. A., Morley, K. I., Zhu, G., Cornes, B. K., ... &
       Martin, N. G. (2006). Assumption-free estimation of heritability from genome-wide
       identity-by-descent sharing between full siblings. PLoS genetics, 2(3), e41.
Zerubavel, N., Bearman, P. S., Weber, J., & Ochsner, K. N. (2015). Neural mechanisms tracking
       popularity in real-world social networks. Proceedings of the National Academy of
       Sciences, 112(49), 15072-15077.
Zimmerman, M. A., Stoddard, S. A., Eisman, A. B., Caldwell, C. H., Aiyer, S. M., & Miller, A.
       (2013). Adolescent resilience: Promotive factors that inform prevention. Child
       development perspectives, 7(4), 215-220.
Zou JY, Park DS, Burchard EG, Torgerson DG, Pino-Yanes M, Song YS, et al. Genetic and
       socioeconomic study of mate choice in Latinos reveals novel assortment patterns. Proc
       Natl Acad Sci. 2015;112(44):13621–13626.




                                                                                              35
Appendix A: Descriptive statistics

Smoking Behavior
                                     Mean    Std. Deviation   Minimum      Maximum
Cigs Per Day – Full Sample            1.59            4.82         0.00        95.00
Cigs Per Day – 8th Graders            0.90            3.92         0.00        60.00
Cigs Per Day – 9th Graders            1.62            4.25         0.00        40.00
Cigs Per Day – 10th Graders           1.65            4.97         0.00        70.00
Cigs Per Day – 11th Graders           2.11            5.27         0.00        60.00
Cigs Per Day – 12th Graders           2.54            6.83         0.00        95.00



Individual Variables
                                     Mean    Std. Deviation   Minimum      Maximum
Smoking PGS                     -0.00094           0.00029     -0.00172     -0.00028
Black                               0.24               0.43         0.00         1.00
Hispanic                            0.16               0.37         0.00         1.00
Maternal Education                  5.28               2.24         0.00         9.00
Household Smoker                    0.47               0.46         0.00         1.00
Male                                0.48               0.50         0.00         1.00
Older Siblings                      0.85               1.18         0.00        12.00
Family Income ($1000s)                44                 39         0.00         999
Height                              5.53               0.48         4.00         6.75
Height PGS                      -0.00006           0.00006     -0.00019      0.00004



Classmate Variables
                                     Mean    Std. Deviation   Minimum      Maximum
Mean Cigs Per Day                   1.59               1.37         0.00         7.27
Mean Smoking PGS                 -0.0009            0.0002      -0.0014      -0.0007
% Family Smokes                     0.47               0.12         0.13         0.86
% has Older Sibling                 0.50               0.11         0.16         0.93
% Black                             0.24               0.26         0.00         1.00
% Hispanic                          0.16               0.23         0.00         0.94
Mean Maternal Education             5.28               0.67         3.41         7.83
% Male                              0.48               0.08         0.15         0.72
Mean Family Income ($1000s)           44                 10           19           93
Number of Classmates               61.71             66.29        20.00       231.00
Mean Height                         5.53               0.14         5.01         6.00


                                                                                        36
Mean Height PGS                -0.00006           0.00004      -0.00015    0.00000



 Cigs Per Day ~ Smoking PGS
                                          White             Black         Hispanic
 Correlation                           0.0287               0.0289          0.1035
 Incremental R-Squared                0.00003               0.0001          0.0011



Smoking (cigs per day) by grade by school




                                                                                     37
Mean Smoking (cigs per day) by grade by school




                                                 38
Smoking PGS by grade by school




                                 39
Appendix B: Assortativity

Figure A1 - A3: Assortativity by Grade, Race and Sex




The histograms above show the distribution of segregation, a measure of the extent to which
students have a friendship preference for others who share the same attribute, for a set of
attributes known to shape friendships in high schools (Bearman et al. 2004; McFarland et al.
2014). Segregation is calculated using the equation below:

                                  𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇) − 𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂𝑂(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇)
       𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆𝑆 =
                                                            𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸𝐸(𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇 𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇𝑇)

The value of segregation goes from -1 to 1, where -1 is a pure out group preference and 1 is pure
in group preference. Expected Cross Trait Ties is the number of cross-trait ties we would expect
to see in a random graph, where the relative group sizes (i.e. number of 8th, 9th, 10th, etc.
graders) are held constant.


                                                                                                                                        40
Grade shows the highest value for segregation; this shows a higher in-group preference for
grades as compared to friendships based on sex or race.


Appendix C – Regression tables corresponding to figures in the text

Table C1: Effect of peer genes on individual outcome compared to individual attributes
                                    (1)                (2)                 (3)
                                Individual        Reduced Form        Age and sex
                                  Genes
                              Cigs per Day        Cigs Per Day        Cigs Per Day

 Smoking PGS                       0.0522*             0.0607**
                                  (0.0206)             (0.0209)
 Mean Smoking PGS                                        0.272*
                                                        (0.124)
 Black                            -0.0868              -0.203***             -0.293***
                                 (0.0485)              (0.0513)              (0.0397)
 Hispanic                        -0.210***              -0.0879               -0.103*
                                 (0.0506)              (0.0488)              (0.0480)
 Maternal Education              -0.00262              -0.00168               0.00664
                                 (0.0140)              (0.0141)              (0.0140)
 Household Smoker                0.129***               0.131***              0.131***
                                 (0.0134)              (0.0137)              (0.0134)
 Male                            0.0724**              0.0698**               0.0552*
                                 (0.0260)              (0.0267)              (0.0259)
 Older Siblings                   0.0165                 0.0176                0.0129
                                 (0.0129)              (0.0130)              (0.0129)
 Age                                                                         0.0966***
                                                                             (0.0122)
 Family Income                    -0.0295*              -0.0286               -0.0270
                                  (0.0146)             (0.0149)              (0.0145)
 % with Smoking Family                                   0.0300
 Member
                                                       (0.0399)
 % with Older Siblings                                   0.0241
                                                       (0.0260)
 % Black                                                 0.0941
                                                        (0.127)
 % Hispanic                                            0.00648
                                                       (0.0862)
 Mean Maternal Education                                 0.0386
                                                       (0.0461)
 % Male                                                 -0.0118
                                                       (0.0329)


                                                                                             41
 Mean Family Income                                      0.0230
                                                        (0.0484)
 Constant                           0.159                 0.178            -1.134***
                                   (0.207)               (0.224)            (0.265)
  N                                 4909                  4909               4907
  R2                                0.097                 0.099              0.102
  adj. R2                           0.081                 0.081              0.087
  F                                 6.008                 5.599              6.772
 Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
School and grade fixed effects are included in all models


Table C2: Instrumental Variable Regressions
                                      (1)                    (2)             (4)         (5)
                                 2SLS – First          2SLS – Second       2SLS –      Reduced
                                     stage                  stage       Second Stage    Form
                                 Mean Cigs Per          Cigs Per Day       Height       Height
                                     Day
  Mean Cigs Per Day                                           0.290*
                                                             (0.133)
   Smoking PGS                         0.0438***             0.0482*
                                       (0.00788)            (0.0208)
   Mean Smoking PGS                     0.944***
                                        (0.0468)
   Mean Height                                                            0.00749
                                                                          (0.305)
   Mean Height PGS                                                                     0.00369
                                                                                        (0.152)
   Height PGS                                                             0.193***     0.194***
                                                                          (0.0236)     (0.0239)
   Black                                  0.0237            -0.209***     0.417***     0.417***
                                        (0.0193)            (0.0515)      (0.0546)     (0.0550)
   Hispanic                             -0.00908             -0.0851        0.0364      0.0360
                                        (0.0184)            (0.0491)      (0.0514)     (0.0503)
   Maternal Education                    0.00957            -0.00446       -0.0138      -0.0138
                                       (0.00533)            (0.0143)      (0.0145)     (0.0145)
   Household Smoker                      0.00720            0.129***
                                       (0.00516)            (0.0138)
   Male                                 -0.00954            0.0727**      0.822***     0.822***
                                        (0.0101)            (0.0270)      (0.0276)     (0.0276)
   Older Siblings                        0.00806             0.0152       0.00163      0.00170
                                       (0.00486)            (0.0131)      (0.0135)     (0.0133)
   Family Income                         0.00536            -0.0301*       0.0158       0.0157
                                       (0.00561)            (0.0150)      (0.0156)     (0.0153)
   % with Smoking Family                 0.198***            -0.0275


                                                                                         42
   Member
                                         (0.0150)           (0.0454)
   % with Older Siblings                 0.114***           -0.00908          0.0313        0.0319
                                        (0.00981)           (0.0287)        (0.0353)       (0.0267)
   % Black                                 0.0859            0.0709          -0.0524        -0.0498
                                         (0.0479)            (0.120)        (0.0908)        (0.149)
   % Hispanic                           -0.0922**            0.0326           -0.146         -0.148
                                         (0.0325)           (0.0880)         (0.130)       (0.0885)
   Mean Maternal Education              0.0888***            0.0133          -0.0218        -0.0229
                                         (0.0174)           (0.0495)        (0.0541)       (0.0483)
   % Male                                 -0.0208           -0.00547          0.0485        0.0511
                                         (0.0124)           (0.0337)         (0.105)       (0.0345)
   Mean Family Income                      0.0204            0.0171          -0.0637        -0.0645
                                         (0.0183)           (0.0487)        (0.0594)       (0.0500)
   Constant                              0.476***           0.00787          -0.990*         -0.105
                                         (0.0846)            (0.120)         (0.475)        (0.229)
    N                                       4938              4909             4895           4895
    R2                                      0.833             0.068            0.233         0.234
    adj. R2                                 0.829             0.050            0.219         0.220
    F                                       256.2                                            15.99
Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
School and grade fixed effects are included in all models


Table C3: Gene by Environment Interaction models
                          (1)            (2)                      (3)          (4)             (5)
                      Base Model     Interaction                 Low         Medium       High Smoking
                                        Model                 Smoking      Smoking PGS        PGS
                                                                 PGS
                         Cigs Per Day     Cigs Per Day      Cigs Per Day   Cigs Per Day   Cigs Per Day
Mean Cigs Per Day            0.272*           0.270*            -0.212         0.414          0.489
                            (0.124)          (0.124)           (0.134)        (0.251)        (0.263)
Smoking PGS                0.0607**         0.0582**           0.0239         -0.0666        -0.0217
                           (0.0209)         (0.0216)          (0.0289)       (0.0999)       (0.0882)
Smoking PGS x                               -0.00922
Mean Smoking PGS
                                            (0.0198)
Hispanic                    -0.0879         -0.202***         -0.102*         -0.0566         -0.119
                           (0.0488)         (0.0514)         (0.0491)        (0.0904)        (0.163)
Black                      -0.203***         -0.0912         -0.139***         -0.253         -0.473
                           (0.0513)         (0.0493)         (0.0407)         (0.145)        (0.626)
Maternal Education         -0.00168         -0.00143         -0.00251          0.0275        -0.0354
                           (0.0141)         (0.0141)         (0.0131)        (0.0294)       (0.0307)
Household Smoker           0.131***         0.131***          0.0186         0.150***       0.199***
                           (0.0137)         (0.0137)         (0.0136)        (0.0278)       (0.0281)


                                                                                             43
Male                        0.0698**         0.0697**         0.0851***          0.0755           0.0291
                            (0.0267)         (0.0267)         (0.0254)         (0.0538)          (0.0562)
Older Siblings               0.0176           0.0176            0.0150         0.00276            0.0364
                            (0.0130)         (0.0130)         (0.0106)         (0.0289)          (0.0306)
Family Income                -0.0286          -0.0287        -0.000242          -0.0393           -0.0424
                            (0.0149)         (0.0149)         (0.0155)         (0.0353)          (0.0263)
% Hispanic                  0.00648          0.00667            0.0708           -0.167            0.115
                            (0.0862)         (0.0862)         (0.0812)          (0.176)           (0.190)
% Black                      0.0941           0.0947            -0.146            0.385           0.0159
                             (0.127)          (0.127)          (0.134)          (0.274)           (0.250)
% Older Siblings             0.0241           0.0239           -0.0128           0.0431          0.00969
                            (0.0260)         (0.0260)         (0.0272)         (0.0548)          (0.0545)
% with Smoking               0.0300           0.0305          -0.00410           0.0720           0.0149
Family Member
                            (0.0399)         (0.0400)         (0.0415)         (0.0839)          (0.0841)
Mean Maternal                0.0386           0.0393           0.0394            0.111            -0.0606
Education
                            (0.0461)         (0.0461)         (0.0459)         (0.0960)          (0.0955)
% Male                       -0.0118          -0.0118         0.00522            0.0441           -0.117
                            (0.0329)         (0.0329)         (0.0364)         (0.0693)          (0.0659)
Mean Family                  0.0230           0.0231           0.0276           -0.0217           0.0221
Income
                              (0.0484)       (0.0484)         (0.0580)         (0.0962)          (0.0946)
Constant                        0.178          0.176           -0.0286           -0.604            0.679
                               (0.224)        (0.224)          (0.204)          (0.774)           (0.410)
N                               4909           4909             1635              1634             1641
  2
R                               0.099          0.099            0.066             0.095            0.119
adj. R2                         0.081          0.081            0.016             0.039            0.067
F                               5.599          5.541            1.313             1.710            2.300
Standard errors in parentheses
*
  p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
School and grade fixed effects included in all models


Appendix D – Alternative Functional Forms and model specifications

As a robustness check, we performed the same analyses with different model specifications and
functional forms. First, we tried Instrumental Variable Poisson regression, since the outcome
variable of cigarettes per day is count data. The results are substantively similar to what obtains
under traditional two stage least squares. Next, we tested what we refer to as “logit-in-means”
estimates of peer smoking as opposed to the “linear-in-means” (Manski, 1993). For the logit-in-
                                          𝑝𝑝
means estimate, we calculated the 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙(1−𝑝𝑝) for every individual where p is the proportion of
smokers in a grade excluding the individual. We then predicted cigarettes per day smoked by an
individual in a grade. The idea here is that the effect of others’ smoking behavior might take the
form of a sigmoid function rather than a linear one. Having a few individuals in a grade who
smoke may not be influential on the overall smoking behavior of the grade; on the other hand, an


                                                                                                  44
   additional smoker in a grade will not matter as much if the majority of the grade is already
   smoking. We find that the two-stage least squared model using logit-in-means yields very similar
   results to the 2SLS using linear-in-means estimates. Overall, the alternative functional form
   specifications all yield substantively similar results, signals the robustness of our findings.

   Table D1: Alternative Functional Forms as Robustness Checks
                                                (1)                             (2)
                                            IV Poisson                     2SLS with
                                                                        Logistic-in-means
                                              Cigs Per Day                Cigs Per Day

Mean Cigs per day                                 0.462*
                                                 (0.202)
Logistic function of Classroom Smokers                                        0.120*
                                                                            (0.0565)
Smoking PGS                                        529.9*                    0.0523*
                                                  (259.5)                   (0.0212)
Black                                            -1.290***                  -0.249***
                                                  (0.205)                   (0.0549)
Hispanic                                           -0.222                    -0.105*
                                                  (0.240)                   (0.0511)
Maternal Education                               -0.00756                    0.00678
                                                 (0.0257)                   (0.0150)
Household Smoker                                 0.928***                    0.120***
                                                  (0.103)                   (0.0148)
Male                                               0.219*                   0.0764**
                                                 (0.0865)                   (0.0278)
Older Siblings                                    0.0458                      0.0173
                                                 (0.0355)                   (0.0133)
Family Income                                    -0.392**                   -0.0308*
                                                  (0.142)                   (0.0153)
% with Older Siblings                             -0.0479                    0.00713
                                                  (0.736)                   (0.0270)
% with Household Smoker                            -0.628                    -0.0818
                                                  (1.198)                   (0.0626)
% Black                                            0.328                      -0.202
                                                  (1.141)                    (0.130)
% Hispanic                                         0.447                     -0.302*
                                                  (1.230)                    (0.131)
Mean Maternal Education                           0.0114                      0.130*
                                                  (0.177)                   (0.0589)
% Male                                             -0.281                    0.00328
                                                  (0.853)                   (0.0356)
Mean Income                                        -0.700                    0.00816
                                                  (0.964)                   (0.0500)
Constant                                           0.125                      0.869*


                                                                                                45
                                                      (1.507)   (0.425)
N                                                      4909      4909
R2                                                               0.026
adj. R2                                                          0.007
   Standard errors in parentheses
   ~
     p <0.1, * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p < 0.001
   School and grade fixed effects are included in all models




                                                                          46
Figures and plots

Figure 1: Effect of peer genes on individual outcome compared to individual attributes




                                                                                         47
Figure 2: Effect of Peer Smoking and Peer Height on Ego Smoking and Ego Height




                                                                                 48
Figure 3: Effect of Peer Genes on Individual’s Smoking Outcome by Polygenic Score Level




                                                                                     49
Figure 4: Effect of Peer Smoking on Ego Smoking Behavior by Race of Ego




                                                                          50
Figure 5: Effect of White Peer Smoking on Ego Smoking Behavior by Race of Ego




                                                                                51
